■•Re.

2

i

rJi

w

A

A

dSu'£<«'

SK*?'

'

other books by Albert Camus
Awarded, the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1957

RESISTANCE, REBELLION, AND DEATH

1961

(Actuelles—a selection)
THE POSSESSED (Les Possedes)

i960

CALIGULA and THREE OTHER PLAYS

1958

(Caligula, Le Malentendu, L’Etat de siege, Les Justes')
EXILE AND THE KINGDOM (L’Exil et le Royaume)
THE FALL (La Chute)

1958

1957

THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS and other essays
(Le Mythe de Sisyphe')

THE REBEL (L’Homme revolte)
THE PLAGUE (La Peste)
THE STRANGER (L’Etranger')

1954

1948
1946

These are borzoi books,
published in New York by Alfred A. Knopf

1955

NOTEBOOKS
19 3 5

-

1 9 4 2

NOTEBOOKS
1 9 3 5

-

1 942

nr Albert Camus

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH, AND
WITH A PREFACE AND NOTES, BY

PHILIP THODY

ALFRED A. KNOPF • NEW TORE
1 9 6 3

L. C. catalog card number: 63-9127

THIS IS A BORZOI BOOK
PUBLISHED BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.

<><X><xX><xx><X><>
Copyright © 1963 by Hamish Hamilton Ltd. and
Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. All rights reserved. No part
of this book may be reproduced in any form with¬
out permission in writing from the publisher,
except by a reviewer, who may quote brief pas¬
sages in a review to be printed in a magazine or
newspaper. Manufactured in the United States of
America, and distributed by Random House, Inc.
Published simultaneously in Toronto, Canada, by
Random House of Canada, Limited.
PUBLISHED JULY
SECOND PRINTING,

15,

1963

SEPTEMBER

1963

Originally published in French under the title
Carnets, mai 1935-fevrier 1942. © 1962, Editions
Gallimard. Published in English in Great Britain
under the title Carnets 1935-1942 by Hamish
Hamilton Ltd.

INTROD UCTIOJV'

it was

in May 1935, when he was twenty-two, that Albert

Camus made the first entries in the literary diary which he
continued to keep until his death in i960. The entries were
jotted down in a series of ordinary school exercise books, and
were not originally intended for publication.. In 1954, how¬
ever, he had a typewritten copy made of the first seven note¬
books, and corrected it with the obvious intention of eventu¬
ally allowing these to be published. Extracts had already
appeared in review form in both French and English when
the complete edition of the first three cahiers was published
in Paris in May 1962.1 Camus’s literary executors—Mme
Albert Camus, M. Rene Char, and M. Jean Grenier—intend
to publish the typescript of the next four of these notebooks,
in two volumes, in the course of the next few years, but have
not yet taken a decision about the notebooks for the period
1954—1960, which are still in manuscript form. The text here
presented to English readers reproduces all the entries made
in the original French edition, and will be followed by the
translation of the next two volumes as they appear. This
1 The first publication of extracts from the notebooks was in Sym¬
posium, Spring-Fall 1958, pp. 1-7, while Camus was still alive. They
consisted of his first draft for The Plague. Extracts appeared in the
Nouvelle Revue Frangaise in March 1962 and in a translation by An¬
thony Hartley in Encounter, October 1961, pp. 11-35.

v

INTRODUCTION

French edition, it should be noted, was given the title of
Carnets. This was solely in order to avoid any possible confu¬
sion with the Cahiers Albert Camus, a series of critical essays
on his work at present awaiting publication. Camus himself
always referred to the notebooks as his cahiers.
When Camus was revising the typewritten copy in 1954,
he underlined the fact that the notebooks were not to be
looked upon as fragments of an autobiography by removing
any passages that, in his view, dealt too directly with his own
private feelings and experiences. There were, in any case,
remarkably few of these, and it is significant that the cahiers
for the period 1935-1942 did not contain any open reference
either to his first or to his second marriage, and provided no
details about his membership in the Communist Party or his
work as a journalist on Alger-Republicain. As will be seen in
later volumes, he did subsequently use the notebooks for
more general purposes, but this was only because he felt that
his memory was going. “Until this improves,” he wrote in
October 1946, “I must obviously note down more and more
things here, even if they are personal”—a clear indication
that, by allowing non-literary consideration to intrude, he was
changing the original character of the cahiers.
This does not mean that the Notebooks are to be read
merely as exercises in style, or that they show him to have
actually been the “objective” writer 2 that he said he wanted
to become. If they tell us relatively little about what he did,
they are full of information about how he felt. His own
political activity is not described, but a number of entries tell
of his dislike of professional politicians, his horror at the out¬
break of war in 1939, and his readiness to see a compromise
2 Cf. L’Et6, 1954, p. 132. “I call an objective writer one who chooses
subjects without ever taking himself as subject matter.”
Vi

INTRODUCTION -

peace achieved in the first year of the war. He gives no details
about the different jobs which he took in order to earn a living,
or about his other personal and emotional difficulties, but the
honesty with which he mentions his horror of work_ and the
frequency with which he returns to the problem of loneliness
do invite us to make a number of guesses about the kind of
person he was. Yet it is first and foremost as a writer that
Camus interests us, and for the fight which the Notebooks
throw on the way he worked that they are most valuable.
The entries made in the first volume can, from this point of
view, be divided into three main categories. First of all, there
are the philosophical ideas, the fragments of description, the
scraps of conversation overheard at home or in the street,
which Camus actually used in works published during his
lifetime. To judge from the cahiers themselves, Camus often
wrote passages that needed very little revision before being
incorporated into the final version of his works. For example,
both a number of extracts from The Stranger and several
passages in the early essays Noces and UEnvers et VEndroit
were written straight out into the notebooks and underwent
very few changes before being printed. The planning and
organization 3 of his works always required a great deal of
revision—there were seven versions of The Fall, possibly as
many of The Plague, and at least two of Caligula—but the
notebooks show Camus as a man who could, on occasion,
“write without blotting a fine.” He also, it may be noted,
made practically no stylistic changes in the later typewritten
copy, and the published French text is not significantly differ¬
ent, either in style or content, from what he wrote down in
3 Cf. article by Roger Quilliot in Democratic, January 4, 1962, and
in Le Figaro litteraire, February 10, 1962. M. Quilliot observes, however,
that The Stranger seems to have been written “quasiment d’un trait.”
For Anthony Hartley, cf. Encounter, October 1961, p. n.

vii

INTRODUCTION

the nineteen-forties. What Anthony Hartley referred to as the
“bare, classical outline” of some of the phrases in the Note¬
books, and what at least one French critic suggested might
be the result of later revision, was a quality that came quite
naturally to Camus at the very beginning of his career as a
writer. The physical appearance of the notebooks, where a
number of passages are written out in pencil and where the
handwriting is most unlike that of a man copying from an
earlier version, precludes any idea that the entries were the
fruit of careful rewriting. What we have in the cahiers is
French as Camus spontaneously wrote it.
The second of the two categories concerns some of the
books which Camus read between 1935 and 1942. It is obvious
at first glance, however, that he made notes on relatively few
of these, and mentioned only some of the authors who made
a particular impact on him. For example, not one of the works
which he reviewed in Alger-Republicain in 1938 and 1939—
and which included Sartre’s La Nausee and Le Mur—is men¬
tioned in the notebooks, and there are only passing refer¬
ences to other authors whose work he happened to review
after coming to Paris in 1940. This fact, added to the fre¬
quency with which certain writers, especially Nietzsche, are
quoted both in the notebooks and in Camus’s published
philosophical essays, is a further indication of the particular
role which he assigned to his cahiers. They were not a record
of everything that he had thought or read, but merely a place
to note down some—but by no means all—of the themes,
experiences, and ideas which he thought he might find useful.
Quite a large number of these ideas did find their way into
his published work, and the notes added to this translation
are intended as a guide for readers interested in how they
were then used. Thus one can see the essential themes of The
viii

INTRODUCTION •

Stranger and The Myth of Sisyyhus—the finality of death, the
immense value accorded to physical life and to intellectual
lucidity, the rejection of any religious belief—occurring sev¬
eral years before the actual composition of the works, and
developing in reaction to new experiences like travel and the
outbreak of war. More particularly, an entry like the two
quotations made from Tolstoy’s Confession in 1942, after The
Myth of Sisyphus had been completed, is a most interesting
indication as to the way in which Camus’s ideas were begin¬
ning to develop at that time.
As might be expected, the third and largest category is that
of the entries which Camus did not finally use in his published
work, and which are therefore interesting mainly as evidence
of ambitions that he at one time entertained but subsequently
abandoned. A number of them were, however, used in the
early novel La Mort Heureuse,4 on which Camus continued
to work after he had had a typewritten copy made of the first
draft between 1937 and 1938, and will therefore become
easier to understand if his trustees finally allow this work to
be published. In the meantime, the following brief account
of the novel, based upon this typescript, will enable some of
these entries to fall into context.
There are a number of resemblances between La Mort
Heureuse, to which Camus may have been referring when he
noted, on September 30, 1937, that it was “through a desire to
4 The typescript of La Mort Heureuse which I was allowed to read was
dated 1937—1938, and M. Quilliot tells me that he has discovered no
reason to doubt the accuracy of these dates. There is, however, another
manuscript in existence, which may in fact contain all the corrections
made after 1937. As will be seen from the Notebooks, Camus stated his
intention of revising this novel in June 1938, and was still experiment¬
ing with a new style of narration as late as March 1939The Pleiade edition of Camus’s novels and plays, which M. Quilliot is
at the moment preparing, will contain short extracts illustrating the
similarities and differences between La Mort Heureuse and The Stranger,

IX

INTRODUCTION

shine too early that some authors did not agree to rewrite,”
and The Stranger, the novel that seems to have grown out of
it and was published in 1942. Both novels are set in Algeria,
and Patrice Mersault, the hero of La Mort Heureuse, shares a
number of the characteristics of Meursault, the hero of The
Stranger. Both seem to be only sons of widowed mothers, both
are young men earning their living as clerks after having had
to give up their studies, both enjoy living in Algeria, are fond
of swimming, have a mistress, find nothing of interest to do
on a Sunday, and tend to fall asleep as soon as work or physical
pleasure leave a gap in their lives. Patrice Mersault, however
—as can be gathered from the entries in the Notebooks—has
a more deliberate interest in achieving conscious happiness
than the easygoing Meursault, and the novel opens with his
killing, apparently with his victim’s consent, a rich but almost
completely paralyzed invalid called Zagreus. The aim of the
murder is to provide Mersault with enough money to pursue
his quest for happiness unhindered by poverty or the need to
earn a living.
Mersault then sets out on a long journey in Eastern Europe
—fragments of Camus’s description of this in the novel are in
the Notebooks and were later incorporated into one of the
essays in L’Envers et VEndroit—but soon returns to Algeria,
with the chill that he caught on the evening of Zagreus’s
murder developing into something more serious. After a brief
stay with some of his friends in the Maison devant le Monde 5
—the description of this episode is perhaps the most openly
autobiographical passage in the whole of Camus’s work—he
marries and goes to live in a small village on the Algerian
coast near the ruins of Tipasa. There, after an imprudent
B A description of the Maison devant le Monde can be found in
Germaine Bree’s book.
X

INTRODUCTION

“

midnight swim, his illness grows worse and he dies, fully
conscious at the very moment of his death of everything that
is happening to him. The second part of the novel is called,
appropriately enough. La Mort Consciente (Conscious Death'),
and the Pantheistic harmony with the rest of creation that
Mersault feels on his deathbed thereby justifies its general
title.
Different views have been expressed about the value of La
Mort Heureuse—the reader will find another account of it in
Germaine Bree’s book on Camus—and it is certainly not as
perfectly finished a work as The Stranger. Its very defects,
however—a certain diffuseness and lack of construction, too
obvious a use of personal experiences—enable us to under¬
stand why Camus never submitted it to a publisher, and
proceeded to write The Stranger, a work which he was later
to call an “exercise in objectivity.” One of the most interesting
opportunities which the Notebooks offer us is that of seeing
something of how this was done, and of watching an author
both creating a new work and reflecting critically on the
principles which must guide this creation. One of the many
stories to be read between the lines of these Notebooks is that
of the struggle between Camus’s intellectual recognition of
the need for discipline and what he referred to, in an inter¬
view in 1959, as the “profound anarchy” 6 of his temperament.
The pleasure which I have taken in translating and editing
the Notebooks has been redoubled by Mme Camus’s generosity
6 Cf. interview in Claude Brisville’s study in La Bibliotheque ideale,
Gallimard, 1959, p. 2,58. Camus also remarked, however: “I make my¬
self strict rules in order to correct my nature. But it is my nature that
I finally obey. The result is far from brilliant.” In the same interview,
he described his manner of working as: “Notes, scraps of paper, reverie,
which all might go on for years. Then, one day, I have the idea or con¬
ception that makes all these isolated fragments coagulate together.
There then begins a long and painful putting them into order.”

xi

INTRODUCTION

in allowing me access to the original cahiers, to the unpub¬
lished typescript copy for the period 1942-1954, and to the
typescript of La Mort Heureuse. I should like to take this
opportunity of expressing my gratitude for all the help which
she has given me.
Philip Thody

CONTENT S

NOTEBOOK I.

May 1935 — September 1937

NOTEBOOK II.

September 1937 - April 1939

63

NOTEBOOK III.

April 1939 — February 1942

129

page

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

3

215

APPENDIX A:

Newspaper Articles Published by
Camus between 1938 and 1940

219

APPENDIX B: Plays Performed by the Theatre du
Travail, Later the Theatre de l’Equipe, between
1935 and 1939

225

■

May 1935 - September 193 7

MAY

1935

What I mean is this: that one can, with no romanticism,
feel nostalgic for lost poverty. A certain number of years
lived without money are enough to create a whole sensi¬
bility. In this particular case, the strange feeling which the
son has for his mother constitutes his whole sensibility.
The latent material memory which he has of his child¬
hood (a glue that has stuck to the soul) explains why this
way of feeling shows itself in the most widely differing
fields.
Whoever notices this in himself feels gratitude and,
consequently, a guilty conscience. If he has moved into
a different class, the comparison also gives him the feel¬
ing that he has lost great wealth. For rich people, the
3

NOTEBOOK I

sky is just an extra, a gift of nature. The poor, on the
other hand, can see it as it really is: an infinite grace.1
A guilty conscience needs to confess. A work of art is a
confession, and I must bear witness. When I see things
clearly, I have only one thing to say. It is in this life of
poverty, among these vain or humble people, that I have
most certainly touched what I feel is the true meaning of
life. Works of art will never provide this and art is not
everything for me. Let it at least be a means.
What also count are the small acts of cowardice, the
times one is ashamed, the way one thinks of the other
world, the world of money, without being aware of doing
so. I think that the world of the poor is one of the few, if
not the only one, which is wholly turned in upon itself, so
that it forms an island in society. With little money,
one can play at Robinson Crusoe. But someone who has
dived down right into it has to say “over there” when
talking about the doctor’s house next door.
All this must be expressed through a study of the
mother and the son.
What I have just written applies to things in general.
1 This is repeated, in slightly different form, in Camus’s first volume
of essays, L’Envers et VEndroit, first published in Algiers in 1937. All
references here, however, are to the 1958 Gallimard edition. An English
translation of these essays is in preparation. Cf. p. 63: “At a certain
level of wealth, the sky itself and the star-filled sky seem natural goods.
But at the bottom of the scale, the sky recovers all its meaning: a price¬
less gift of grace.
The mother-son relationship recurs in The Stranger, The Plague, and
The Misunderstanding. Camus loved his mother intensely, and wrote in
a later cahier, in 1952: “When my mother’s eyes were not resting on
me, I have never been able to look at her without tears springing into
my eyes.” For a further analysis of the name and relationship pattern
in Camus’s work, cf. Carl A. Viggiani: “Camus’ L’Etranger,” in PMLA,
December 1956.

4

May 1935

—

September 1937

When one conies down to particular instances, everything
becomes more complicated.
(1) A setting. A neighborhood and its inhabitants.
( 2 ) The mother and what she does.
(3) The relationship between the son and his mother.
What is the solution? The mother? End with a chapter
describing how her symbolic value comes into being
through the son’s nostalgia?

Grenier: 2 We always have too low an opinion of our¬
selves. But in poverty, illness, or loneliness we become
aware of our eternity. “We need to be forced into our
very last bastions.”
That’s exactly it, neither more nor less.

Vanity of the word experience. You cannot acquire ex¬
perience by making experiments. You cannot create ex¬
perience. You must undergo it. Patience rather than ex¬
perience. We wait patiently—or, rather, we are patients.
Every experience: when we emerge from experience we
are not wise but skillful. But at what?

Two women, close friends, both very ill. But one with a
nervous complaint and capable of recovery. The other in
the last stages of consumption. No hope.
2 Jean Grenier, a philosopher in his own right, was Camus’s philos¬
ophy teacher in Algiers and exercised a considerable influence over his
thought. Both L’Envers et VEndroit and The Rebel are dedicated to
him. For more details, cf. my own study Albert Camus 1913-1960
(The Macmillan Company, 1961), pp. 235-6.

5

NOTEBOOK I

One afternoon the consumptive at her friend’s bed¬
side. The latter:
“Up to now, you see, even in my worst attacks, I still had
something. A stubborn hope to keep alive. Now, I feel
there is nothing left to hope for. I’m so tired that I feel I
shall never get up again.”
Her friend, a fierce joy shining in her eyes, took her
hand:
“Oh, we shall make the great voyage together.”
The same women: the one dying, the other almost
cured. She had gone to France especially to try out a
new treatment.
And the other blames her for it. She seems to be re¬
proaching her friend for leaving her behind. In fact, the
sight of her friend getting better makes her suffer. She
had had this mad hope of not dying alone, of taking her
dearest friend with her. Now she is going to die alone.
And this knowledge feeds her friendship with a terrible
hatred.

Storm sky in August. Gusts of hot wind. Black clouds.
Yet in the East a delicate, transparent band of blue sky.
Impossible to look at it. Its presence is a torture for the
eyes and for the soul, because beauty is unbearable, drives
us to despair, offering us for a minute the glimpse of an
eternity that we should like to stretch out over the whole
of time.

He is at ease in sincerity. Very rare.

6

May 1935

—

September 1937

The theme of comedy is also important. What saves us
from our worst suffering is the feeling that we are aban¬
doned and alone, and yet not sufficiently alone for “other
people” to stop “sympathizing with us” in our unhappiness.
It is in this sense that our moments of happiness are often
those when we are lifted up into an endless sadness by the
feeling that everyone has forsaken us. Also in this sense
that happiness is often only the self-pitying awareness of
our unhappiness.
This is very noticeable among the poor—God put selfpity by the side of despair like the cure by the side of the
disease.

When I was young, I expected people to give me more
than they could—continuous friendship, permanent emo¬
tion.
Now I have learned to expect less of them than they can
give—a silent companionship. And their emotions, their
friendship, and noble gestures keep their full miraculous
value in my eyes; wholly the fruit of grace.

They had already had too much to drink and wanted a
meal. But it was Christmas Eve and the restaurant was
full. They were turned away, but had insisted and were
thrown out. They had then kicked the owner’s wife, who
was pregnant. The owner, a frail, fair-haired young man,
had taken a gun and opened fire. The bullet had lodged in
the man’s right temple. His head had now rolled over and
was resting on the wound. Drunk with alcohol and terror,
his friend had begun to dance around his body.
7

NOTEBOOK

I

What had happened was quite straightforward, and
would all end up tomorrow in the newspaper. But, for the
moment, in this out of the way comer, the sight of the
pavement glistening under the occasional street lamp
after the recent rain, the long, wet hissing of the tires
of passing cars, the brightly lit streetcars clanging back
from time to time, gave this scene sprung from another
world a disquieting relief: the sweetly sickening and insist¬
ent image that the neighborhood takes on when night peo¬
ples its streets with shadows—or, rather, when one single
anonymous shadow, heralded by a dull movement of feet,
sometimes leaps forward, bathed in crimson glory, in the
red light cast by the bulb outside a pharmacy.

January

1936 3

Beyond the window there is a garden, but I can see only
its walls. And a few branches flowing with light. A little
higher, I see more branches, and higher still the sun. And
of all the jubilation of the air that can be felt outdoors, of
all that joy spread out over the world, I can see only
shadows of branches playing on white curtains. There
are also five rays of sunlight patiently pouring into
the room the golden scent of dried grass. A breeze, and the
shadows on the curtains come to life. If a cloud covers up
the sun and then lets it through again, the bright yellow
of the vase of mimosa leaps out of the shade. The birth of
this single flash of brightness is enough to fill me with a
confused and whirling joy.
> 3 This description, later incorporated with minor changes into
L Envers et lEndroit, pp. 121—4, was written straight out into the Note¬
books with very few alterations or corrections.

8

May 1935 — September 1937

A prisoner in the cave, I lie alone and look at the shadow
of the world. A January afternoon. But the heart of the
air is full of cold. Everywhere a thin film of sunlight that
you could split with a touch of your fingernail, but which
clothes everything in an eternal smile. Who am I and what
can

I

do—except

enter

into

the movement

of

the

branches and the light, be this ray of sunlight in which my
cigarette smolders away, this soft and gentle passion
breathing in the air? If I try to reach myself, it is at the
heart of this light that I am to be found. And if I try to
taste and understand this delicate flavor that contains the
secret of the world, it is again myself that I find at the
heart of the universe. Myself, that is to say this intense
emotion which frees me from my surroundings. Soon, my
attention will be filled again with other things and with
the world of men. But let me cut out this moment from
the cloth of time as other men leave a flower in the pages
of a book. In it, they enclose the memory of a walk in
which they were touched by love. I also walk through the
world, but am caressed by a god. Life is short, and it is a
sin to waste one’s time. I waste my time all day long,
while other people say that I do a great deal. Today is a
resting place, and my heart goes out to meet itself.
If I still feel a grain of anxiety, it is at the thought of this
unseizable moment slipping through my fingers like a ball
of quicksilver. Let those who want to, stand aside from
the world. I no longer complain, for now I see my¬
self being born. I am happy in this world for my king¬
dom is of this world. A cloud passes and a moment grows
pale. I die to myself. The book opens at a well-loved page—
how tasteless it is when compared to the book of the
9

NOTEBOOK I

world. Is it true that I have suffered, is it not true that I
am suffering? And that I am drunk with this suffering be¬
cause it is made up of that sun and these shadows, of this
warmth and that coldness which can be felt afar off, at the
very heart of the air? What cause to wonder if some¬
thing dies or men suffer, when everything is written on
this window where the sun pours forth its fullness? I can
and in a moment I shall say that what counts is to be hu¬
man, simple. No, what counts is to be true, and then every¬
thing fits in, both humanity and simplicity. And when am
I truer and more transparent than when I am the world?
Moment of adorable silence. Men fall silent. But the
song of the world rises and I, a prisoner chained deep in
the cave, am filled with delight before I have time to
desire. Eternity is here and I was hoping for it. Now I
can speak. I do not know what I could wish for rather
than this continued presence of self with self. What I
want now is not happiness but awareness. One thinks
one has cut oneself off from the world, but it is enough to
see an olive tree upright in the golden dust, or beaches
glistening in the morning sun, to feel this separation melt
away. Thus with me. I become aware of the possibilities
for which I am responsible. Every minute of life carries
with it its miraculous value, and its face of eternal youth.

People can think only in images. If you want to be a
philosopher, write novels.4

4 Importance of images in fiction—an idea repeated in L’Envers et
I’Endroit, pp. 72-3, and in The Myth of Sisyphus. Cf. English transla¬
tion by Justin O Brien (Alfred A. Knopf, 1955), p. 100. It also occurs in
Camus s review of La Nausee in Alger-Republicain on October 20
IO

May 1935

—

September 1937

Absurdity

Lucidity

Sames without consequence
Strength and goodness
preserve oneself

acquire

from vanity

perseverance

A Saint: Keep silent. Act. Socialism
Acquisition and achievement.
Basically: heroic values.

part 11* * * 5

A. In the present
B. In the past
Ch. Ai—The House before the World. Introduction.
Ch. Bi—Memories. Affair with Lucienne.
Ch. A2—House before the World. His youth.
Ch. B2—Lucienne tells of her acts of infidelity.
Ch. A3—House before the World. Invitation.
1938. “A novel is never anything but a philosophy put into images. And
in a good novel, the whole of the philosophy has passed into the
images.” La Nausee, in his view, did not wholly satisfy this criterion.
5 This list of contents seems to be a first draft for La Mort Heureuse.
The House before the World was an actual house overlooking the sea,
on the outskirts of Algiers, which Camus shared with a number of other
students in the nineteen-thirties. It is described in La Mort Heureuse.
There, Mersault is jealous of an affair which one of his mistresses,
Marthe, had had with another man. He eventually marries Lucienne.
II

NOTEBOOK I

Ch. B4—Sexual jealousy. Salzburg. Prague.
Ch. A4—House before the World. The sun.
Ch. B5—Flight (letter). Algiers. Catches cold, falls ill.
Ch. A5—Night and the stars. Catherine.

Patrice tells his story of the man sentenced to death: 6
“I can see him, he is inside me. And everything he says
pierces my heart. He lives and breathes with me. He is
afraid with me.
“. . . And the other man who tries to break down his
resistance. I can see him living too. He is in me. I send
him the priest every day to weaken him.
“I know that now I am going to write. There comes a
time when the tree, after much suffering, must bear fruit.
Every winter ends in a spring. I must bear witness.
Afterwards, the cycle will start up again.
“I shall tell of nothing but my love of life. But I shall tell
of it in my own way. . . .
“Others write because of the temptations they have put
off. And each disappointment in life makes a work of art
for them, a lie woven out of the lies of their life. But what
I write will spring from my moments of happiness, even
6 It is interesting to see the theme of capital punishment occurring
so early. It was one of the main preoccupations of Camus’s life; it
formed the subject matter of The Stranger and The Plague, inspired
the Reflections on the Guillotine, cf. Resistance, Rebellion, and Death
(Alfred A. Knopf, i960), pp. 173—234, and lay at the basis of many of
his political attitudes.
Patrice is Mersault’s Christian name in La Mort Heureuse. The theme
of the man sentenced to death hardly appears at all in the “final”
(1937-1938) version of La Mort Heureuse. It is, of course, at the very
centre of The Stranger.

12

May 1935 — September 1937

when what I write is cruel. I must write as I must swim,
because my body demands it.”

part hi (all in the present)
Chapt. I—“Catherine,” says Patrice, “I know that now I
am going to write. The story of the condemned man. I
have come back to my real function, which is to write.”
Chapt. II—Descent from the House before the World to
the port, etc. Taste of death and of the sun. Love of life.

Six stories:
The story of the brilliant game. Luxury.
The story of the poor neighborhood. Death of the
mother.
The story of the House before the World.
The story of sexual jealousy.
The story of the condemned man.
The story of the descent toward the sun.

In the Balearic Islands. Last summer 7
What gives value to travel is fear. It is the fact that, at a
certain moment, when we are so far from our own coun¬
try (a French newspaper acquires incalculable value. And
7 These reflections on travel recur, in slightly changed form, in
L’Envers et I’Endroit, pp. 108-9, when Camus is describing his visit to
Palma.

13

NOTEBOOK I

those evenings when, in cafes, you try to get close to other
men just to touch them with your elbow), we are seized
by a vague fear, and an instinctive desire to go back to the
protection of old habits. This is the most obvious benefit of
travel. At that moment we are feverish but also porous,
so that the slightest touch makes us quiver to the depths
of our being. We come across a cascade of fight, and there
is eternity. This is why we should not say that we travel
for pleasure. There is no pleasure in traveling, and I look
upon it more as an occasion for spiritual testing. If we
understand by culture the exercise of our most intimate
sense—that of eternity—then we travel for culture. Pleas¬
ure takes us away from ourselves in the same way as
distraction, in Pascal’s use of the word, takes us away from
God. Travel, which is like a greater and a graver science,
brings us back to ourselves.

The Balearic Islands
The bay.
San Francisco—the cloister.
Bellver.
The wealthy district
women).

(the shadows and the old

The poor district (the window ).
The cathedral (bad taste and a masterpiece).
A cafe with a piano.
The coast of Miramar.
Valldemosa and the terraces.
Soller and midday.
San Antonio (convent). Felanitx.
14

/1935 - September 1937

■Mat

Pollensa:
house.

the town. The convent. The boarding¬

Ibiza: the bay.
La Pena: the fortifications.
San Eulalia: the beach. The festival.
The cafes around the port.
The stone walls and the windmills in the country.

FEBRUARY

13,

1936

I ask of people more than they can give me. It is useless
to maintain the contrary. But what a mistake and what
despair. And myself perhaps. . . .

Seek contacts. All contacts. If I want to write about
men, how can I cut myself off from the countryside? If the
sky or light attract me, shall I forget the eyes or voices of
those I love? Each time I am given the elements of a
friendship, the fragments of an emotion, never the emo¬
tion or the friendship itself.
You go to see an older friend to tell him everything. Or,
at least, this something which is stifling you. But he is in a
hurry. You talk about everything and about nothing at
all. The time to speak has gone. And here I am, more
alone and empty than before. How a careless word from a
friend escaping from my presence will lay waste this
feeble wisdom that I am trying to construct! “Non ridere,
non lugere” . . . and doubts about myself and about
other people.

15

NOTEBOOK I

MARCH

A day of sunshine and clouds. The cold spangled with
yellow. I ought to keep a diary of each day’s weather. The
fine, transparent sunshine yesterday. The bay trembling
with light like a moist lip.8 And I have worked all day.

A title: The hope of the world.

Grenier on Communism: “The whole question comes
down to this: should one, for an ideal of justice, accept
stupid ideas?” One can reply “yes,” this is a fine thing to
do. Or “no,” it is honest to refuse.
With a due sense of proportion, one can see the same
problem here as in Christianity. Should the believer load
himself down with the contradictions in the Gospels and
the excesses of the Church? Does believing in Christianity
involve accepting Noah’s ark and defending the Inquisi¬
tion? or the tribunal which condemned Galileo?
But, on the other hand, how can we reconcile Com¬
munism and disgust? If I try extreme forms, in so far as
they reach

absurdity

and uselessness—then

I

reject

Communism. And this concern for religious matters. . . .

It is death which gives gambling and heroism their true
meaning.
8 The image of the hay like a moist lip occurs again in L’Envers et
VEndroit, p. 54.

16

May 1935 — September 1937

•

Yesterday. The sun on the quays, the Arab acrobats,
and the port leaping with light. It is as if, for the last
winter 9 that I shall spend here, this country were offering
me all its riches. This unique winter, glistening with cold
and sunlight. Blue cold.
Lucid ecstasy and smiling destitution—the despair
which we see in the virile acceptance reflected in Greek
stelae. Why do I need to write or create, to love or suffer?
The part of my life which is now lost is not, basically, the
most important. Everything becomes pointless.
Neither despair nor joy seems justified before this sky
and the shining suffocating heat pouring down from it.

may

16

A long walk. Hills with the sea in the background. And the
delicate sun. White eglantines in all the bushes. Heavy,
syrupy flowers with violent-colored petals. Also the return
home, gentleness and friendship of women. Grave and
smiling faces of young women. Smiles, jokes, and plans.
One goes back into the game. And, without believing in
them, everyone smiles at appearances and pretends to ac¬
cept them. No false notes. I am linked to the world by
9 Perhaps he had been told that his illness made it necessary for him
to leave Algiers. Cf. entry on p. 44.
This entry, with its “tout devient inutile,” foreshadowing something of
the feeling of the absurdity of the world expressed in The Stranger and
The Myth of Sisyphus, supports the views of those critics who see
Camus’s early work as strongly marked by his reaction to tuberculosis.
He first fell ill in 1930, and never seems to have been completely cured,
since he had relapses in 1936, 1942, and 1949. The tone here is almost
that of a man seeking some consolation for a fate which he knows is
inevitable and which he detests.

17

NOTEBOOK I

everything I do, to men with all the gratitude I feel.1 From
the hilltop, we could see the mists left by the recent rains
being pressed down and brought back to life by the sun.
Even as I came down through the woods, diving down into
this cotton wool, I sensed the sun above me and saw the
trees appearing one by one in this miraculous daylight.
Trust and friendship, sun and white houses, scarcely
grasped shades of meaning—oh, my untouched moments
of happiness are already drifting away and offering no
more help in the gloom of the evening than a young
woman’s smile or the understanding glance of shared
friendship.

If time seems to pass so quickly, this is because there
are no landmarks. Like the moon when it is at its height or
on the horizon. The years of our youth are so long be¬
cause they are so full, the years of our old age so short be¬
cause each stage is already marked out. Note, for instance,
that it is so interminable and exasperating to watch the
1 A reflection which recurs in L’Envers et VEndroit, p. 124, and pro¬
vides one of the explanations for the idea of the “two sides of the coin”
expressed in the title. As a number of other entries in the Notebooks
show, Camus feels himself torn between a love for his fellow creatures
and an ability to forget them in an instinctive communion with the
world. This feeling of duality between men and the world persisted in
one form or another throughout his work, and inspired the title of Roger
Quilliot’s study La Mer et Les Prisons in 1955. In an essay entitled Re¬
turn to Tipasa, written in 1952 and included in L’Ete (translated in
The Myth of Sisyphus, 1955), Camus wrote: “Yes, there is beauty and
there are men suffering in humiliation. However difficult it may be, I
should like never to be unfaithful either to the one or to the others”
(The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 203). In his spoken introduction to record¬
ings from his work (Disques Festival, FLD 25, ed. Gallimard, no date),
Camus changed this to: “Whatever may be my defects as a man or as a
writer. . . .”

18

May 1935 — September 193 7

hand turn for five minutes on a clock face that it is almost
impossible to do so.2

MARCH

A gray sky, but with the light filtering through. A mo¬
ment ago a few drops of rain. Down there, the bay was
already looming through the mist. Happiness and those
who are happy. They have only what they deserve.

MARCH

My joy is endless.

Dolorem exprimit quia movit amorem.

MARCH

A mental hospital above Algiers. A stiffish breeze, moving
the grass and sunlight, climbs the hill. And all this golden
and tender movement comes to a halt some way from the
summit, at the foot of the dark cypress trees, which
then climb to the top in close-set ranks. An admirable
light falling from the heavens. Below, no wrinkles on
the smooth face of the sea smiling with its blue teeth.
Upright in the wind, the sun warming one side of my face,
I stand speechless as I watch this unique moment flow
past me. But a patient arrives with his nurse, a box under

2 Valentin, the hero of Queneau’s novel Le Dimanche de la Vie, makes
a similar discovery. Gallimard, 1951, p. 19919

NOTEBOOK I

his arm, and comes up to me with a serious expression
on his face.
“Good morning, Mademoiselle”

(this

to the young

woman with me). “Allow me to introduce myself. Mon¬
sieur Ambrosino.”
“Monsieur Camus.”
“Ah, now, I knew a Camou. Trucking business at
Mostaganem. Must be one of your relatives.”
“No.”
“Doesn’t matter. Let me stay with you a minute. I am al¬
lowed to go out for half an hour every day. But I have to
grovel in front of the nurse to make him come with
me. You one of this young lady’s relatives?”
“Yes.”
“In that case then, I’ll tell you: we’re going to get en¬
gaged at Easter. My wife says I can. Mademoiselle, pray ac¬
cept these few flowers. This letter is for you as well. Sit
down next to me. I only have half an hour.”
“We must be going, Monsieur Ambrosino.”
“Oh, all right, when shall I see you again?”
“Tomorrow.”
“Ah. Well, you see, I only have half an hour and I came
to play a little music.”
We leave. On the road, we pass the magnificent bright
color of the red geraniums. The patient has taken from his
box a reed with a long split down the middle, covered
over with a piece of rubber. He makes it produce a strange,
plaintive, warm music: “II pleut sur la route. . .

The

music follows us down past the great clumps of daisies,
against the unruffled smile of the sea.
I open the letter. It contains advertisements cut out of
20

May 1935 — September 1937

newspapers and carefully arranged with a number pen¬
ciled on each.

M 3-Every day he used to put the gun on the table.
When he had finished work, he would put his papers in
order, put his head close to the revolver, place his fore¬
head against it, roll his temples on it, cooling his hot,
feverish cheeks against the cool metal. Then, for a long
time, he would let his fingers wander along the trigger,
playing with the safety catch, until the world grew silent
about him, and, already half asleep, his whole being hud¬
dled down into the one sensation of this cold and salty
metal from which could spring death.
As soon as one does not kill oneself, one must keep silent
about life. And, as he woke up, his mouth filled with an
already bitter saliva, he licked the barrel, poking his
tongue into it, and with a death rattle of infinite happi¬
ness said again and again in wonder and astonishment:
“My joy is priceless.”

M—PART II
The successive catastrophes—his courage—life made
up of these misfortunes. He settles down into the painful
cloth from which his life is woven, builds up his days
3 A passage used in La Mort Heureuse. (The cahiers themselves, it
may be noted, do not contain either the name Mersault or the different
spelling of Meursault. The typescript, perhaps on Camus’s instruc¬
tions, renders most of the entries M. as Mersault.) The passage is, in
fact, used to describe the invalid whom Mersault finally kills, Roland
Zagreus. This passage, like the preceding one, was written straight out

into the Notebooks without any alterations.
21

NOTEBOOK I

around his loneliness, his return home in the evening,
his suspicion and disgust. People think he is tough and
stoical. Really, things seem to be going quite well. One
day, an insignificant incident: one of his friends speaks
to him in an offhand manner. He goes home. Kills him¬
self.4

I seem to be gradually emerging.
The gentle and restrained friendship of women.

The social question is now settled, and I have found my
balance again. In a fortnight’s time, I shall decide where I
am. Think of my book all the time. From Sunday on¬
wards, immediately start to organize my work.
I must start to build again after this long period of
anguish and despair. Finally the sun and my panting body.
Keep silent—and have confidence in myself.

APRIL

The first hot days of the year. Stifling. All the animals are
lying on their side. At dusk, the air above the town takes
on a strange quality. Noises rise and are lost in the air
like balloons. Trees and men stand motionless. On the ter¬
race of their houses, the Arab women gossip while wait¬
ing for evening to fall. The smell of coffee being roasted
also rises in the air. An hour of tenderness and despair,
4 The idea of a suicide caused by a moment of indifference occurs
both in L’Envers et VEndroit, p. 71, and in The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 5.
22

May 1935 - September 1937

with nothing to embrace, nothing at whose feet to throw
oneself, overcome with gratitude.

The heat on the quays—it crushes you with its enor¬
mous weight and takes away your breath. The thick and
heavy smell of tar rasping in your throat. Annihilation
and the taste of death. It is this which is the real climate
of tragedy and not, as people usually consider, the night.

Senses and the world—a mingling of desires. And
in this body which I keep close to my own, I hold this
strange joy which comes down from sky to sea.

Sun and death.5 The docker with a broken leg. The
drops of blood, falling one by one on the hot stones of the
quay, sizzle and shrivel up. In the cafe, he tells me the
story of his life. The others have gone. Six glasses stand on
the table. He lived alone, in a small house in the suburbs,
going home only in the evening to do the cooking. A dog, a
tom and a female cat, six kittens, which the cat cannot
feed. They die one by one. Every evening, a stiff dead
body and filth. Two smells: death and urine mingling to¬
gether. On the last evening (he stretches his arms across
the table, wider and wider apart, slowly and gently push¬
ing the glasses toward the edge) the last kitten died. But
the mother had eaten half of it—half a cat left, as you
5 A fragment reproduced in La Mort Heureuse. The story of the cats
et VEndroit, pp. 71-2.

is also told, in the first person, in L’Envers

23

NOTEBOOK I

might say. And still all the filth. The wind howling around
the house. A piano, in the far distance. He sat in the mid¬
dle of these ruins and wretchedness. And the whole mean¬
ing of the world had suddenly surged up into his mouth.
(One by one, the glasses fall from the table, as he
stretches his arms wider and wider apart.) He stayed
there for a long time, shaking with a vast, wordless anger,
his hands in the urine and the thought that he had got to
get his dinner ready.
All the glasses are broken. And he smiles. “O.K.,” he says
to the owner, “I’ll pay for everything.”

The docker’s broken leg. In a comer, a young man
laughs silently to himself.

“It’s nothing. What hurt most were general ideas.” Run¬
ning after the truck, speed, dust, and din. The wild
rhythm of windlasses and machines, the masts dancing
on the horizon, the hulls of the vessels lurching from
side to side. On the truck: bouncing over the uneven
cobbles of the quay. And in the white, chalky dust, in the
sun and blood, against the immense and fantastic back¬
ground of the port, two young men being carried swiftly
away, breathless with laughter as if overcome with dizzi¬
ness.6
6 This description was reproduced in the typescript of La Mort
Heureuse and also recurs, with some changes, in The Stranger, p. 31.
The character of Emmanuel also occurs in both novels, as Mersault’s
and Meursault’s friend.

24

May 1935 — September 1937

'

MAY

One must not cut oneself off from the world. No one who
lives in the sunlight makes a failure of his life. My
whole effort, whatever the situation, misfortune or disillu¬
sion, must be to make contact again. But even within
this sadness I feel a great leap of joy and a great desire to
love simply at the sight of a hill against the evening sky.
Contacts with truth, with nature first of all, and then
with the art of those who have understood and with my
own art if I am capable of it. Otherwise, the sea, sun¬
shine and delight, with the moist lips of desire, will sim¬
ply lie there in front of me.
Smiling despair. No solution, but constantly exercising
an authority over myself that I know is useless. The es¬
sential thing is not to lose oneself, and not to lose that
part of oneself that lies sleeping in the world.

MAY

All contacts—does this mean the Cult of the Self? 7 No.
The Cult of the Self presupposes either optimism or a
7 A probable reference to the trilogy entitled Le Culte du Moi, 18881891, by Maurice Barres, a standard work of egocentric dilettantism.
Camus wrote an article on Barres in La Lumiere, a very left-wing Pari¬
sian weekly, on April 5, 1940, in which he stated: “In his way, which
was quite moving at times, Barres was the aesthete of patriotism as he
was the aesthete of individualism.” The meaning of Camus’s remarks in
the Notebooks seems to be that, for someone like himself, who has not
the time and leisure to “cultivate the self” in the way that Barres’s hero
did, the correct attitude is one of constant attention to the different pos¬
sibilities which day-to-day life contains. This idea recurs in The Myth
of Sisyphus, p. 68: “A subclerk in the post office is the equal of a con¬
queror if consciousness is common to them.”

25

NOTEBOOK I

dilettante’s attitude toward life. Both nonsense. Do not
select a life, but make the one you have stretch out.
Attention: for Kierkegaard, the origin of our suffering
lies in comparisons.
Commit yourself completely. Then, show equal strength
in accepting both yes and no.

MAY

These early evenings in Algiers when the women are so
beautiful.

MAY

On the very edge—and over the edge lies a gambler’s atti¬
tude 8 to life. I deny, I am cowardly and weak, I act as if I
were saying yes, as if I were strong and brave. Question of
will power—carry absurdity through to the very end—I
am capable of. . . .
Hence, take this gambler’s attitude tragically, as far as
the effort one makes is concerned, but see it as comic
(or, rather, as unimportant) in the result obtained.
But to do this, don’t waste time. Look for the extreme
experience in solitude. Purify gambling by conquering
yourself—knowing such conquest to be absurd.
Bring together the Hindu sage and the Western hero.

8 Camus was fascinated by the words jeu, jouer, and joueur, with
their different associations with gambling, sports, and play-acting, and
deliberately exploited their ambiguity. This makes any translation an
interpretation based on context.
26

May 1935 — September 1937

“It is general ideas that hurt most.”
This extreme experience must always come to an end
before an outstretched hand. To be resumed later. Out¬
stretched hands are rare.

God—the Mediterranean: constructions—nothing natu¬
ral.
Nature = equivalence.

Against relapse and weakness: effort. Be careful of the
demon:
culture—the body
the will—work (Phil.)
But the counterpart: the intercessors—every day
my work ( emotions )
extreme experiences.
Philosophical work: absurdity.
Literary work: strength, love, and death under the sign
of conquest.
In both, mingle the two styles while respecting the par¬
ticular tone of each. One day, write a book that will give
the meaning.
And show no emotion about this tension—despise com¬
parisons.

An essay on death and on Philosophy—Malraux. India.
An essay on chemistry.
27

NOTEBOOK I
MAY

That life is the strongest force—true. But the starting
point of all kinds of cowardice. We must make a point of
thinking the opposite.

And now they start to bellow: I am immoral.
They must be translated as meaning: I need to give
myself an ethic. Admit it then, you fool. I do too.

Another way of looking at it: you must be simple, truth¬
ful, not go in for literary declamations—accept and
commit yourself. But we do nothing else.
If you are convinced of your despair, you must either
act as if you did hope after all—or kill yourself. Suffering
gives no rights.

An intellectual? Yes. And never deny it. An intellectual
is someone whose mind watches itself. I like this, be¬
cause I am happy to be both halves, the watcher and the
watched. “Can they be brought together?” This is a practi¬
cal question. We must get down to it. “I despise intelli¬
gence” really means: “I cannot bear my doubts.”
I prefer to keep my eyes open.

NOVEMBER9

See Greece. Mind and feeling, a taste for expression as evi¬
dence of decadence. Greek sculpture starts to decline as
9 Camus had to cancel his trip to Greece in 1939 because of the out¬
break of war. He finally went there in 1955.
28

May 1935 - September 1937

soon as the statues begin to smile and have an expression
in their eyes. The same is true of Italian painting, with
the “colorists” of the sixteenth century.
The paradox of the Greeks who are great artists in
spite of themselves. The Doric Apollos are admirable
because their faces are expressionless. Unfortunately,
however, the way they were painted did actually give
them an expression. But now that the paint has gone, the
masterpiece remains.

Nationalities appear as signs of disintegration. Almost as
soon as the religious unity of the Holy Roman Empire
had been broken, nationalisms began to make themselves
felt. In the East, we still find unity.
Internationalism is trying to restore to the West its true
meaning and vocation. But this internationalism is based
not on Christian but on Greek principles. Modern human¬
ism deepens the gulf separating East and West—as in the
case of Malraux. But it restores strength.

Protestantism. Nuance. In theory, Luther’s and Kierke¬
gaard’s attitudes are admirable. In practice?

JANUARY

Caligula 1 or the meaning of death. 4 acts.
I—(a) His accession. Joy. Virtuous speeches. (Cf. Sue¬
tonius. )
(b) Mirror.
iAs Germaine Bree has shown (Symposium, Spring-Fall 1958, pp.
43-8), the first version of Caligula was completed in 1938.

29

NOTEBOOK I

II—(a) His sisters and Drusilla.
(b) Scorn for the great.
(c) Death of Drusilla. Flight of Caligula.
HiEnd: Caligula conies forward, drawing back the curtain:
“No, Caligula is not dead. He is there, and there. He is in
each one of you. If you were given the power, if you had
the courage, if you loved hfe, you would see this monster
or this angel that you carry within yourselves break loose.
Our century is dying for having accepted values, for hav¬
ing believed that things could be beautiful and cease
to be absurd. Farewell. I am going back into history,
where those who are afraid to love too much have held me
prisoner for so long.”
JANUARY

Essay: The House before the World.
—In the neighborhood, people called it the house of the
three Students.
—When you leave, it is to shut yourself away.
—The house before the world is not a house where you
have a good time, but where you are happy.

“There are other people here besides well-brought-up
young ladies,” says M., in whose presence X is using bad
language.
M. and love:
You have reached the age where one is happy to recog¬
nize oneself in somebody else’s child.”
30

May 1935

—

September 1937

“He has to learn Einstein’s theory of relativity in order
to make love.”
“Heaven preserve us,” says M.

The path up there is so steep that it is a conquest every
time you climb it.

FEBRUARY

Civilization does not lie in a greater or lesser degree of re¬
finement, but in an awareness shared by a whole people.
And this awareness is never refined. It is even quite sim¬
ple and straightforward. To see civilization as the work of
an elite is to identify it with culture, which is something
quite different. There is a Mediterranean culture. But
there is also a Mediterranean civilization. At the other
extreme, one must not confuse the idea of civilization
with that of the people.

On Tour (theater)
In the morning, the tenderness and fragility of the
Oranais region, so hard and violent under the daytime
sun: shimmering watercourses bordered with rose laurel,
shades of almost conventional color where the sun is ris¬
ing, mauve-colored mountains fringed with pink. Every¬
thing heralds a glorious day. But with a delicacy and gen¬
tleness that one feels will soon be over.

31

NOTEBOOK I

APRIL

1937

Strange: inability to be alone, inability not to be alone. One
accepts both. Both profit.

The most dangerous temptation: to be like nothing at
all.2

Kasbah: there always comes a moment when you draw
away from yourself. A small charcoal fire crackling in the
middle of a dark and slimy alleyway.

Madness—beautiful setting for a magnificent morning
—the sun. The sky and bones. Music. A finger at the win¬
dow. ,

The need to be right—the sign of a vulgar mind.

Story—the man who refuses to justify himself.3 Other
people prefer their idea of him. He dies, alone in his
awareness of what he really is—Vanity of this consolation.

APRIL

Women—who prefer their ideas to their sensations.
2 Ne ressembler a rien. This idea recurs in the essay on Oran, com¬
pleted in 1939, and included in UEte (translated in The Myth of
Sisyphus, p. 181).
3 This idea is later developed in The Stranger, where Meursault is
condemned to death partly because of his refusal to make any attempt
to justify himself in the eyes of his judges.

32

May 1935

-

September 1937

—For the essay on ruins: 4
The drying wind—the old man stripped as bare as an
olive tree in the Western Sahara.
(1) Essay on ruins: the wind among the ruins or death
in the sun.
( 2 ) Go back to “Iron in the Soul”—foreboding.
( 3 ) The house before the world.
(4) Novel—work at it.
(5) Essay on Malraux.
(6) Thesis.

In a foreign country, the sun bathing the houses on a
hill in golden light. A more intense emotion than that pro¬
duced by the same sight in one’s own country. It is not the
same sun. I know perfectly well that it is not the same sun.

In the evening, the gentleness of the world on the bay.
There are days when the world lies, days when it tells the
truth. It is telling the truth this evening—with what sad
and insistent beauty.

MAY

Mistake of a psychology which concentrates on details.
Men who are seeking and analyzing themselves. To know
oneself, one should assert oneself. Psychology is action, not
thinking about oneself. We continue to shape our per4 The essay on ruins became Le vent a Djemila in Noces. Iron in the
Soul—title of the essay in L’Envers et VEndroit describing Camus’s ex¬
periences in Prague, La Mort dans VAme.

33

NOTEBOOK I

sonality all our life. If we knew ourselves perfectly, we
should die.

(1) The wondrous poetry that precedes love.
(2) The man who makes a failure of everything, even
his death.
(3) In our youth, we attach ourselves more easily to a
landscape than to a man.
It is because landscapes allow themselves to be inter¬
preted.

MAY

Projected preface for L’Envers et VEndroit.
In their present state, most of these essays will appear
rather formless. This does not spring from a convenient
disregard for form, but simply from an insufficient ma¬
turity. Those readers who take these pages for what they
are, that is to say essays in the full sense of the word,
can be asked only to follow the general development
of the ideas they express. They will then perhaps feel, be¬
tween the first page and the last, a secret movement which
gives them unity. I would be tempted to say that this move¬
ment justifies their existence, if I did not look upon all at¬
tempts at justification as useless, and if I did not know that
people always prefer their own idea of what a man is like
to what he really is.

To write is to become disinterested. There is a certain
renunciation in art. Rewrite—the effort always brings
34

May IQ35

-

September 1937

some profit, whatever this may be. Those who do not suc¬
ceed fail because they are lazy.

Luther: “It is a thousand times more important to be¬
lieve firmly in absolution than to be worthy of it. This
faith makes you worthy, and constitutes true satisfaction.”
(Sermon preached at Leipzig in 1519 on Justification.)

JUNE

The condemned man visited by the priest every day. Be¬
cause the neck is sliced off, because the knees give way,
because of the lips that try to form a name, because the
body thrusts itself madly toward the earth to hide itself
in a “My God, My God.”
And every time, the resistance of the man who doesn’t
want this easy way out, and who wants to chew over and
taste all his fear. He dies without a word, his eyes full of
tears.

Philosophies 5 are worth the philosophers who make
them. The greater the man, the truer his philosophy.6
5 Most of Camus’s quotations and references from Spengler come
from the Introduction to The Decline of the West, which he must have
read in M. Tazeront’s translation first published in Gallimard’s Bibliotheque des Idees in 1924. Since he does not always quote accurately
from the French edition, I have taken the liberty of translating the
entries in the Notebooks directly into English. Page references in my
notes, however, are to the authorized English translation by Charles
Francis Atkinson, published by Alfred A. Knopf.
6 Cf. Spengler, p. 41.
The reader is reminded that, for Spengler, civilization is the form
which a culture takes in decline, cf. p. 31: “. . . death following life,,
rigidity following expansion.”

35

NOTEBOOK I

Civilization versus culture
Imperialism is pure civilization. Cf. Cecil Rhodes—“Ex¬
pansion is everything”—civilizations are like small is¬
lands—a civilization as the inevitable climax of a culture
(cf. Spengler).
Culture: the cry of men in the face of their destiny.
Civilization, its decadence: man’s desire for wealth.
Blindness.
On a political theory about the Mediterranean.
“What I speak about I know.”

(1) Economic first principles ( Marxism ) J
(2) Spiritual first principles (The Holy Roman Em¬
pire).

The tragic struggle of the suffering world. Pointlessness
of the problem of immortality. We are interested in our
destiny, admittedly. But before, not after.

The consolatory power of Hell.7 8
(1) In the first place, endless suffering has no mean¬
ing for us. We imagine moments of respite.
(2) We cannot feel what is meant by the word “eter7 The cahier itself has the word Studies written by the side of this,
as an indication that they were subjects which Camus intended to pur¬
sue, not expressions of his own views.
8 The reflections on hell recur, in slightly different form, at the end
of The Myth of Sisyphus, when Sisyphus is shown as happy in his
useless task partly because of the physical sensations which he can
still feel (p. 123).

36

May 1935 — September 1937

nityWe cannot give any value to it—except in so far as
we talk of an “eternal moment.”
(3) In Hell, we are still alive with this body—and this
is better than annihilation.

Logical rule: singularity has universal value.
Illogical rule: what is tragic is contradictory.
Practical rule: an intelligent man on one plane can be a
fool on others.

To be deep through insincerity.

His little doll, seen by Marcel. “Her husband was no
good at it. One day she said to me: It’s never like that
when he does it.’ ”

The battle of Charleroi, seen by Marcel.9
“Well, they dressed us Zouaves out in extended order.
The major said: ‘Charge.’ And down we went, it was like
a ravine with trees in it. They told us to charge. There was
no one in front of us. So we went on and on, and kept
going. Then suddenly the machine guns started up at us.
We all fell down on top of one another. There were so
many dead and wounded in the bottom that you could
9 Marcel’s description of the battle of Charleroi was noted down on a
loose piece of paper that was later stuck into the cahier. Like the other
fragments of conversation in the first three cahiers, it was written
straight out and underwent no corrections in the typescript.

37

NOTEBOOK I

have sailed across the ravine in a boat. Then there were
the ones who shouted out: ‘Mummy, Mummy.’ It was
terrible.”

“Oh, Marcel, what a lot of medals you’ve got there!
How did you get them all?”
“Where did I get them? At the war, of course.”
“How at the war?”
“Look here, do I have to bring out the certificates where
it’s all written down? Have you got to see it all in black
and white? What do you think I am?”
The “certificates” are brought out.
The “certificates” apply to the whole of Marcel’s regi¬
ment.

Marcel. Well, we’re not rich, but we eat well.1 Look at
my grandson now, he eats more than his father. His
father needs a pound of bread, he needs two. And you can
pile on the sausage and pile on the sardines. Sometimes
when he’s finished he says: “Yum, Yum,” and goes on
eating.

JULY

Countryside near La Madeleine.2 Beauty which gives us a
taste for poverty. I am so distant from my fever—so little
1 Marcel’s remarks about food recur in L’Envers et VEndroit, p. 46,
where the Algerian words soubressade (a highly flavored red sausage)
and escabeche (a kind of fish stew) are replaced by saucisson and
camembert.
2 A district near Algiers.

38

May 1935

—

September 1937

capable of any pride but that of loving. Keep at a distance.
I must express what fills my heart, and express it quickly.

“It doesn’t apply.” True novel. A man defends a faith all
his life. His mother dies. He gives up everything. But the
truth of his faith has not really changed. It doesn’t apply,
that’s all.

The flying boat: the glory of metal shining in the bay
against the blue sky.

The pine trees, with their yellow pollen and green leaves.

Christianity, like Gide, asks man to hold back his de¬
sires.3 But Gide finds an extra pleasure in doing this, while
Christianity looks upon it as a mortification of the flesh.
From this point of view, Christianity is more “natural” than
Gide, who is an intellectual. But it is not so natural as
ordinary people, who quench their thirst at fountains and
know that the aim and end of desire is to have enough
and more than enough (write “An Apology for Satiety”).

Prague.4 The flight from oneself.
“I would like a room.”
“Certainly. For one night?”
3 The reflections on Christianity and Gide recur in Summer in Algiers,
p. 143 n. of The Myth of Sisyphus.
4 This conversation is repeated in La Mort Heureuse. In L’Envers et
I’Endroit, however, Camus describes how he took the more expensive
room and had to economize on food.

39

NOTEBOOK

I

“No. I don’t know.”
“We have rooms at 18, 25, and 30 crowns.”
(No reply.)
“Which room would you like, sir?”
“Any one. It doesn’t matter.” (Looks outside.)
“Porter, take this gentleman’s luggage to room num¬
ber 12.”
(He wakes up.)
“How much is that room?”
“30 crowns.”
“It’s too expensive. I would like a room for 18 crowns.”
“Porter, room number 34.”

(1) In the train taking him to

. . ,” “X” was looking

at his hands.
(2) The man who is still there. But it is a coincidence.

Lyons 5
Vorarlberg-Halle.
Kufstein—The chapel, and, all along the Inn, the fields
under the rain. Loneliness anchoring itself deeply.
Salzburg—Jedermann. St. Peter’s Cemetery. The Mirabelle garden and its precious triumph. Rain, phlox—lake
and mountains—walk over the plateau.
Linz—The Danube and the working-class suburbs. The
doctor.
Budweis—The suburb. Small Gothic cloister. Loneli¬
ness.

5 Travel notes incorporated into L’Envers et VEndroit, in the descrip¬
tion of Camus’s visit to Czechoslovakia.
40

May 1935

-

September 1937

Prague—The first four days. Baroque cloister. Jewish
cemetery. Baroque churches. Arrival in the restaurant.
Hunger. No money. The dead man. Cucumber in vinegar.
The one-armed man sitting on his accordion.
Dresden—Paintings.
Bautzen—Gothic cemetery. Geraniums and sunflowers
in the brick arches.
Breslau—Drizzle. Churches and factory chimneys. Its
own particular kind of tragic feeling.
Plains of Silesia: pitiless and harsh—dunes—Flights
of birds from off the sticky ground in the thick morning
light.
Olmutz—Tender and slow moving plains of Moravia.
Sour plum trees and emotions stirred by distant sights.
Brno—Poor districts.
Vienna—Civilization—protective gardens and an ac¬
cumulation of luxury. Inward distress hiding away in
these silken folds.

Italy
Churches—a particular feeling associated with them:
cf. Andrea del Sarto.
Painting: a set and serious world. Confidence, etc.
Note: Italian painting and its decadence.

The intellectual and commitment (fragment).6
6 Camus’s views on this were expressed in his review of Paul Nizan’s
La Conspiration, in Alger-Republicain, November n, 1938, where he
wrote that it was “a problem as trifling as that of immortality, a problem
which man settles with himself and on which he must not be judged.

41

NOTEBOOK I

JULY

How unbearable, for women, is the tenderness which a
man can give them without love.
For men, how bittersweet this is.

Married couples: the man tries to shine before a third
person. Immediately, his wife says: “But you’re just the
same . .

and tries to bring him down, to make him

share her mediocrity.

In trains: a mother to her child:
“Don’t suck your fingers, you dirty thing.”
Or: “If you carry on, you’ll get such a. . .
Id. married couples: the wife gets up in the crowded
train.
“Give it to me,” she says.
The husband feels in his pocket and gives her the paper
she needs.

july

1937

For the Gambler’s Novel.

Cf. Les Pleiades:* * * * * * 7 overflowing cadence. Keep the ru
Luxurious soul. The adventurer.
Men belong to a political party as they get married. And when we are
concerned with a writer, it is by his work that we can best judge the
effects of his commitment.” He then went on to observe that Monther¬
lant, who “rejects any regimentation,” was one of “the most amazing
prose writers of his century,” while Aragon had declined since joining
the Communist Party.
7 A novel by Gobineau, 1816—1882, which Camus greatly admired.

42

May 1935 — September 1937

July

1937—Gambler

Revolution, glory, death, and love. What does this mean to
me by the side of this something in myself which is so
grave and so true?
“And that is?”
“This heavy swelling up of tears,” he said, “which is all
the taste I have of death.”

july

1937

The adventurer. Feels clearly that there is nothing further
worth doing in art. Nothing great or new is possible—in
Western culture, at any rate. Nothing left but action. But
anyone with greatness of soul will feel nothing but de¬
spair on entering upon this action.

JULY

When one is fasting, one can go without food for six
weeks

(water suffices). When one is obliged to fast

(famine), ten days at the most.
Reservoir of real energy.

Breathing habits of the Tibetan yogis. What we should
do is apply our methods of scientific study to experiences
of this scale. Have “revelations” in which we do not be¬
lieve. What 1 like to do: remain lucid in ecstasy.

43

NOTEBOOK I

Women in the street.8 The warm beast of desire that lies
curled up in our loins and stretches itself with a fierce
gentleness.

AUGUST

On the way to Paris: this fever beating in my temples.
The strange and sudden withdrawal from the world and
from men. The struggle with one’s body. Sitting in the
wind, emptied and hollowed out inside, I spent all my time
thinking of K. Mansfield, about that long, painful, and
tender story of a struggle against illness. What awaits
me in the Alps is, together with loneliness and the idea
that I shall be there to look after myself, the awareness of
my illness.

To keep going to the end means not only resisting but
also relaxing. I need to be aware of myself, in so far as
this is also an awareness of something that goes beyond
me as an individual. I sometimes need to write things
which I cannot completely control but which therefore
prove that what is in me is stronger than I am.

AUGUST

Tenderness and emotion of Paris. The cats, the children,
the free and easy attitude of the people. The gray
colors, the sky, a great show of stones and water.

8 The phrase recurs in La Mort Heureuse. A number of entries in the
cahiers tend to confirm the rumors that Camus led a rather vigorous
sexual life.
44

May 1935 — September 1937
AUGUST

1937 9

Every day he went off into the mountains and came
back speechless, his hair full of grass, and his body cov¬
ered with the scratches of a whole day’s rambling.
And each time it was the same conquest without seduc¬
tion. He was gradually wearing down the resistance of this
hostile country, managing to make himself like the round,
white clouds behind the solitary pine tree standing out on
the crest of a hill, like the fields of pinkish willow herb,
rowan trees, and bellflowers. He was becoming part of
this fragrant, rocky world. When he reached the distant
summit and saw the immense countryside stretching
out before him, he felt not the calm peace of love but a
kind of inner pact which he was signing with this alien
nature, a truce concluded between two hard and savage
faces, the intimacy of enemies rather than the ease of
friendship.

Gentleness of Savoy.

august

1937

A man who had sought life where most people find it (mar¬
riage, work, etc.) and who suddenly notices, while read¬
ing a fashion catalogue, how foreign he has been to his
own life (fife as it is seen in fashion catalogues).1
9 A passage written out in pencil.
1 Camus told Roger Quilliot that this entry reflected his first con¬
scious formulation of the theme of The Stranger. These two entries, the
second of which sketches out a possible theme for La Mort Heureuse,

45

NOTEBOOK I

Part

I—His life until then.

Part II—Life as a game.
Part III—The rejection of compromise and the discovery
of truth in nature.

august

1937

Last chapter? Paris-Marseilles. The descent toward the
Mediterranean.
And he went into the water, washing off the dark and
contorted images left there by the world. Suddenly, the
rhythm of his muscles brought back to life the smell of
his own skin. Perhaps never before had he been so aware
of the harmony between himself and the world, of the
rhythm linking his movements with the daily course of
the sun. Now, when the night was overflowing with stars,
his gestures stood out against the sky’s immense and
silent face. By moving his arm, he can sketch out the space
between this bright star and its flickering, intermittent
neighbor, carrying with him sheaves of stars and trails of
clouds. So that the waters of the sky foam with the move¬
ment of his arm, while the town lies around him like a
cloak of glittering shells.

Two characters. Suicide of one of them?
show how the books developed together in Camus’s mind. It also shows
that, in his first idea of the character at any rate, Camus intended
Meursault to be seen as a man who had gone through the experience of
the absurd before the story began. For further discussion of this point,
cf. my study Albert Camus, 1913-1960, pp. 37—8.

46

May 1935 - September 1937
AUGUST

I937

The gambler.
“It’s going to be difficult, very difficult. But that’s no rea¬
son for not trying.”
“Of course not,” said Catherine, raising her eyes to the
sun.

The gambler.
Mme X, otherwise a perfect old bag, was a very fine
musician.
For novel.
Part I: Traveling theater. Movie. Story of a great love
affair (College Sainte-Chantal).

august

1937

Projected plan. Combine life and gambling with fife.
Part I—Flight from oneself.
A. Flight from oneself.
B. M. and poverty. (All in the present tense.) Chapters
in series A describe the gambler. Those in series B, fife
until the mother’s death (death of Marguerite—different
jobs: selling on commission, motorcar spare parts, prefec¬
ture, etc.2).
Last chapter: Descent toward the sun and death (sui¬
cide—death from natural causes ).
Part II

2 The jobs listed here were held by Camus himself. The note “death
from natural causes” (la mort naturelle) reproduces the title of the
first part of La Mort Heureuse.
47

NOTEBOOK I

The other way around. A in the present: Rediscovery
of joy. House before the world. Liaison with Catherine.
B in the past. Caught up in it. Sexual jealousy. Flight.
PartHI
All in the present tense. Love and sun. “No,” says the
boy.3

august

1937

Every time I hear a political speech or I read those of our
leaders, I am horrified at having, for years, heard nothing
which sounded human. It is always the same words tell¬
ing the same lies. And the fact that men accept this,
that the people’s anger has not destroyed these hollow
clowns, strikes me as proof that men attribute no impor¬
tance to the way they are governed; that they gamble—
yes, gamble—with a whole part of their life and their socalled “vital interests.”

What really upsets me is the importance given to reac¬
tions of the soul. If you are melancholy, then life with an¬
other person becomes impossible. For if you have any
nobility of spirit you cannot bear the innumerable ques¬
tions asked of you. For such feelings can have about as
much importance as getting up an appetite or wanting
to. . . .
3 The cahier manuscript bears the additional remarks: “Woman who
commits suicide,” thus sketching out the ending of The Misunderstand¬
ing, which Camus wrote in 1942—1943.

48

May 1935
AUGUST

-

September 1937

I937

Plan. 3 parts.

PART I

A. In the present
B. In the past
Ch. Ai—M. Mersault’s day seen from the outside.
Ch. Bi—Poor district of Paris. Horsemeat shop. Patrice
and his family. The dumb man. The grand¬
mother.
Ch. A2—Conversation and paradoxes. Grenier. Motion
pictures.
Ch. B2—Patrice’s illness. The doctor. “This extreme
twinge of pain. . . .”
Ch. A3—A month on tour with the theater.
Ch. B3—Different jobs (selling on commission, motor¬
car spare parts, prefecture).
Ch. A4—Story of the great love affair: “You never felt
like that again?” “Yes, Madame, with you.”
Theme of the revolver.
Ch. B4—The mother’s death.
Ch. A5—Meeting with Raymonde.

Or alternatively:
I A—Sexual jealousy.
B—Poor district—the mother.
49

NOTEBOOK I

II A—House before the world—stars.
B—Overfullness of life.
Ill Flight—Catherine whom he does not love.

Reduce and condense. Story of sexual jealousy which
gives rise to a feeling of exile. Return to life.
“The lesson which he had gone to seek so far off had
kept all its value. But only by being brought back to the
sunlit country.”
Arrival in Prague—up to the moment of departure—
illness.
Explanation—Lucile—Flight.

AUGUST

Absence of Spanish philosophers.

Novel: 4 the man who realizes that one needs to be rich
in order to live, who devotes himself completely to the
acquisition of money, who

succeeds, lives

and

dies

happy.

SEPTEMBER

This August has been like a gulf—a deep breath before
the release of everything in a wild effort. Provence, and
something closing up within me. Provence like a woman
leaning on my shoulder.

4 This is partly the plot of La Mart Heureuse, where Mersault kills for
money and dies happy.
50

May 1935 — September 1937

Men must live and create. Live to the point of tears—
as when standing in front of this house with its round
tiles and blue shutters on a cypress-planted hill.

Montherlant: I am the man to whom something hap¬
pens.

At Marseilles,5 happiness and sadness—at the very
boundaries of myself. Living town that I love. But, at the
same time, this bitter taste of loneliness.

SEPTEMBER

8

Marseilles, hotel bedroom. Big yellow flowers on gray wall¬
paper. Geography of filth. Sticky, muddy corners behind
the enormous radiator.

Spring mattress, broken light

switch. . . . That kind of liberty which comes from
dubious and shady places.

M.

SEPTEMBER

8

The long road down glistening with sunlight. The dog
roses in Monaco and Genoa, cities full of flowers. Blue
evenings on the Ligurian coast. My tiredness and longing
for tears. This loneliness and thirst for love. Finally Pisa,
alive and austere, with its green and yellow palaces, its
domes, its elegance along the banks of the severe Arno.
All the nobility contained in this refusal to give itself
easily to the traveler. A sensitive and demure town. So
5 The description of Marseilles recurs in La Mort Heureuse.

51

NOTEBOOK I

close to me at night, in the empty streets, that as I
walk there alone my longing to weep at last finds release.
The wound that lay open within me begins to heal.

On the walls of Pisa: “Alberto fa l’amore con la mia
sorella.” 6

THURSDAY,

SEPTEMBER

9

Pisa and its men lying in front of the Duomo. The
Campo Santo, with its straight lines and cypress trees at
all four corners. One comes to understand the quarrels of
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries—here each town is
important, with its own features and profound truth.
There is no other life but that whose loneliness was
marked out by the rhythm of my feet along the Arno. No
other life but that which quickened my blood in the train
going down to Florence. These women’s faces, so serious
but

suddenly

dissolving in laughter.

One

especially,

with a long nose and proud mouth, who was laughing. At
Pisa, I spent over an hour lounging about on the grass of
the Piazza del Duomo. I drank from the fountains, where
the water was tepid but so fluid. Going down to Florence,
I spent a long time looking at faces, drinking in smiles.
Am I happy or unhappy? It’s not a very important ques¬
tion. I live with such frenzied intensity.
Things and people are waiting for me, and doubtless I
am waiting for them and desiring them with all my
6 Cf. Noces, p. 84. Most of these notes on Camus’s visit to Italy in
August-September 1937 were used in Noces, especially in the essay Le
Desert.

52

May 1935

—

September 1937

strength and sadness. But, here, I earn the right to be alive
by silence and by secrecy.
The miracle of not having to talk about oneself.

Gozzoli and the Old Testament (in costume).

The Giotto in the Santa Croce. The inner smile of Saint
Francis, lover of nature and of life. He justifies those who
have a taste for happiness. A soft and delicate light on
Florence. The rain is waiting and swelling up the sky.
Christ in the tomb by Giottino: Mary clenching her teeth
with grief.

Florence. At every church corner, displays of bright,
creamy flowers, sprinkled with water and naive.

Mostra Giottesca7
One needs a certain time to realize that the faces in the
Italian primitives are those one meets daily in the street.
This

is

because we

have lost

the

habit

of

seeing

what is really important in a face. We no longer look at our
contemporaries, and select only what is useful to our aims
(in every sense of the word). The Italian primitives do
not distort, they “bring to life.”
In the Cloister of the Dead, at the Santissima An7 The whole of this passage was incorporated in Noces, pp. 71-2, and
79-80. Some sentences were added, but few changes were made in the
original wording.

53

NOTEBOOK I

nunziata, the sky was gray and full of clouds, the architec¬
ture severe, but there is nothing that speaks of death.
There are ledger stones and ex-votos; one man was a lov¬
ing father and a tender husband, another the best of hus¬
bands and a skillful merchant; a young lady, model of
all virtues, spoke French and English “si come il nativo.”
(They all created duties for themselves, and today chil¬
dren play leapfrog on the tombs that seek to perpetuate
their virtue.) Here, a young girl was the hope of all her
family: “Ma la gioia e pellegrina sulla terra.” But none of
this convinces me. Almost all of them, according to the
inscriptions, had grown resigned, doubtless because they
accepted their other duties. I shall not grow resigned.
With all my silence, I shall protest to the very end. There
is no reason to say: “It had to be.” It is my revolt which is
right, and I must follow this joy which is like a pilgrim
on earth, follow it step by step.
The clouds thicken over the cloister and night gradually
darkens the ledger stones bearing the moral virtues at¬
tributed to the dead. If I had to write a book on morality,
it would have a hundred pages and ninety-nine would be
blank. On the last page I should write: “I recognize only
one duty, and that is to love.” And, as far as everything
else is concerned, I say no. I say no with all my strength.
The ledger stones tell me that this is useless, that life is
“col sol levante, col sol cadente.” But I cannot see what
my revolt loses by being useless, and I can feel what
it gains.
I thought about all this, sitting on the ground with my
back against a column, while the children laughed and
played. A priest smiled at me. Women looked at me with
54

May 193s

—

September 1937

curiosity. In the church, the organ was playing softly, and
the warm color of its harmonies could be heard from
time to time through the children’s shouts. Death! If
I carry on like this, I shall certainly end by dying happy.
I shall have eaten up all my hope.

SEPTEMBER

If you say: “I don’t understand Christianity, I want to live
without consolation,” then you are narrow-minded and
prejudiced. But if, living without consolation, you say: “I
understand and admire the Christian position,” you are a
shallow dilettante. I am beginning to grow out of being
concerned by what people think.

Cloister of San Marco. The sun among the flowers.

Siennese and Florentine primitives. Their insistence on
making monuments smaller than men is a result not of
an ignorance of the laws of perspective but of a per¬
sistence in giving importance to the men and saints
whom they depict. Use this in making theatrical decors.

Late roses in the cloister of Santa Maria Novella, and
the women on a Sunday morning in Florence. Their un¬
corseted breasts, their eyes and bps leave you with a
beating heart, a dry mouth, and glowing loins.8
8 The phrase about “glowing loins” (une chaleur aux reins) was re¬
moved before the sentence was incorporated into p. 81 of Noces. Cf. also
Noces, pp. 89-90.

55

NOTEBOOK

I

Fiesole
We lead a difficult life, not always managing to fit our ac¬
tions to the vision we have of the world. (And when I
think I have caught a glimpse of the color of my fate, it
flees from my gaze.) We struggle and suffer to re¬
conquer our solitude. But a day comes when the earth
has its simple and primitive smile. Then, it is as if the
struggles and life within us were rubbed out. Millions of
eyes have looked at this landscape, and for me it is like
the first smile of the world.9 It takes me out of myself, in
the deepest meaning of the expression. It assures me that
nothing matters except my love, and that even this love
has no value for me unless it remains innocent and free.
It denies me a personality, and deprives my suffering of
its echo. The world is beautiful, and this is everything.
The great truth which it patiently teaches me is that
neither the mind nor even the heart has any importance.
And that the stone warmed by the sun or the cypress
tree swelling against the empty sky set a boundary to the
only world in which “to be right” has any meaning: nature
without men. This world reduces me to nothing. It carries
me to the very end. Without anger, it denies that I exist.
And, agreeing to my defeat, I move toward a wisdom
where everything has been already conquered—except
that tears come into my eyes, and this great sob of poetry
which swells my heart makes me forget the truth of the
world.

SEPTEMBER

13

The scent of laurel which you meet at every street corner
in Fiesole.
9 Id., pp. 82-5.

56

May 1935

SEPTEMBER

—

September 1937

•

15

In the cloister of San Francesco in Fiesole there is a little
courtyard with an arcade along each side, full of red
flowers, sun, and yellow and black bees. In one corner,
there is a green water sprinkler, and everywhere the
humming of bees. A gentle steam seems to rise from the
garden as it bakes in the heat. Sitting on the ground, I
think about the Franciscans whose cells I have just visited
and whose sources of inspiration I can now see. I feel
clearly that if they are right then it is in the same way
that I am. I know that behind the wall on which I am lean¬
ing there is a hill sloping down toward the town, and the
offering of the whole of Florence with all its cypress
trees. But this splendor of the world seems to justify
these men. I put all my pride in a belief that it also justifies
me, and all the men of my race, who know that there is
an extreme point at which poverty always rejoins the
luxury and richness of the world. If they cast everything
off, it is for a greater and not for another life. This is the
only meaning which I can accept of a term like “stripping
oneself bare.” “Being naked” always has associations of
physical liberty, of harmony between the hand and the
flowers it touches, of a loving understanding between the
earth and men who have been freed from human things.
Ah, I should become a convert to this if it were not already
my religion.
Today, I feel free about the past and about what I have
lost. All I want is this compactness and enclosed space—
this lucid and patient fervor. And like the warm bread
that one kneads and presses I simply want to hold my
life between my hands, like the men who knew how to
57

NOTEBOOK I

enclose their life between these flowers and these columns.
The same is true of those long nights spent on trains,
where one can talk to oneself, prepare oneself for life, and
feel marvelously patient in taking up ideas again, stopping
them in their flight, and then once more moving forward.
To lick one’s life like a stick of barley sugar, to form,
sharpen, and finally fall in love with it, in the same way as
one searches for the word, the image, the definitive sen¬
tence, the word or image which marks a close or a conclu¬
sion, from which one can start out again and which will
color the way we see the world. I can easily stop now, and
finally reach the end of a year of unrestrained and over¬
strained life. My effort now is to carry this presence of
myself to myself through to the very end, to maintain it
whatever aspect my life takes on—even at the price of the
loneliness which I now know is so difficult to bear. Not
to give way—that is the whole secret. Not to surrender, not
to betray. All the violent part of my character helps me in
this, carrying me to the point where I am rejoined by my
love, and by the furious passion for life which gives mean¬
ing to my days.
Every time a man (myself) gives way to vanity, every
time he thinks and lives in order to show off, this is a
betrayal. Every time, it has always been the great mis¬
fortune of wanting to show off which has lessened me in
the presence of the truth. We do not need to reveal our¬
selves to others, but only to those we love. For then we are
no longer revealing ourselves in order to seem but in order
to give. There is much more strength in a man who
reveals himself only when it is necessary. I have suffered
58

May 1935

-

September 1937

from being alone, but because I have been able to keep my
secret I have overcome the suffering of loneliness. To go
right to the end implies knowing how to keep one’s secret.
And, today, there is no greater joy than to live alone and
unknown. My deepest joy is to write. To accept the world
and to accept pleasure—but only when I am stripped
bare of everything. I should not be worthy to love the bare
and empty beaches if I could not remain naked in the pres¬
ence of myself. For the first time I can understand the
meaning of the word happiness without any ambiguity. It
is a little different from what men normally mean when
they say: “I am happy.”
A certain persistence in despair finally gives birth to
joy. And the same men who, in San Francesco, live by the
side of these red flowers, keep in their cells a skull to nour¬
ish their meditations, seeing Florence from their win¬
dows and death on the table before them. And if I now
feel that I have come to a turning point in my life, this is
not because of what I have won but because of what I
have lost. Within me, I feel a deep and intense strength
that will enable me to live as I intend. If, today, I feel so
distant from everything, it is because I have strength
only to love and to admire. Life with its face of tears and
.sun, life in the salt sea and on warm stones, life as I love
and understand it—as I caress it I feel my love and de¬
spair gathering strength within me. Today is not like a
resting place between “yes” and “no.” It is both “yes” and
“no.” “No,” and rebellion against everything which is
not tears and sunlight. ‘Tes” to my life, whose future
promise I now feel within myself for the first time. A turbu59

NOTEBOOK I

lent, confused year which is coming to an end, and Italy.
I am uncertain of the future, but have achieved total
liberty toward my past and toward myself. Here lies my
poverty, and my sole wealth. It is as if I were beginning
the game all over again, neither happier nor unhappier
than before. But aware now of where my strength lies,
scornful of my own vanities, and filled with that lucid
fervor which impells me forward toward my fate.1
September 15,1937

1 This literally is the end of the first “Jupiter” cahier which Camus
filled. His handwriting is at first full and rounded, but gradually becomes
tighter and more compact. At the beginning, it varies a good deal from
one entry to the next. Toward the end of his life, his handwriting be¬
came very small, cramped, and rather difficult to read.

NOTEBOOK

II

September 1937 - April 19 39

SEPTEMBER

22

La Mort Heureuse

“You see, Claire, it’s rather difficult to explain. There’s only
one question: to know one’s own value. But to do this,
you have to leave Socrates on one side. To know yourself
you must act—and this does not mean that you can then
say who you are. The Cult of the Self’—don’t make me
laugh. Which self and which personality? When I look
at my life and at the secret color which it has, I feel as if
tears were trembling in my heart. I am just as much the
bps that I have kissed as the nights spent in the ‘House
before the World,’ just as much the child brought up in
poverty as this frenzied ambition and thirst for life which
sometimes carry me away. Many people who know me
63

NOTEBOOK II

sometimes don’t even recognize me. And everywhere I feel
like that inhuman image of the world which is my own
life.”
“Yes,” said Claire, “you’re playing it both ways.”
“Of course. But when I was twenty, I read hke every¬
body else that all the world’s a stage and so on. But that’s
not what I mean. A number of lives, a number of different
levels—of course. But when the actor is on stage, then
we accept the convention. No, Claire, we know quite
well that this is not play acting, there is something which
tells us so.”
“Why?”
“Because if the actor gave his performance without
knowing that he was in a play, then his tears would be real
tears and his life a real life. And whenever I think of this
pain and joy that rise up in me, I am carried away by the
knowledge that the game I am playing is the most serious
and exciting there is.
“And I want to be this perfect actor. I don’t care about
my personality and I’m not interested in cultivating it. I
don’t want to treat my life as an experiment, but to be
what my life makes me. It is I who am the experiment,
and it is life that forms and controls me. If I had enough
strength and patience, I know how completely impersonal
I would become, how far my strength would carry me on
the path to active nothingness. What has always held
me back is my personal vanity. Today, I can understand
that to love, act, and suffer is indeed to be alive but only
in so far as we become transparent and accept our fate
as a single reflection of a rainbow of different joys and
passions.
64

September 1937 - April 1939

'

‘The road, etc. . . .
“But for that you need time, and now I have time.”
Claire, who had said nothing for a long time, now looked
into Patrice’s eyes and said slowly:
“Much suffering lies in wait for those who love you.”
Patrice stood up, a desperate look on his face, and said
violently:
“Their loving me puts me under no obligation to them.”
“That’s true,” said Claire. “I was just stating a fact.
(One day, you will be left alone.)”

SEPTEMBER

23.

KIERKEGAARD

PHILOSOPHICAL

IN

FRAGMENTS1

“Language is right, in the word ‘passion,’ to insist on the
way the soul suffers. Whereas the way people actually
1 The Philosophical Fragments were translated by Knud Ferlov and
J. J. Gateau in 1937. and published by Gallimard under the title of Riens
Philosophiques. This passage occurs on p. 118. I have translated it di¬
rectly from Camus’s French. David S. Swenson translates thus (Ox¬
ford University Press, 1936, p. 39): “The Danish language correctly calls
emotion (Danish Affehten, cf. German Leidenschaft) Sindslidelse. When
we use the word Affekt, we are likely to think more immediately of the
convulsive daring which astounds us and makes us forget that it is a
form of passivity. So, for example, pride, defiance, etc.”
Camus seems to have been struck by the resemblance between this note
by Kierkegaard and the conversational passage which he himself had
written on the previous day. This also seems to be the point of the note
about the “perfect actor in life,” which is not a quotation from the Frag¬
ments.
The discussion of Kierkegaard in The Myth of Sisyphus deals with a
different aspect of this thought, the use of the absurd to justify the
leap into religious faith (pp. 36—41). For someone interested in seeing
how Camus built up the argument of The Myth of Sisyphus, the Note¬
books are disappointing. They contain, for example, no mention of Hus¬
serl, Jaspers, or, more surprisingly, Chestov, and it must be assumed that
Camus id make other notes which he destroyed or which have not been
made available. The later volumes are equally disappointing as far as
the elaboration of The Rebel is concerned.

65

NOTEBOOK II

use the word makes us think more of how we are over¬
whelmed by its uncontrollable impetuosity, and thereby
forget that it is a question of suffering (pride—a chal¬
lenge).”
Id. The perfect actor (in life) is the man who is “acted
upon”—and who knows it—passive passion.

“He woke up covered in sweat, his clothes all rumpled,
and wandered around the flat for a moment. Then he lit a
cigarette and sat down, his mind a blank, looking at the
creases in his crumpled trousers. His mouth was full of
the bitter taste of sleep and tobacco. Around him, his
soft and flabby day plashed like ooze.”

Rama Krishna on trade:
“The truly wise man is he who feels contempt for noth¬
ing.”
Do not confuse sanctity with idiocy.

SEPTEMBER

23

Solitude, a luxury of the rich.

SEPTEMBER

26

(1) Put fragments of a diary (ending) at the begin¬
ning of the novel.
(2) Remain lucid in ecstasy.
66

September 1937

-

April 1939

'

Concrete description: Disappearance of friends.
Streetcars (end of services?).
Ideas—leitmotif.
He sank from silence to silence, huddling down into
himself. . . . Until he reached the point where lucidity
can turn itself upside down. An immense effort: comes
back to the world—drops of sweat—thinks of a woman’s
open legs—Goes to the balcony and pours out the whole
of his being into the world of flesh and light. “It’s hygienic.”
Then takes a shower and does exercises with his chest
expander.

A theologico-political treatise.

In George Sorel. Dedicate to the “left-wing humanism”
which tries to make us see Helvetius, Diderot, and Holbach as the high-water mark of French literature.
The idea of progress which infects all working-class
movements is a bourgeois idea developed in the eighteenth
century. “Our whole effort must be to prevent bourgeois
ideas from poisoning the rising class: this is why we can
never do enough to break every link between the people
and eighteenth-century literature.” (Illusion du Progres,
pp. 285 and 286.)

SEPTEMBER

30

I always end up by seeing every aspect there is of a per¬
son. It’s a question of time. There always comes a moment
67

NOTEBOOK II

when I feel the break. What is interesting is that this al¬
ways happens when I feel this person lacking in curiosity
about something.

Dialogue.
“And what do you do in life?”
“I count.”
“What?”
“I count. I say: one, the sea; two, the sky (ah, how
beautiful it is); three, women; four, flowers (ah, how
happy I am).”
“You end up by being silly then.”
“Good Lord, you think like your morning paper does. I
think like the world does. You share the views of the
Echo de Paris, and I share those of the world. When it’s
bathed in sunlight, when the sun beats down, I want to
love and kiss, to flow into bodies as into patches of light,
to bathe myself in flesh and sunlight. When the world is
gray, I feel gloomy and full of tenderness. I feel more
moral, so able to love that I could even get married. In
either case, it doesn’t matter.”
After his departure:
(1) Afool
(2) Just showing off
(3) A cynic
“Not at all,” says the schoolmistress. “He’s a spoiled child,
you can see that. A rich man’s son, who doesn’t know what
life’s like.”
(Because it is increasingly agreed that if you find life
can be beautiful and simple you can’t know what it’s like.)
68

September 1937 — April 1939
SEPTEMBER

•

30

It is in order to shine sooner that authors refuse to re¬
write. Despicable. Begin again.

OCTOBER

2

“He strode without stopping through the muddy streets un¬
der a fine, light rain. He could see no farther than a few
steps in front of him. But he was walking quite alone in
this little town that was so far from everything, so far
away from everything and from himself. No, it couldn’t
happen again. To cry about a dog, and in front of
everyone. He wanted to be happy. He hadn’t deserved
that.”

OCTOBER

42

“I lived until the last few days with the idea that I had to
do something in life, and more exactly that, because I
was poor, I had to earn a living, get a job, settle down. I
must accept the fact that the roots of this idea, which I
still dare not call a prejudice, were very deep, since it
lived on in spite of all my irony and ‘last words on the
subject.’ And then, once appointed at Bel-Abbes, as I was
faced with all the permanence that being established
there implied, everything suddenly melted away. I re¬
jected it, doubtless because I saw security as unimportant
compared to my opportunities for real life. The dull,
stifling routine of such an existence made me draw back.
2 One of the rare openly autobiographical passages in the Notebooks.
Camus had been offered a teaching post at the college of Sidi-bel-Abbes.
This entry analyzes his reasons for turning it down.

69

NOTEBOOK II

If I had got through the first few days, I should certainly
have accepted. But that was the danger. I was afraid,
afraid of being lonely and of being permanently fixed. To¬
day, I don’t know whether it was strength or weakness to
have rejected this fife, to have shut the door of what peo¬
ple call ‘a future’ in my own face, and to remain instead
poor and insecure. But at least I know that if there is a
conflict, it is for something worth while. Unless, later
on. . . . No. What made me run away was doubtless the
fear not so much of settling down but of settling down per¬
manently in something ugly.
“Am I now capable of what other people call ‘a serious
attitude to fife’? Am I lazy? I don’t think so, and have
given myself proof to the contrary. But have we the right
to refuse difficulties under the pretext that we don’t like
them? I think that only people lacking in character go to
pieces through laziness. If I lacked physical vitality, there
would be only one solution left for me.”

OCTOBER

IO

To be worth something or nothing. To create or not to
create. In the first case everything is justified. Everything,
without exception. In the second case, everything is com¬
pletely absurd. The only choice then to be made is of the
most aesthetically satisfying form of suicide: marriage,
and a forty-hour week, or a revolver.

On the road to La Madeleine. Once again, in the presence
of such great natural beauty, the desire to be stripped
bare of everything.
70

September 1937
OCTOBER

-

April 1939

•

15

Giraudoux 3 (for once): “The innocence of a being lies
in its complete suitability to the world in which it lives.”
Ex.: the innocence of the wolf.
The innocent is the person who explains nothing.

October

17 4

In the paths above Blida, night is soft as milk, and gentle
with grace and meditation. In the mornings, on the
mountain with its short grass ruffled with meadow saffron,
its icy streams, the sun and shade, my body accepts and
then refuses. The concentrated effort of walking uphill,
the air burning my lungs like a red-hot iron or cutting into
them like a sharpened razor, the concentration of all my
energy in an effort to go beyond myself and conquer the
slope, is like a self-knowledge which one gains through
the body. The body, a true path to culture, teaches us
where our limits lie.

Villages grouped around natural sites, each living its
own life. Men dressed in long white garments, making
simple, precise gestures that stand out against the per¬
manently blue sky. Narrow paths bordered with Barbary
fig trees, olive, carob, and jujube trees. On these paths,
3 Camus did not like Giraudoux very much, and wrote of his work, in
La Lumiere, on May 10, 1940, that his art consisted solely of “replacing
the great themes of fatality by acrobatics performed by the intelligence.”
4 Another passage incorporated into La Mort Heureuse. So is the fol¬
lowing entry, October 18.

71

NOTEBOOK II

you meet men with brown faces and clear eyes, leading
donkeys laden with olives. And these men and trees, ges¬
tures and mountains, seen side by side, give birth to a
feeling of acceptance mingled with joy and sadness.
Greece? No, Kabylia. And it is as if suddenly, across the
centuries, the whole of Greece had suddenly been set
down between the sea and mountains, reborn in its an¬
cient splendor with its laziness and respect for Fate hardly
emphasized by the nearness of the East.

OCTOBER

18

In September, the carob trees breathe a scent of love over
all Algiers, and it is as if the whole earth were resting
after having given itself to the sun, its belly still moist with
almond-flavored seed.
On the road to Sidi-Brahim, after the rain, the scent of
love falls from the carob trees, heavy and oppressive,
weighed down with all its load of water. Then, as the sun
sucks up the water and the colors recover their bright¬
ness, the scent of love lessens and becomes hardly notice¬
able. And it is like a mistress who comes out with you into
the street after a whole stifling afternoon, and who, as
she leans her shoulder against yours, looks at you in the
midst of all the street lights and crowd.

Huxley: “After all, it is better to be a good bourgeois like
the others than a bad bohemian, a false aristocrat, or a
second-rate intellectual. . .
72

September 1937
OCTOBER

—

April 1939

*

20®

The demand for happiness and the patient quest for it. We
need not banish our melancholy, but we must destroy our
taste for difficult and fatal things. Be happy with our
friends, in harmony with the world, and earn our happi¬
ness by following a path which nevertheless leads to death.
“You will tremble before death.”
“Yes, but I shall leave nothing unfulfilled in my mission,
which is to live.” Don’t give way to conformity and to
office hours. Don’t give up. Never give up—always de¬
mand more. But stay lucid, even during office hours. As
soon as we are alone in its presence, strive after the
nakedness into which the world rejects us. But above all,
in order to be, never try to seem.

OCTOBER

21

One needs a good deal more energy to travel with very little
money than to play at “the hunted traveler.” 6 Traveling
steerage, arriving tired out and with a feeling of empti¬
ness, going long distances third class, often eating only
once a day, counting one’s money and being constantly
afraid of having an already very difficult journey inter¬
rupted by an unexpected accident—all this requires a
6 Monsieur Quilliot notes that this is a fragment for La Mort Heureuse.
I did not find it in the copy which I read, but there is a second typescript,
and no indication by Camus as to which is the final version, if one ever
existed.
Voyageur traque in French. A reference to Henry de Montherlant’s
two books, Aux Fontaines du Desir and La Petite Infante de Castille, to
which he gave the general title of Les Voyageurs Traques (1926).
Montherlant traveled very extensively from 1924 onward.

6

73

NOTEBOOK II

courage and will power that make it impossible to take
sermons about “the need to uproot oneself” very seriously.
It is neither amusing nor easy to travel. If you are young
and penniless, you need a liking for difficulties and a love
for the unknown if you are to transform your dreams of
travel into reality. But, after all, this does save you from
dilettantism—although I wouldn’t go as far as to say that
what is lacking in Gide and Montherlant is the fact that
they have never traveled on a cheap ticket which com¬
pelled them to spend six days in the same town. But I
am perfectly certain that, basically, I can never see things
as Gide or Montherlant do—because of the cheap tickets.

October

25

Gossip—unbearable and degrading.

NOVEMBER

5

Cemetery of El Kettar. An overcast sky and a heavy sea
facing hills covered with white tombstones. The trees and
earth damp from the rain. Pigeons among the white
ledger stones. One solitary geranium, its leaves both pink
and red, and a great silent feeling of loss and sadness that
teaches us to know the pure and beautiful face of death.

NOVEMBER

6

The path to La Madeleine. Trees, earth, and sky. How
great a distance and yet what secret understanding be¬
tween my gesture and the first star awaiting us on our
return.
74

September 1937 - April 1939
NOVEMBER

Character.

7 7

A.M.—an invalid—both legs

amputated—

paralyzed all down one side.
“They help me when I want to relieve myself. They wash
and wipe me. I’m practically deaf. But I would never do a
thing to cut short a life in which I believe so strongly. I
would accept even worse, blindness, deprivation of all my
senses, loss of the power of speech and of any contact
with the external world—as long as I could feel within
me this dark, burning flame which is me and me alive.
And I should still give thanks to life for having let me
continue to burn with its flame.”

NOVEMBER

88

In the local movie theater, you can buy mint-flavored
lozenges with the words: ‘‘Will you marry me one day?”
“Do you love me?” written on them, together with the re¬
plies: “This evening,” “A lot,” etc. You pass them to the
girl next to you, who replies in the same way. Lives become
linked together by an exchange of mint lozenges.

NOVEMBER

13

Cvilinsky: 9 “I’ve always acted out of spite. Now I get along
a lot better. Act so as to be happy? If I am to settle down,
7 The passage is actually spoken by Zagreus in La Mort Heureuse.
8 Incorporated into Summer in Algiers, p. 147 of The Myth of Sisyphus.
9 As Monsieur Quilliot points out in his notes to the French edition,
Cvilinsky was a doctor in Algiers, and a personal friend of Camus. The
passage is spoken by Bernard, the doctor, in La Mort Heureuse.

75

NOTEBOOK II

why not here, in a country that I like? But it’s always dis¬
appointing to look forward to things emotionally—always.
So we should live in the way we find easiest. Do nothing
that goes against the grain, even if we shock people. It’s a
bit cynical—but it’s always the way the most beautiful
girl in the world looks at things.”
Yes, but I’m not sure that it is always disappointing to
look forward to things emotionally. It’s just unreasonable.
In any case, the only experience I’m interested in hap¬
pens to be one where everything would be as we expected
it. Doing something in order to be happy, and succeed¬
ing. What attracts me is the link between the world and
myself, this double reflection that enables my heart to
intervene and control my happiness up to the exact
point where the world can either destroy it or bring it to
fruition.
Aedificabo et destruam, says Montherlant. I prefer to
say: Aedificabo et destruat. I don’t go from one side of
my nature to the other, but from the world to myself and
from myself back to the world. It’s a question of humility.

NOVEMBER

l6

He said: “We must have one love, one great love in our
life, since it gives us an alibi for all the moments when we
are filled with motiveless despair.”

NOVEMBER

17

“The Will to Happiness.”
Part III. The achievement of happiness.
76

September 1937

-

April iQ3g

*

Several years. Time flows as the seasons change, and
that is all.
Part I

(Ending). The invalid who tells Mersault:

“Money. It’s a kind of spiritual snobbery that makes peo¬
ple think they can be happy without money.”
Back home, M. looks at the events in his life in the light
of these facts. Reply: “Yes.”
For a man who is “nobly born,” happiness lies in taking
on the fate of everyman, not through a desire for renun¬
ciation but with a will to happiness. To be happy, you
need time. Lots of time. Happiness too is a long patience.
And it is the need for money that robs us of time. Time
can be bought. Everything can be bought. To be rich
means having time to be happy when you are worthy of
happiness.1

NOVEMBER

22

It is normal to give away a little of one’s life in order not
to lose it all. Six or eight hours a day so as not to die of
starvation. And then—there is profit in all things for
those who seek it.

DECEMBER2

The rain as thick as oil on the windows, the empty sound
of horses’ hooves, and the dull, persistent downpour all as¬
sumed bygone features whose heavy gloom soaked into
Mersault’s heart as the water soaked into his shoes and
1 Zagreus makes similar remarks about the importance of money in
La Mort Heureuse.
2 Another passage in La Mort Heureuse.

77

NOTEBOOK II

the cold through the thin material of his trousers into his
knees. The whole sky was covered with a mass of rolling
black clouds, following unceasingly one after the other.
The vaporized water that drifted down, neither mist nor
rain, was washing Mersault’s face with a gentle hand, lay¬
ing bare the deep rings under his eyes. The crease had
gone from his trousers, and with it that warmth and confi¬
dence that a normal man carries around in a world which
is made for him.
(At Salzburg.3)

Irony with Marthe—leaves her.

The man who showed all kinds of promise and who is
now working in an office. He does nothing apart from this,
simply going back home, lying down and smoking until
dinner time, going back to bed again and sleeping until
the next morning. On Sundays, he gets up very late and
stands at the window, watching the sun or the rain, the
passers-by or the silent street. The whole year through. He
is waiting. He is waiting for death. What good are
promises anyway, since in any case. . . ,4

Politics, and the fate of mankind, are shaped by men
without ideals and without greatness. Men who have great-

3
4

Presumably Camus either wrote this passage in Salzburg or is de¬
scribing something that happened to him there.
Applies both to Mersault and to Meursault. The idea that the inevita¬
bility of death destroys all values is fundamental to The Stranger. Cf.
Meursault’s closing speech.

78

September 1937 - April 1939

•

ness within them don’t go in for politics. The same is true
of everything. But our task now is to create a new man
within ourselves. We must make our men of action into
men of ideals, and our poets into captains of industry. We
must learn to live out our dreams—and to transform them
into action. Previously, men gave up or lost their way.
We must neither lose our way nor give up.

We haven’t the time to be ourselves. All we have time
for is happiness.

Oswald Spengler: The Decline of the West.5
(1) Form and reality:
“I call understanding the world being at its level.”
“The man who gives definitions 6 has no knowledge of
destiny.”
“There also exists in life, apart from causal necessity 7—
which I shall call the logic of space—the organic necessity
of destiny—the logic of time. . . .”
The Greeks’ lack of any sense of history.
“History, from the earliest times up to the Medic Wars,
is the product of an essentially mythical mode of thought.” 8
Originally, the Egyptian column was made of stone and
5 Cf. footnote 5, p. 35, on Spengler.
6 Understanding the world—gives definitions. Cf. Preface, p. xiv.
7 Cf. Introduction, p. 7, logic of space, logic of time.
8 Introduction, p. 10. The idea occurs again in The Rebel, 1951, where
Camus writes (p. 161): “Aristotle, to give a definite example, did not be¬
lieve that he was living after the Trojan war.”
On the West’s Vita Nuova, cf. Spengler, p. 14. All these other remarks
are taken from the Introduction to The Decline of the West.

79

NOTEBOOK II

the Doric column of wood. This was how the Attic soul
expressed the deep hostility which it felt toward any idea
of permanence. “Egyptian culture, the incarnation of the
idea of care.” The Greeks, a happy people, have no history.
The myth, and its anti-psychological meaning. In con¬
trast, what we find at the beginning of the spiritual his¬
tory of the West is a fragment of self-analysis, and that is
the West’s Vita Nuova. (Cf. in contrast: the mythical
fragments about Heracles, which remain the same from
Homer to the tragedies of Seneca. A thousand years. That
is to say: Antiquity = the present.)
Ex.: “It was the Germans who invented mechanical
clocks, these terrifying symbols of the flow of time,
whose sonorous chimes ring out by day and night from
innumerable towns in Western Europe, and which are per¬
haps the most gigantic expression that a historical attitude
toward the world is capable of producing.”
“As men of Western European culture, endowed with a
sense of history, we are the exception and not the rule.”
Stupidity of the pattern: Classical times—Middle Ages
—Modern Times.
“What meaning can the person of the superman have
for the world of Islam?”
“The destiny of a culture is to produce a civilization.
Thus Rome follows Athens. The Greek soul and Roman
intelligence. In the classical world, culture becomes civili¬
zation in the fourth century, in the West in the nine¬
teenth.”
Our literature and music are made for city dwellers.
Thus we make the History of Philosophy the only serious
theme of every philosophy.
So

September 1937 - April 1939

•

The whole question:
the antithesis between history and nature
Mathematics

History

and paintings (revise).

DECEMBER9

What he found moving was her way of hanging on to
his clothes, of squeezing his arm when walking along
with him, the complete trust with which she gave herself
and which appealed to the man in him. There was also her
silence, which made her coincide exactly with what she
happened to be doing, and completed her resemblance to a
cat, which was linked with the gravity she put into her
kisses. . . .
At night, he ran his fingers over her high and ice-cold
cheekbones, and felt them sink into the soft warmth of
her lips. Then he felt as if, somewhere within himself,
a great, impersonal, and burning cry had been uttered.
And as he stood watching both the night, laden to a burst¬
ing point with stars, and the town, like an upturned sky,
swollen with human lights, the deep warm breath that
rose from the port brought him a thirst for that lukewarm
stream, a limitless desire to carry off from those living
lips the whole meaning of the inhuman and sleeping
world, as if it were a silence locked away within her mouth.
He bent down, and it was as if he had placed his lips upon
a bird. Marthe groaned. He bit into her lips, and, as their
mouths clung together for minutes on end, breathed in
that gentle warmth which carried him into ecstasy as if he
9 Another fragment for La Mort Heureuse.

8l

NOTEBOOK II

were clasping the whole world in his arms. She, in the
meantime, clinging to him like a drowning woman, flashed
out from time to time from the great depths into which
she had been thrown, thrust his lips away and then drew
them to her again, falling back into the black and icy
waters which burned her like a people of gods.

DECEMBER

A man who is something of an actor is always happy in
the company of women. Women are an appreciative audi¬
ence.

It is always at the beginning that wearisome things
weary us. Later on, death. “I shall never be able to live
like that.” But it is the fact that you do live like that
which enables you to accept it.

Novel. Parti. Game of cards (brisque).
The conversations.
“When we were in the Zouaves. . . .”
“With my husband. . . .”
A man who’s had a drop too much: “You’re disgusting.
Disgusting. And I’ll tell you why. Because you’re a narrow¬
minded little bastard. And I don’t like narrow-minded
bastards. You’ve no idea of how to live.”
(Parc Saint-Raphael.)
Novel. Titles: A pure heart.
The happy on earth.
The golden beam.
82

September 1937 - April 1939

•

“Do you know many men ‘in love’ who would refuse an
attractive woman if she offered herself to them? And if
there are any, it’s because they are not highly sexed.”
“You call ‘being highly sexed’ being devoid of any seri¬
ous emotions?”
“Quite. ( At least in the way you mean serious.)”

Novel. Part I.
Zagreus’s house in the country, just outside the town.
Murder. The room is too warm. Mersault, feeling his ears
growing redder and redder, can’t breathe. He catches
cold on going out into the air (origin of the illness which
will kill him ).
Ch. IV. Conversation with Z., begun on the subject of
“impersonality.”
“Yes,” says Z., “but you can’t do that while you’re
working.”
“No, because I’m in a state of rebellion, and that’s bad.”
. . Basically,” says M., “I’m a dangerous fanatic.”

Novel. Part IV. A passive woman.
‘The mistake,” said M., “lies in thinking that you must
choose, that you must do what you want and that there
are conditions for happiness. Happiness either is or it
isn’t. It’s the will to happiness which matters, a kind of
vast, ever present awareness. Everything else—women,
art, worldly triumphs—are just so many pretexts. An
empty canvas for us to decorate.”
83

NOTEBOOK II

Novel. Part III.
Some time later, Mersault said he was leaving. Pie
was going to travel, and then settle in the outskirts of
Algiers. A month later he was back, now certain that
travel had nothing to offer him. He saw it as it really is, a
happiness for the restless. This was not what Mersault
was looking for in his quest for conscious happiness. Be¬
sides, he felt ill and knew what he wanted. For the second
time, he made ready to leave the House before the sea.

FEBRUARY

1938

Here, men are sensitive to destiny. It is what sets them
apart.

The pain of not having everything in common and the
misfortune of having everything in common.

FEBRUARY

1938 1

The spirit of revolution lies wholly in man’s protest against
the human condition. Under the different forms which it
assumes, it is, in this respect, the only eternal theme of
art and religion. A revolution is always carried out against
the Gods—from that of Prometheus onwards. It is a pro¬
test which man makes against his destiny, and both
tyrants and bourgeois puppets are nothing but pretexts.
This spirit can certainly be grasped in its historical
manifestations, but one needs all the emotion of a Mal1 As Monsieur Quilliot points out in his notes to the French edition of
the Notebooks, these ideas already foreshadow the themes of The Rebel.
84

September 1937 - April 1939
raux not to give way to the desire to prove. It is simpler to
discover it in its essence and destiny. From this point of
view, a work of art that retraced the conquest of happi¬
ness would be a revolutionary one.

Find excess within moderation.

April

1938

What sordid misery there is in the condition of a man who
works and in a civilization based on men who work.
But we must hang on and not let go. The natural reac¬
tion is always to scatter your talents outside work, to make
people admire you the easy way, to create an audience and
an excuse for cowardice and play acting (most marriages
are organized on this basis ). Another inevitable reaction is
to try to be clever about it. Besides, the two things fit in
very well together, if you let yourself go physically, neg¬
lect your body, and let your will power slacken.
The first thing to do is to keep silent—to abolish audi¬
ences and learn to be your own judge. To keep a balance
between an active concern for the body and an attentive
awareness of being alive. To abandon all claims and de¬
vote yourself to achieving two kinds of freedom: freedom
from money, and freedom from your own vanity and
cowardice. To have rules and stick to them. Two years is
not too long a time to spend thinking about one single
point. You must wipe out all earlier stages, and con¬
centrate all your strength on forgetting nothing and then
on learning patiently.
85

NOTEBOOK II

If this price is paid, then there is one chance in ten of
escaping from the most sordid and miserable of condi¬
tions : that of the man who works.

APRIL

Send off two essays. Caligula. No importance. Not mature
enough. Publish in Algiers.
Go back to Philosophy and Culture. Leave everything
else: Thesis.
Either Biology + agregation
or Indo-China.
Every day, write something in this notebook. In two
years’ time, write a work.

april

1938

Melville runs after adventure and ends up in an office.
He dies poor and unknown. Loneliness and isolation (the
two things are not the same) will finally enable you to
exhaust even viciousness and slander. But we must al¬
ways be ready to forestall viciousness and slander in our¬
selves.

MAY

Nietzsche.2 Condemns the Reformation which saves Chris¬
tianity from the principles of life and love that Cesare
2 The reference here seems to he to section 61 of The Antichrist, A
Criticism of Christianity (translation by Anthony M. Ludovici; The Mac¬
millan Co., 1915, pp. 228-9), which reads as follows: “I see a spectacle
so rich in meaning and so wonderfully paradoxical to boot, that it would
be enough to make all the gods of Olympus rock with immortal laughter.

86

September 1937 - April 1939

‘

Borgia was infusing into it. The Borgia Pope was finally
justifying Christianity.

What attracts me in an idea is always its piquant and
original quality—what is new and superficial in it. I
might as well admit it.

C., who plays at seducing people, who gives too much to
everybody, but whose feelings never last. Who needs to
seduce, to win love and friendship, and who is incapable
of both. A fine character to have in a novel, but lamentable
as a friend.

Scene: husband, wife, and the gallery.
The husband has some qualities and likes to show off.
His wife is very quiet, but ruins all her husband’s effects
by short, crisp sentences. Thus establishes her own su¬
periority. Her husband controls himself, but the humilia¬
tion makes him suffer. This is how hatred is born.
Ex.: With a smile: “Don’t try to be more foolish than
you are, my dear.”
The spectators in the gallery wriggle and smile un—Cesar Borgia as Pope . . . Do you understand me? . . . Very well
then, this would have been the triumph which I alone am longing for
today:—this would have swept Christianity away. . . . But . . . Luther
saw the corruption of the Papacy when the very reverse stared him in the
face: the old corruption, peccatum originate, Christianity no longer sat
upon the Papal chair! But Life! The triumph of Life! The great yea to all
lofty, beautiful and daring things . . .” As footnote 8, pp. 96—7, points
out, there are many parallels between Camus’s early ideas and those of
Nietzsche, and the interest which Camus shows in other figures of the
Italian Renaissance underlines his similarity to Nietzsche.

87

NOTEBOOK II

comfortably. He blushes, goes toward her, and smiles as
he kisses her hand: “You’re quite right, my dear.”
Face is saved and hatred grows fatter.

I can still remember the despair that overwhelmed me
when my mother told me that “now I was old enough, and
would get useful presents at New Year’s.” Even today, I
can’t stop myself from wincing secretly whenever I re¬
ceive this type of present. And, certainly, I knew that it
was the voice of love—but why must love sometimes take
on such ridiculous tones?

One thinks differently about the same thing in the morn¬
ing and in the evening. But where is truth, in the night
thought or in the spirit of midday? Two replies, two races
of men.

MAY3

The old woman who dies in the old people’s home. Her
friend, the friend she has made over a period of three
years, weeps “because she has nothing left.” The caretaker
of the little mortuary, who is a Parisian and lives at the
mortuary with his wife. “Who could have told them that at
seventy-four he would end up at an old people’s home
at Marengo?” His son has a job. They left Paris. The
daughter-in-law didn’t want them. Scenes. The old man
3 One of the first fragments for The Stranger to have a different atmos¬
phere from the passages for La Mort Heureuse. The “little old man” be¬
comes Perez in the final version, where many other details noted down
here are also retained.
88

September 1937 — April 1939

•

finally “raised his hand to him.” His son put them in an
old people’s home. The gravedigger who was one of the
dead woman’s friends. They often went to the village to¬
gether in the evening. The little old man who insisted on
following the procession to the church and then to the
cemetery (two kilometers). Since he is lame, he can¬
not keep up and walks twenty yards behind. But he
knows the country and takes short cuts that enable him
to catch up with the procession several times until he falls
behind again.
The Arab nurse who nails down the coffin has a cyst on
her nose and wears a permanent bandage.
The dead woman’s friends: little old people ridden with
fancies. Everything was wonderful in the past. One of
them to a neighbor: “Hasn’t your daughter written to
you?” “No.” “She might remember that she does have a
mother.”
The other has died—as a sign and a warning to them all.

JUNE

For Mort Heureuse: A series of letters breaking off an
affair. A familiar theme: it’s because I love you too much.
And the last letter: a masterpiece of lucidity. But here
again, the amount of play acting is immense.

End. Mersault drinks.
“Oh,” said Celeste,4 wiping the counter. “You’re getting
old, Mersault.”
4 Celeste, one of Camus’s own three favorite characters (cf. Brisville,
op. cit., p. 258), appears both in La Mort Heureuse and The Stranger as
the owner of the restaurant where Mersault and Meursault eat.

89

NOTEBOOK II

Mersault stopped short and put down his drink. He
looked at himself in the glass above the bar. It was true.

Summer in Algiers.
For whom does this sheaf of black birds fly across the
green sky? The blind and deaf summer which filters
through and gives a purer meaning to the cries of the
swifts and the newsboys’ shouts.

June. For the summer:
(1) Finish Florence and Algiers.
(2) Caligula.
( 3 ) The summer impromptu.5
(4) Essay on the theater.
( 5 ) Essay on the forty-hour week.
(6) Rewrite novel.
(7) The absurd.

For The Summer Impromptu.
“You there in the audience.”
“What?”
“Yes, you.”
“What?”
“Not many of you, are there?”
“What do you mean, not many?” (He looks around.)
“Not many, I mean. There aren’t many of you. Just a
few.”
5 The summer impromptu was written for the Theatre de l’Equipe,
which often performed to very small audiences.
90

September 1937

-

April 1939

‘

“We do what we can.”
“Of course. And we like you like that.”

Novel.
“I must admit that I have serious faults,” said Bernard.
“For example, I’m a liar.”
“Oh, I know. There are some faults that people never
confess. And others that it costs nothing to acknowledge.
With a tone of false humility, of course: ‘It’s true, I’m
quick-tempered, gluttonous.’ In a way, they find it flatter¬
ing. But being deceitful, vain, or envious are things that
people don’t admit. It’s always the others who are like that.
And besides that, by admitting that you are hasty-tempered,
you avoid talking about the rest. You’re not going to look
for extra defects in a man who has just accused himself
spontaneously, are you?
“I have no merit. I have accepted myself. It is this which
makes everything so simple.”

Caligula: “What you will never understand is that I am
a simple man.”

An essay on the forty-hour week.
In my family: ten hours’ work, followed by sleep. From
Sunday to Monday—unemployment: the man weeps. His
greatest misery is that he should both weep and wish for
what humiliates him (competition).
91

NOTEBOOK II

People talk a lot nowadays about the dignity of work,
and about the need for it. Monsieur Gignoux,0 in particu¬
lar, has very definite ideas on the subject.
But it’s a fraud. There is dignity in work only when
it is work freely accepted. Only idleness has a moral value
because it can serve as a criterion by which to judge men.
It is fatal only to the second rate. That is its lesson and
its greatness. Work, on the other hand, crushes everyone
down to the same level. It provides no basis for judging
men. It brings into action a metaphysic of humiliation.
Under the form of slavery which the society of rightthinking people now give it, the best men cannot survive
its effects. . . .
I suggest that we stand the usual expression on its head
and make work a fruit of laziness. There is a “dignity of
labor” in the little barrels which men make for themselves
on Sundays. Here, work and play come together again, and
play finked with technique attains the dignity of a work of
art and of the whole creation.
Then there are some people who are indignant or go
off into raptures. “What, I tell you, some of my workmen
earn 40 francs a day.”
End of the month, when the mother says with an en¬
couraging smile: “This evening, we’ll have cafe au lait.
It’s a change from time to time.” But at least they might
make love. . . .
6 Monsieur Quilliot notes that this is probably the well-known con¬
temporary economist. There is a C. J. Gignoux who is at present editor of
the conservative Revue des Deux Mondes.

92

September 1937 - April 1939
The only fraternity which is now possible, which is
offered or allowed to us, is the sordid and sticky fra¬
ternity in the face of death in battle.

JUNE

In the movies, the little woman from Oran sitting next to
her husband, the tears streaming down her face at the
misfortune of the hero. Her husband begs her to stop. In
the middle of her tears she says: “But let me make the
most of it.”

La Mort Heureuse:
In the train, Zagreus is sitting in front of him. How¬
ever, instead of the black scarf he usually wore, he put on
a very light colored summer tie. (After the murder, he
goes back to living in his flat. Changes nothing in it.
Simply puts in a new mirror.)

The temptation shared by all forms of intelligence:
cynicism.

The misery and greatness of this world: it offers no
truths, but only objects for love.
Absurdity is king, but love saves us from it.

There is sound psychology in serial stories. But it is a
generous psychology, which pays no attention to details. It
trusts people, and it is there that its falseness lies.
93

NOTEBOOK II

The old woman and her New Year wishes: We don’t
ask for very much. Work and good health.

The peculiar vanity of man, who wants to believe and
who wants other people to believe that he is seeking after
truth, when in fact it is love that he is asking this world
to give him.

It is difficult to realize that one can be superior to a
large number of people without thereby becoming some¬
one superior. And that genuine superiority.

AUGUST

One room opens out onto the courtyard, its other door
leading into a second room whose only light comes from
the first, and which then leads to a third, windowless
room. Three mattresses in this third room. Three people
sleep there. But since, at its widest point, it is narrower
than the length of a mattress, the end of each mattress
has been bent up against a wall, and the men sleep in an
arc.

The blind man who goes out at night between one o’clock
and four with another blind friend. Because like that
they are sure of not meeting anyone in the street. If they
bump into a lamppost, they can laugh in comfort. They do.
Whereas by day, other people’s pity prevents them from
laughing.
94

September 1937 - April 1939
“I ought to write,” says the blind man. “But no one’s
interested. What interests people in a book are the signs of
a sorrowful existence. And our lives are never like that.”

To write, one must always remain just this side of the
words (rather than go beyond them). In any case, no
gossip.
The “real” experience of loneliness is one of the least
literary there is—a thousand miles away from the idea of
loneliness that you get from books.
Cf. the degradation involved in all forms of suffering.
One must not give in to emptiness. Try to conquer and
“fulfill.” Time—don’t waste it.

The only liberty possible is a liberty as regards death.
The really free man is the one who, accepting death as it is,
at the same time accepts its consequences—that is to say,
the abolition of all life’s traditional values. Ivan Kara¬
mazov’s “Everything is permitted” is the only expression
there is of a coherent liberty. And we must follow out all
the consequences of his remark.

august

21,

1938

“Only he who has known ‘the present’ really knows what
hell is like.” (Jacob Wassermann.7)
Lois de Manou:
7 Probably the German novelist (1837-1934). I have not been able to
trace either the exact source of this quotation or the reference to Lois de
Manou.

95

NOTEBOOK II

“A woman’s mouth, a young girl’s breast, a child’s prayer,
and the smoke rising from a sacrifice are always pure.”

On conscious death, cf. Nietzsche: Twilight of the Idols,
p. 203.8
Nietzsche: “It is to the most spiritual souls, assuming
them to be the most courageous, that it is given to live
out the most painful tragedies. But it is for this reason
8 The reference here is to the standard Mercure de France edition of
Henri Albert’s translation of The Twilight of the Idols (14th edition,
1920; in the 1952 edition the passage is on page 163). Ludovici translates
as follows: “One should die proudly when it is no longer possible to live
proudly. Death should be chosen freely—death at the right time, faced
clearly and joyfully and embraced while one is surrounded by one’s chil¬
dren or other witnesses. ... In spite of all cowardly prejudices, it is
our duty, in this respect above all to reinstate the proper, that is to say the
physiological, aspect of so-called natural death, which after all is per¬
fectly ‘unnatural’ and nothing else than suicide. One never perishes
through anybody’s fault but one’s own. The only thing is that the death
which takes place in the most contemptible circumstances, the death that
is not free, the death that occurs at the wrong time, is the death of a
coward. Out of the very love one hears to life, one should wish death to
be different from this—that is to say, free, deliberate, and neither a mat¬
ter of chance nor of surprise.” The direct translation of the French text
referred to by Camus runs: “. . . . a wholly different death, a free and
conscious one in which there is no surprise.” Cf. The Twilight of the
Idols (The Macmillan Co., 1915, page 89). The section is number 36 in
Skirmishes in a War with the Age and is entitled A Moral for Doctors.
Ludovici translates the next quotation, section 17 of the same chapter,
as: “The most intellectual men, provided they are also the most coura¬
geous, experience the most excruciating tragedies; but on that very ac¬
count they honour life, because it confronts them with its most formi¬
dable antagonism.”
The passage on conscious death seems to have inspired the first part of
La Mort Heureuse, which is entitled Mort Naturelle and tells how Mersault killed Zagreus when the latter was fully prepared for it. There are a
number of close parallels between some of Camus’s early ideas and the
later philosophy of Nietzsche, and Camus continued to quote his apho¬
risms in essays and interviews in later life. (Cf. L’Ete, p. 74; The Myth of
Sisyphus, pp. 95—6: “Art and nothing but art; we have art in order not to
die of life”; Nobel Prize Speech; Brisville, op. cit., p. 261, and many other
occasions.) In the period covered by the Notebooks, the four qualities

96

September 1937

-

April 1939

'

that they honor life, because it is to them that it shows
its greatest hostility.”

Nietzsche:

“What do we desire when we look at

beauty? To be beautiful ourselves. We imagine that beauty
carries with it great happiness, but this is a mistake.”
(Human, too human.9)

The air is peopled with cruel and fearsome birds.

To increase the happiness of a man’s life is to extend
the tragic 1 nature of the witness that he bears. A truly
which the two thinkers have in common are an admiration for “heroic”
periods like the Italian Renaissance; a hostility to the “life-denying”
aspect of Christianity; a determination to face up to the tragic nature of
existence and see in this awareness the source of man’s greatness; and,
finally, an ambition to combine an attentive concern for the body with in¬
tellectual lucidity. It may also be that the frequent mention of the idea of
scorn and contempt in 1939—1940 also owes something to Nietzsche; it
may equally well have been a purely spontaneous reaction on Camus’s
part, or a reflection of his admiration for Montherlant.
There is a long discussion of Nietzsche in The Rebel, pp. 57—71, where
at the same time that Camus recognizes Nietzsche’s partial responsibility
for the rise of national socialism, he also argues that we must not confuse
him with Rosenberg, and that we must “be his advocates.” “In the whole
history of human intelligence,” he continues, “with the single exception
of Marx, there is no equivalent for the adventure of Nietzsche. We shall
never finish repaying the injustice done to him.” In so far as one looks
upon The Rebel as a personal confession, it is the passage on Nietzsche
which strikes the most strongly autobiographical note, for many of
Camus’s criticisms of Nietzsche’s nihilism seem equally applicable to
his own earlier attitudes.
9 Aphorism no. 149: “The slow arrow of beauty.”
1 An idea repeated in Noces, p. 152: “In this Algerian summer I learn
that one thing only is more tragic than suffering, and that is the life of a
happy man. But it may be also the way to a greater life because it leads
to not cheating.”

97

NOTEBOOK II

tragic work of art (if it does bear witness) will be that
of a happy man. Because this work of art will be entirely
wiped out by death.

Method used in meteorology. The temperature varies
from one moment to the next. It is something too fleeting
to be stabilized in mathematical concepts. Here, obser¬
vations are arbitrary slices of reality. And only the idea of
an average enables us to offer an image of this reality.

Etruscan bibliography:
A. Grenier: “Recherches Etrusques” in la Revue des
Etudes Anciennes, IX (1935)—pp. 219 ff.
B. Nogara: Les Etrusques et Leur Civilisation—Paris,
1936.

Fr. de Ruyt: Charon, Demon Etrusque de la Mort.
(Reference? )

Belcourt
The young woman whose husband takes a siesta and
must not be disturbed by the children. Two rooms. She
puts a blanket on the floor in the dining room and plays
silently with the children so that he can sleep. Because of
the heat, she keeps the landing door open. Sometimes,
she drops off to sleep herself, and as you go by you can see
her lying back, her silent children around her watching
the slight movements of her body.
98

September 1937

-

April 1939

•

Belcourt
Been fired. Don’t dare tell her. Talks.
“Well, well have coffee tonight. It makes a change
from time to time.”
He looks at her. He has often read stories about poverty
in which the woman is “brave.” She hasn’t smiled. She
has gone back to the kitchen. Brave? No, resigned.

The former boxer who has lost his son. “What do we do
on earth? We move around, and move around.”

Belcourt2
Story of R. “I knew a woman . . . you might say she
was my mistress. ... I realized there was something
funny going on.” Story of the lottery tickets (“Did you buy
one for me?”). Story of the two-piece dress and her
sister. Story of the bracelets and the pawn ticket.
Worked out on the basis of 1300 francs. That doesn’t
give her enough: “Why don’t you work half-days? You’d
help me a lot for all these little things. I bought you the
suit, I give you 20 francs a day, I pay the rent, and you
spend the afternoon drinking coffee with your friends.
You give them the coffee and sugar. I give you the money.
I’ve been good to you, and you’re doing me wrong.”
He wants some advice. He still ‘likes to have it now and
2 This is a sketch for the first part of The Stranger, where Meursault be¬
comes involved with his rather dubious neighbor Raymond Sintes. The
Stranger, pp. 30-42.

99

NOTEBOOK II

then.” He wants a letter with “nasty things in it” and
“things to make her feel sorry.”
Ex.: “You just want to have a good time with it, that’s
all.” And then: “I’d thought that . . .” etc.
“You don’t see that the world’s jealous of all the happi¬
ness I’m giving you.”
“I knocked her around, but nicely, as you might say. She
yelled, I closed the shutters.”
The same thing with her friend.
He wants it to be she who comes back. There is some¬
thing tragic about him in this liking to humiliate her.
He is going to take her into a hotel and call the vice squad.
Story of his friends and of the beer. “You lot, you say
you’re in the underworld.” “They told me that if I wanted
they would carve her up.”
Story of the overcoat. Story of the matches.
“One day, you’ll realize how happy I made you.”
She is an Arab.

Theme: the world of death. A tragic work: a happy
work.
“But, Mersault, it doesn’t seem as if this world satisfies
you, from the way you talk about it.”
“It doesn’t satisfy me because it’s going to be taken from
me—or, rather, it’s because it satisfies me too much that I
can feel all the horror of losing it.”
“I don’t understand.”
“You don’t want to.”
“Perhaps.”
After a while, Patrice goes away.
IOO

September 1937 - April 1939
“But, Patrice, there is love.”
He turned back, his face distorted with despair.
“Yes,” said Patrice, “but love is of this world.”3

Old people’s home (the old man cutting across the
fields). Burial. The sun melts the tar of the roads—
people’s feet sink down into it and leave the black flesh
gaping open. There is something similar between this
black mud and the driver’s boiled leather hat. And all these
shades of black, the sticky black of the open tar, the dull
black of the clothes, the shiny black of the hearse—the
sun, the smell of leather and horse dirt, of varnish and
incense. Tiredness. And the other man, cutting across the
fields.4
He is going to the burial because she is his only friend.
At the home, they used to say: “She’s your fiancee,” as
if he were a child. And he used to laugh. And he was
happy.

Characters.
(A) Etienne, “physical” character; the attention he
gives to his body:
i° Watermelon.
20 Illness (twinges of pain).
30 Bodily needs—Good—Warm, etc.
3 The juxtaposition of the passages from The Stranger with what is
obviously a conversation intended to figure in La Mort Heureuse em¬
phasizes the difference in style and atmosphere between the two
novels, which were developing together in Camus’s mind at that time.
4 The description of the heat at the funeral is taken up again in The
Stranger.
IOI

NOTEBOOK II

4° He laughs with pleasure when he eats something
he likes.
(B) Marie C. Her brother-in-law, and their life together,
“he pays the rent.”
(C) Marie Es. Childhood. Her place in the family. Her
virginity, discussed by everyone. Saint Francis of
Assisi. Suffering and humiliation.
(D) Mme Leca. Cf. above.
(E) Marcel, the chauffeur—and the old woman in the
cafe.

We do not have feelings which change us, but feelings
that suggest to us the idea of change. Thus love does not
purge us of selfishness, but makes us aware of it and gives
us the idea of a distant country where this selfishness
will disappear.

Resume work on Plotinus.8
Theme: Plotinianreason.
(i) Reason—not an unambiguous concept. Interesting
to see how it behaves in history at a time when it must
either adapt itself or perish.
Cf. Diplome.
It is the same reason, and it is not the same.
5 Camus had completed his thesis on Plotinus in 1936. There is a good
summary of it in Carl A. Viggiani’s “Camus in 1936: The Beginnings of a
Career,” in Symposium, Spring-Fall 1958, pp. 12-18. This attempt to pur¬
sue the question further does not seem to have led to any published work.
There is, however, a reference to this idea in The Myth of Sisyphus, pp.
47-8.

102

September 1937 - April 1939

.

It is because there are two kinds of reason, the one
ethical and the other aesthetic.
Pursue further: images in Plotinus as the syllogism of
this aesthetic form of reason.
The image as a parable: the attempt to express the undefinable nature of feeling by what is obvious and undefinable in concrete things.
As in all descriptive sciences (statistical—collecting
facts) the great problem in meteorology is the practical
one of deciding how to replace missing data. And the
methods used always fall back on the concept of an aver¬
age, and thereby presuppose the generalized and rational
quality of an experience whose rational aspect was the
very thing originally sought for.

Belcourt. The speculator in sugar who commits suicide
in the lavatory.

The German family in 1914. Four months’ respite. They
come to fetch the father. Concentration camp. Four years
without news. Life during this period. He comes back in
’19. Tubercular. Dies after a few months.
The little girls at school.

Artist and work of art.6 The true work of art is the one
which says least. There is a certain relationship between
6 These reflections on art are repeated, with relatively few changes, in
The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 100.

103

NOTEBOOK II

the global experience of an artist, his thought and his life
(his system, in one sense—leaving out anything system¬
atic which this word implies), and the work reflecting
this experience. This relationship is wrong when the
work gives the whole of this experience surrounded by a
fringe of literature. It is right when the work of art is a
section cut out of his experience, the facet of a diamond
in which the gem’s inner luster is reflected but not ex¬
hausted. In the first case, there is exaggeration, and
literature. In the second, a work which is fruitful because
of a whole implied content of experience whose wealth is
not directly expressed.
The problem is to acquire that knowledge of life (or,
rather, to have lived) which goes beyond the mere ability
to write. So that, in the last analysis, the great artist is
first and foremost a man who has had a great experience
of life (it being understood that, in this case, living also
implies thinking about life—that living is, in fact, pre¬
cisely this subtle relationship between a man’s experi¬
ence and his awareness of it).

If to love implies spending one’s life loving, and creat¬
ing a particular kind of life, then pure love is a love which
is dead. It becomes nothing more than a point of reference,
and we still need to seek an understanding about all the
rest.

Thought is always out in front. It sees too far, farther
than the body, which lives in the present.
104

September 1937 - April 1939

To abolish hope is to bring thought back to the body.
And the body is doomed to perish.

Lying down, he smiled clumsily and his eyes glistened.
She felt all her love flood into her throat and tears come
into her eyes. She threw herself on his lips and crushed
her tears between their two faces. She wept into his
mouth, while he tasted in these salt lips all the bitterness
of their love.

The dry heart of the creator.

“If only I could read. But in the evening there isn’t
enough light for me to knit. So I have to lie down and
wait. It’s a long time, two hours spent like that. Ah, if my
granddaughter were here I could talk to her. But I’m too
old. Maybe I smell. My granddaughter never comes. So I
stay like this, all alone.”

2P.7

Today, mother died. Or it might have been yesterday, I
don’t know. I had a telegram from the home: “Mother
died. Funeral tomorrow. Yours faithfully.” It doesn’t mean
anything. It might have been yesterday.
7 What subsequently became the opening sentences of The Stranger
were written straight out without any corrections. The note “aP” (second
part?) gives the impression, when taken in combination with the plans
on pp. 46-50, that Camus may originally have intended to describe the
kind of person Meursault was before his discovery of the absurd and his
mother’s death.
105

NOTEBOOK II

As the concierge said: “It’s hot in the plain. You bury
them more quickly, especially here.” He told me he came
from Paris and had found it hard to get used to things.
Because, in Paris, you can stay with the body for two,
sometimes three days. Here, you don’t have the time.
You’ve just got used to the idea that they’re dead when
you have to start running after the hearse.
. . . But the procession was going too fast as well. And
the sun was beating down like a great bully. And as the
assistant nurse very rightly said: “If you go too slowly, you
risk getting sunstroke. And if you go too fast, you’re
covered in perspiration and then you catch a chill in the
church.” She was right. There was no way out.
The undertaker’s assistant said something to me that
I didn’t quite catch. He was lifting his hat up from time to
time and using his handkerchief to wipe his head. “What?”
I said to him. “Hot,” he replied, pointing to the sky. “Yes,”
I said. A little later he asked me: “That your mother?”
“Yes.” “Was she old?” “So-so,” I replied, since I didn’t know
exactly. Then he fell silent.

DECEMBER

1938

For Caligula: There is nothing worse than anachronism
in the theater. This is why Caligula doesn’t say the only
reasonable thing that he might say: “A single person
thinks, and all is emptiness.”8
8 Caligula s anachronism is, in French, an ironic misquotation of
Lamartine s famous line: “Un seul etre vous manque et tout est dePr?16\.In the °riginal cahier> Camus had in fact written out the whole
of this line in full, but then crossed out “vous manque” and replaced it
with “qui pense.”

106

September 1937 — April 1939

Caligula. “I need people to keep silent around me. I need
living beings to be silent so that the fearful turmoil in my
heart can also come to an end.”

DECEMBER

15

The prison ship.9 Cf. description in newspaper.

At the meeting.1 The old railwayman, clean, well
shaven, his shoes shining, his plaid-lined overcoat care¬
fully folded inside out and carried over one arm, who asks
me “if it’s here” that the meeting is going to take place, and
tells me how worried he is when he thinks about what the
working man is going to be like in the future.

At the hospital. The tubercular patient who is told by
the doctor that he has five days to live. He anticipates and
cuts his throat with a razor. Obviously, he can’t wait five
days.
One of the male nurses tells a journalist:

“Don’t

mention it in your papers. He’s suffered enough already.”

The man who loves on this earth and the woman who
loves him with the certainty of finding him again in the
hereafter. Their loves are not on the same scale.
9 A reference to Camus’s article in Alger-Republicain, December 1,
1938.

1 Perhaps a reference to his article on November 27, 1938. (See list of
Camus’s articles in Appendix A.)
107

NOTEBOOK

II

Death and a writer’s work. Just before dying, he has
his last work read over to him. He still hasn’t said what he
had to say. He orders it to be burned. And he dies with
nothing to console him—and with something snapping
in his heart like a broken chord.

SUNDAY

The wind in the mountain holding us back, gagging us,
shouting in our ears. The whole forest twisted from top
to bottom. Above the valleys, the red ferns flying from one
mountain to the next. And this beautiful orange-colored
bird.

Story of the foreign legionary who kills his mistress in
the back room of a cafe. Then he takes the body by the
hair, drags it into the main room, and then out into the
street, where he is arrested. He had invested some money
in the cafe, and the owner had told him not to bring his
mistress there. She had come all the same. He ordered her
to leave. She refused. That was why he killed her.

The little couple in the train. Both ugly. She hangs on
to him, laughs, flirts, tries to seduce him. He looks
gloomy, is embarrassed that everyone can see him be¬
ing loved by a woman he is not proud of.

High society, or the two old journalists exchanging in¬
sults in the middle of the police station, surrounded
108

September 1937 - April 1939

by a circle of grinning policemen. Senile fury, unable to
express itself in blows, comes out in an astonishing excess
of filth: “Filthy bastard—old whore—stupid cunt—little
pimp.”
“Me, I’m a respectable man.”
“That’s the big difference between us.”
“Yes, a big difference. I’m respectable. You’re just a
stinking son of a bitch.”
“Shut up or I’ll knock you silly and kick the shit out of
you.”
“You’re about as strong as my bow tie. Because I’m re¬
spectable, you see.”

Spain. The man who is a party member. He wants to
enlist. After the interview, it turns out that it is for per¬
sonal reasons. Rejected.

In every life, there are a great number of small emo¬
tions and a small number of great emotions. If you make a
choice: two lives and two types of literature.

But, in fact, they are two monsters.

The pleasure that one takes in male relationships. The
subtle pleasure of giving or asking for a light—a com¬
plicity, a kind of freemasonry of the cigarette.

NOTEBOOK II

P. who says he is prepared to offer “a miniature of the
Virgin, pregnant, in a frame of toreador’s collarbones.”

Notice in the barracks: “Drink drives out the man and
brings out the beast.” Which makes men understand why
they like it.

“The earth would be a magnificent cage for animals
totally lacking in humanity.”

It is to Jeanne 2 that some of my purest joys are linked.
She often used to say to me: “You’re silly.” It was her ex¬
pression, the one she used when she laughed, but she
always said it when she loved me most. We both came
from poor families. She lived a few streets away from
me, in the rue du centre. Neither of us ever went out of
our own neighborhood, for everything brought us back
to it. And in both our homes we found the same sadness
and the same sordid life. Meeting each other was a way of
escaping from all this. Yet today, when I look back over so
many years and see her face, like a tired child’s, I realize
that we were not really escaping from it, and that what
2 The first fragment in the Notebooks to be later used in The Plague.
Roger Quilliot, who has had access to the different manuscripts for his
preparation of the PIHade edition, notes that in the first version of the
novel this fragment was written hy the sentimental classics master,
Stephan. A note to this effect in the French edition of the Notebooks led
a reviewer in the Times Literary Supplement for July 6, 1962 (p. 487) to
suggest that the passage might perhaps refer to Camus’s first wife. M.
Quilliot assures me that this is a complete misreading of his note. In
any case, Simone Hie, Camus’s first wife, was the daughter of a doctor,
whereas Jeanne remains a railroad man’s daughter in the final version of
this episode in The Plague, where she is the wife of the clerk, Grand. Cf.
The Plague, pp. 74—5.

IIO

September iQ3j - April ig^g

is now priceless in our love stemmed from the very shadow
which this poverty cast over us.
I think that I really did suffer when I lost her, but I had
no feelings of rebellion. This is because I have never really
felt at ease in ownership. Regret has always seemed much
more natural to me. And although I can see my feel¬
ings quite clearly, I have never been able to stop thinking
that Jeanne is much more a part of me at a moment like
today than she was when she stood a little on tiptoe
to put her arms around my neck. I can’t remember how
I met her. But I know that I used to go to visit her at her
home. And that her father and mother laughed when
they saw us. Her father worked on the railroad, and when
he was at home he always sat in a corner, looking thought¬
fully out of the window, his enormous hands flat on his
thighs. Her mother was always doing housework. So was
Jeanne, but in such a light and carefree manner that she
never looked as if she was really working. She wasn’t very
small, but always looked so to me. And I felt she was so
light and tiny that I always had a twinge of sadness when
I saw her dart across the road in front of the trucks. I can
see now that she was probably not very intelligent. But at
the time, I never thought about it. She had her own par¬
ticular way of playing at being cross that almost made me
cry with delight. And this heart, now closed to so much,
can still be touched by the memory of the secret gesture
she would make when she turned around and threw her¬
self into my arms when I begged her to forgive me. I can’t
remember now whether I wanted her physically or not. I
know that everything was mixed up, and that all my
feelings melted into tenderness. If I did want her, I forgot
hi

NOTEBOOK II

about it the first day that, in the corridor of her flat, she
kissed me to thank me for a little brooch that I had given
her. With her hair drawn back, her uneven mouth with
its rather large teeth, her clear eyes and straight nose,
she looked that evening like a child that I had brought
into the world for the sake of its love and tenderness.
Helped by Jeanne herself, who always called me her “big
friend,” I kept that impression for a long time.
There was a strange quality to the joys we shared to¬
gether. When we got engaged, she was eighteen and I
twenty-two. But what filled our hearts with grave and joy¬
ful love was the official character that it now had. And for
Jeanne to come home with me, for mother to kiss her and
call her “my girl,” were all opportunities for rather ridicu¬
lous moments of joy that we made no attempts to hide.
But Jeanne’s memory is linked in my mind with an impres¬
sion that I shall never be able to express. I can still feel it,
however, and I only need to be sad, see a woman whose
face touches me, and then come across a brilliantly lit
shop front, to find Jeanne with me again, her face turned
toward me as she says: “How lovely,” and be hurt by the
truth of the memory. It was at Christmas time, and the
local shops made a great show with lights and decorations.
We would stop in front of the confectioners’ windows. The
chocolate models, the imitation rockwork of gold and silver
paper, the snowflakes of cotton wool, the gilded plates and
rainbow-colored cakes, all sent us into raptures. I felt a
little ashamed. But I could not hold back the upsurge of
joy that filled my whole being and brought tears to Jeanne’s
eyes.
If, today, I try to analyze this feeling, I can find many
II2

September 1937

-

April 1939

different things in it. Certainly, this joy came first and
foremost from Jeanne—from her scent and the way
she used to hold tightly on to my wrist, or pout her lips. But
there was also the sudden brightness of the shops in a
neighborhood that was normally so dark, the hurried
air of the passers-by, laden with parcels, the delight of the
children in the streets, which all helped to tear us from our
world of loneliness. The silver paper around the chocolates
was the sign that a confused but noisy and golden period
was beginning for the simple-hearted, and Jeanne and I
snuggled closer together. Perhaps we were vaguely aware of
the particular happiness that a man feels when his life
falls into harmony with what he is himself. Normally, we
carried the magic desert of our love through a world from
which love had disappeared. And on days like these, it
seemed that the flame which rose in us when we held
hands was the same one which we saw dancing in the
shop windows, in the hearts of the workmen who had
turned around to look at their children, and in the depths
of the pure and icy December sky.

DECEMBER

Faust the other way around. The young man asks the devil
for the goods of this world. The devil (who wears a sports
coat and likes to say that cynicism is the great temptation
of intelligence) gently replies: “But you already have the
goods of this world. You must ask God for what you lack—
if you really do think that you do lack anything. You can
strike a bargain with God, and in exchange for the goods
of the next world you can sell him your body.”

NOTEBOOK II

After a pause, the devil lights an English cigarette and
says: “And that will be your eternal punishment.”

Peter Wolf.

Escapes

from

a

concentration

camp,

kills a sentry, and manages to cross the frontier. Seeks
refuge in Prague, where he tries to start his life again.
After the Munich agreement, is extradited by the Prague
government. Handed over to the Nazis. Condemned to
death. Executed with an ax a few hours later.

On a door: “Come in. I have hanged myself.” 3 They go
in and find it is true. (He says “I,” but there isn’t an “I” any
more.)

Javanese dances. Slowness the basis of Hindu dances.
The spreading out of the limbs. The detailed efflorescences
in the group movements. Like the accumulation of de¬
tails in architecture. A proliferation of gestures. Nothing
is hurried, everything takes its course. It is neither an
action nor a gesture, but a participation.
By the side of this, tragedy expressed by the leaps in
certain cruel dances. The use of silences by the accom¬
paniment (which, moreover, is like a musical ghost).
Here, the music does not describe the pattern followed by
the dance. It forms a background. It enfolds the gestures

3 M. Quilliot points out that, in the first version, it is Stephan, the
narrator, who hangs himself. In the final version, it is Cottard, who later
becomes a black-marketeer.
114

September 7937 - April 1939 .
and the music. It flows around the bodies and their imper¬
ceptible geometry.
(Othello in the dance of the heads.)

For the end of Noces.
The earth! Man’s task is to fill this great temple deserted
by the gods with idols made in his own image, indescrib¬
able, with faces of love and feet of clay.
. . . these monstrous idols of joy, with a face of love
and feet of clay.

The deputy for Constantine who is elected for the third
time. At noon on election day he dies. In the evening, peo¬
ple go to his house to cheer him. His wife goes out on the
balcony and tells them that her husband is a little tired.
Shortly afterwards, the corpse is elected deputy. Most ap¬
propriate.4

On the Absurd? 5
There is only one case in which despair is pure: that of
the man sentenced to death. (May I be allowed a short
illustration?) A man driven to despair by love might be
4 The comment on the death of the deputy for Constantine parallels
the account which Camus gave of a senatorial election in Algiers in
Alger-Republicain on October 24, 1938, when he wrote: “201 senatorial
delegates have conferred on Monsieur Mallarme the right to frustrate, by
his presence in the Senate, the hopes and desires of a whole department.”
5 First draft of an idea which links together The Myth of Sisyphus and
The Stranger. The character of Kirilov, from Dostoevsky’s The Possessed
(which Camus adapted for the stage in 1959), is studied on pp. 104-12
of The Myth of Sisyphus.

NOTEBOOK II

asked if he wanted to be guillotined on the following day
and would refuse. Because of the horror of the punish¬
ment? Yes. But here, the horror springs from the complete
certainty of what is going to happen—or rather, from the
mathematical element which creates this certainty. Here,
the Absurd is perfectly clear. It is the opposite of irra¬
tionality. It is the plain and simple truth. What is and
would be irrational is the fleeting hope, itself already near
to death, that it is all going to stop and that this death can
be avoided. But this is not what is absurd. The truth of
the matter is that they are going to chop his head off while
he knows what is happening—at the very moment when
his whole mind is concentrated on the fact that his
head is going to be chopped off.
Kirilov is right. To commit suicide is to prove that one is
free. And there is a simple solution to the problem of
liberty. Men have the illusion that they are free. But
when they are sentenced to death they lose the illusion.
The whole problem lies in the reality of illusion.
Before:6 “This heart, this little sound that has been
with me for so long, how can I imagine that it will ever
cease beating, how can I imagine this at the very mo¬
ment when. . .
“Oh, prison, prison, the paradise of prison.”
(The mother: “And now they are giving him back to
me. . . . This is what they have done with him. . . .
They have given him back to me in two pieces.’5')
“Eventually, I slept only a little during the day, and
waited at night for dawn to break, bringing with it the

6 A first draft of Meursault’s reflections when awaiting execution. The
Stranger, pp. 142-3.
Il6

September 1937 - April 1939

*

truth of another day. For the whole of that uncertain hour
when I knew that they usually came. . . . Then I became
like an animal. . . . Afterwards, I had another day.
“I worked it out. I tried to control myself. There was my
appeal. I always assumed the worst. It was rejected.
Well then, I would die. Perhaps sooner than others. But
how often had not the idea of dying made me see life
as absurd? Since we are going to die anyway, it doesn’t
matter how and when. Therefore I must accept. Then, at
that moment, I had the right to consider the other possi¬
bility. I was pardoned. I tried to tame the upsurge in my
body and blood which made my eyes smart with des¬
perate hope. I tried to make this cry less intense, so as to
make my resignation more plausible if my first assumption
were correct. But what was the use. The dawns came, and
with them the uncertain hour. . . .
“But here they are. Yet it’s still very dark. They’ve
come earlier. I’ve been robbed, I tell you I’ve been
robbed. . . .
“Run away. Wreck everything. No, I’ll stay. Cigarette?
Why not. Time. But at the same time, he’s cutting my
shirt collar away. At the same time. I haven’t gained any
time at all. I tell you I’m being robbed.
. . How long this corridor is, but how quickly these
people are walking. ... As long as there are a lot of
them, as long as they greet me with cries of hatred. As
long as there are a lot of them, and I am not alone. . . .
“. . . I’m cold. How cold it is. Why have they left me in
my shirt-sleeves? It’s true that it doesn’t matter any more.
No more illnesses for me. I’ve lost the paradise of suffering,
I’m losing it, as I’m losing the joy of spitting out my lungs,

NOTEBOOK II

of being eaten away by a cancer under the gaze of some¬
one I love.
. . And this starless sky, these black windows, and
this busy street, and this man in the front row, and the
foot of this man who. . . .”
END

The Absurd. Gurvitch.7 Essay on Despair. Power of the
leaders. . . .

Mersault.
Caligula.
Special number of Rivages 8 on the theater.
Find the productions again. Commentary on Miquel’s 9
7 A French sociologist, author of Les tendances actuelles de la philos¬
ophic allemande and Les essais de sociologie.
8 Rivages was the title of a literary magazine which the publisher
Chariot—who first published L’Envers et VEndroit and Noces—brought
out in Algiers. It was called a Revue de la Culture mediterraneenne, and
Camus wrote an introduction for the first number in 1939. Only two num¬
bers appeared, the second of which published the essay Summer in Algiers
from Noces (one of the essays included in the 1955 translation of The
Myth of Sisyphus). The special number on the theater does not seem to
have been published, but the following manifesto of the Theatre de
l’Equipe appeared in the first number of Rivages: “The theater is an
art of the flesh which gives living bodies the task of translating its lessons,
an art which is both coarse and subtle, demanding an exceptional degree
of understanding between movements, voices, and bodies.” The Theatre
would put on, continued the advertisement, works from civilizations
where “the love of living mingled with the despair of life.” Examples of
these were Greece, Elizabethan England, Spain, and modem America.
9 Louis Miquel was an Algerian architect and a friend of Camus. M.
Quilliot notes that he was responsible, with Simounet, for making the
plans of the Centre Albert Camus, a sportsground opened at Orleansville
in i960.
Il8

September 1937 - April 1939

*

plan. Presentation. Everything concerned with the theater.
The Mirabel garden in Salzburg.
The company on tour at Bordj-bou-Arreridj.

1939
To burn is rest for me. Other things burn apart from joy.
But unending work, unending marriage, or unending de¬
sire.

Order of work:
Lecture on the theater.
Read about the absurd.
Caligula.
Mersault.
Theater.
Rivages at Chariot’s on Monday.
Lesson.
Paper.

FEBRUARY

Lives which death does not take by surprise. Which have
organized themselves for it. Which have taken it into ac¬
count.

In the same way as a writer’s death makes us exaggerate
the importance of his work, a person’s death makes us
exaggerate the importance of his place among us. Thus

NOTEBOOK II

the past is wholly made up of death, which peoples it with
illusions.

A love which cannot bear to be faced with reality is not
a real love. But then, it is the privilege of noble hearts
not to be able to love.

Novel. These conversations side by side, at night, these
endless shared and spoken secrets.
“And this life of waiting. I wait for dinner and then for
sleep. I think about waking up the next morning, with a
vague hope—but of what? I don’t know. I wake up and
wait for lunch. And so on until the next day. . . . Al¬
ways to be saying to myself: “Now he’s at his office, he’s
having lunch, he’s at his office, he’s finished work—and
this gap in his life which I have to imagine, that I do
imagine and that makes me cry out with pain. . . .”
“. . . Arrive joyfully to set out the next day—and how
close despair is to joy! Looking back to these two days.
They were wonderful, and tears cover them over.”

Algeria, country of both excess and moderation. Meas¬
ured in its lines, excessive in its heat.

Death of “Caporal.” Cf. newspaper.

The lunatic in the bookshop. Cf. newspaper.
120

September 1937 - April 1939
Tragedy forms a closed world, in which we stumble
over and knock against obstacles. In the theater, tragedy
must be bom and die in the restricted area of the stage.

Cf. John Stuart Mill: “Better Socrates dissatisfied than
a pig satisfied.”

This morning full of sunlight. The streets warm and full
of women. Flowers on sale at every street comer. And the
smiling faces of these young girls.

MARCH1

“Once in this warm, well-lit, first-class compartment, I
closed the door behind me and lowered all the blinds.
Then, sitting in the midst of the extraordinary silence
which suddenly greeted me, I felt as if a great weight had
suddenly been lifted away. I was freed from all the breath¬
less days that I had just lived through, from the effort to
bring my life under control, from a whole turmoil of diffi¬
culties. Everything was silent. The coach was vibrating
gently. And although I could still hear the sound of the
rain brushing across the windows, it seemed to form part
of the silence. For the next few days I no longer had to
think, but merely to travel. I had become a prisoner of
1 Another passage for La Mort Heureuse, the last one that Camus seems
to have written. (Cf. notes to Introduction.) He here seems to be experi¬
menting with the possibility of making Mersault tell his story in the first
person. It will be noted, however, how different the style is from that of
Meursault in The Stranger.
121

NOTEBOOK II

timetables, hotels, of a human task that was waiting for
me. Now that I had ceased to belong to myself, I had
achieved true self-possession. And I closed my eyes in
ecstasy over the calm which accompanied the peaceful
universe, freed from tyranny and love, that had just come
to birth outside myself.”

Oran. Mers-el-Kebir bay above the little garden of red
geraniums and freesias. A day of sunshine and clouds, not
of unbroken fine weather. A country in harmony with it¬
self. A long break in the clouds is enough to bring calm
flooding back into overanxious hearts.

April

1939

In Oran, a “sufoco” is an insult. You don’t stand for it, but
pay it back at once, in blood. The Oranais are hotblooded.
A landscape can be magnificent without being great. It
can even narrowly miss greatness. The bay of Algiers,
for example, misses greatness because it is too beautiful,
Mers-el-Kebir seen from Santa Cruz, on the other hand,
shows us what grandeur is like: magnificent and heartless.

A few yards from the immediate outskirts of Oran, you
find unending stretches of uncultivated land, covered at
this season of the year with full-flowering broom. A little
farther on lies the first village set up by official coloniza122

September 1937 - April 1939 .
tion. It is quite without soul, and in its one solitary street
there stands a symbolic bandstand.

The high plateaus and the Djebel Nador.
Unending stretches of cornfields, empty of both trees
and men. At long intervals, you see a hut, and a chilly
silhouette standing out against the horizon as it crosses
a ridge. A few crows, and silence. Nowhere to seek refuge,
nothing on which to hang a feeling of delight, or a pos¬
sibly fruitful melancholy. What rises up from this earth
is anguish and sterility.
At Tiaret,2 some schoolteachers told me they were
“damned fed up.”
“And what do you do when you’re fed up?”
“Get tight.”
“And then?”
“Go to the brothel.”
I went with them to the brothel. It was snowing. A fine,
penetrating snow. They had all been drinking. A doorman
made me pay two francs to go in. It was an enormous, rec¬
tangular room, painted in an odd pattern of oblique
black and yellow bands. People were dancing to a phono¬
graph. The girls were neither pretty nor ugly.
One of them said: “Coming up?”
The man said no, rather half-heartedly.
“Well,” said the girl, “I wouldn’t mind it at all.”
2 Camus went to Tiaret, a town in the southeast of the department of
Oran, in order to cover the trial and acquittal of Michel Hodent in March
1939- (Cf. Appendix A).
123

NOTEBOOK II

When we came out, it was still snowing. Through an
opening, you could see the countryside. Still the same
desolate expanse, except that this time it was white.

At Trezel—a Moorish cafe. Mint tea and conversations.
The street where the prostitutes are is called “Rue de
la Verite.” It’s three francs a time.

Tolba 3 and his brawls.
Tm not a bad guy, but I’m very touchy. I hop from right
to left. The other guy says to me: ‘If you’re a man, get
off the streetcar.’ I say to him: ‘Go on, keep your shirt on.’
So he says: Tou’re not a man.’ So I get off and say to
him: ‘Now then, that’s enough, or I’ll rough you up.’ Tou
and who else?’ So I give him one. Down he goes. I go
to help him up. And he tries to kick me. So I shove my
knee in his face and slap him a couple of times. There’s
blood all over his face. So I say: ‘Had enough?’ Tes,’ he
says.”

Mobilization 4
The eldest son is leaving. He’s sitting in front of his
mother and saying: “It won’t come to anything.” The
3 This story is repeated, by Raymond Sintfes, in The Stranger, pp. 35-6.
Camus took a great interest in the local speech habits of people in Algiers,
and seems to have had a knack for remembering all the details of con¬
versations that he overheard. It is impossible for a translation to give
anything like the impression of the original French.
4 Perhaps a personal reminiscence of Camus’s elder brother Lucien go¬
ing off to war in 1939.

124

September 1937 - April 1939mother says nothing. She has picked up a paper that was
lying on the table. She folds it into two, then into four,
then into eight.

At the station, the crowd seeing people off. Men packed
into the carriages. A woman crying. “But I never thought
it would be like this, that it would hurt so much.” Another:
“It’s funny, people rushing off like that to get killed.” A girl
cries in her fiance’s arms. He looks grave and says nothing.
Smoke, shouts, and jolts. The train leaves.

Women’s faces, delights of the sun and sea—that is
what is being murdered. And if one doesn’t accept mur¬
der, then one has to hang on. We’re living right in the
middle of a contradiction, the whole of our century is
stifling and living up to its neck in this contradiction, with¬
out a single tear to relieve its anguish.
Not only is there no solution, but there aren’t even
any problems.

125

NOTEBOOK

III

April 19 39 — February 1942

Whereas in Provence or in Italy cypress trees are usually
dark patches against the sky, here, in the El Kettar ceme¬
tery, this cypress tree was streaming with light, over¬
flowing with the golden wealth of the sun. It seemed as if
a golden juice had come boiling up from its black heart to
the utmost tips of its short branches, and were flowing in ,
long wild trails along the green leaves.

. . . Like those books where too many passages are un¬
derlined in pencil to make people think highly of the
previous reader’s taste and judgment.
129

NOTEBOOK II

Dialogue between Europe and Islam: 1
“And when we look at your cemeteries and what you
have made of them, we feel a kind of pitying admiration
for you, a horror mingled with esteem for men who have
to live with such an image of their death. . . .
. . We too often feel self-pity. It helps us to live. It is
a feeling that you hardly know, and you would find it un¬
manly. Nevertheless, it is felt by those among us who are
highest in many virtues. For we call manly those who are
wholly lucid, and reject any strength which is divorced
from complete awareness. For you, on the other hand, a
man’s virtue lies in giving orders.”

At war. People who argue about the amount of danger at
each front. “Mine was the most dangerous.” When every¬
thing has been made vile and sordid, they still try to estab¬
lish an order of merit. That is how they survive.

“Yes,” said the sewerman, “and you ought to see the
lavatories that ‘they’ve’ made for them down there at the
naval barracks. It’s a real shame to give lavatories to peo¬
ple like that.”

The woman who lives with her husband without un¬
derstanding a thing about him. One day, he talks on the
radio. They put her behind a pane of glass where she can
1 The dialogue between Europe and Islam has a number of affinities
with Malraux’s Temptation of the West (1926).

130

April 1939 — February 1942

•

see but not hear him. All she can see is that he is making
certain gestures. For the first time, she sees him in his
body, as a physical being, and also for the clown he is.2
She leaves him. “It’s that puppet who climbs onto my
belly every night.”

Subject for a play. The masked man.
After a long journey, he comes back home wearing a
mask. He keeps it on for the whole play. Why? That’s
what the play is about.
At the end, he takes it off. There was no reason for it.
It was just to see things from behind a mask. He would
have been ready to keep it on a long time. He was happy,
if there is any meaning to that word. But what makes
him take it off is the way his wife suffers. He says to her:
“Up to now, I loved you with my whole being, and now
I shall love you only as you want to be loved. It seems that
you prefer to be despised rather than to love without know¬
ing why. There are two kinds of greatness here.”
(Or two women. One loves him with his mask be¬
cause he fascinates her. Then, she stops loving him.
“You loved me with your mind. You had to love me with
your body as well.” The other loves him in spite of the
mask, and continues afterwards.)
By a strange but natural reaction, she imagined that it
was the things which hurt her most that caused suffering
to the man she loved. She had so accustomed herself to
2 The idea of realizing how absurd somebody is by watching him
through a pane of glass recurs in The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 15.
M. Quilliot notes that the “masked man” is the first sketch for The
Misunderstanding (1944).

NOTEBOOK III

doing without hope that as soon as she tried to under¬
stand this man’s life, she always saw only what was un¬
favorable to herself. And that was exactly what annoyed
him.

The historical and the eternal mind. One has a feeling
for beauty. The other for infinity.

Le Corbusier: “What makes an artist, you see, are the
moments when he feels that he is more than a man.”

Pia3 and the documents that will disappear. A de¬
liberate crumbling away. Faced with nothingness, the reac¬
tion of hedonism and constant travel. Here, the historical
mind becomes geographical.

In the streetcar. The man who is half drunk and at¬
taches himself on to me. ‘If you’re a man, give me five
francs. Look, I’ve just come out of the hospital. Where
am I going to sleep tonight? But if you’re a man, I’ll go and
have a drink and I’ll forget. I’m unhappy, I am. I haven’t
got anyone.”
I give him five francs. He takes my hand, looks at me,
throws himself into my arms, and bursts out sobbing. “Ah,
you’re a good guy. You understand me. I’ve got no one,
you understand, no one.” When I have left him, the
3 Pascal Pia was the editor of Alger-Republicain in 1938-1939, and later
worked with Camus on Combat. The Myth of Sisyphus is dedicated to him

132

April 1939 — February 1942

.

streetcar starts up again and he stays inside, lost and still
in tears.

The man who has lived alone for a long time and who
adopts a child. He pours out onto him his whole lonely
past. And in the tight little universe in which he lives, con¬
stantly with the child, he feels himself master, and the
ruler over a magnificent kingdom. He bullies and frightens
the child, drives him mad with his whims and violent de¬
mands. Until, one day, the child runs away and the man
finds himself alone again, with his tears and a terrible up¬
surge of love for the toy that he has just lost.

“I would wait for the moment when, out in the street,
she used to look up at me. And what I then saw was a pale
and shining countenance, which had been cleansed of
make-up and made almost expressionless by my kisses.
Her features were bare. And for the first time, it was really
her that I was seeing, after having sought her during all
the long, stifling hours of desire. The patience with which
I had loved her at last had its reward. And it was in this
face, with its paler bps and white cheekbones, which my
mouth had exhumed from its shell of smiles and make-up,
that I finally reached her and knew her deeply.”

Poe and the four conditions for happiness.
(1) Life in the open air.
( 2 ) The love of another being.
i33

NOTEBOOK III

( 3 ) Freedom from all ambition.
(4) Creation.

Baudelaire: “They forgot two rights in the Declaration
of the Rights of Man. The right to contradict oneself, and
the right to leave.”
Id. “There are some temptations which are so strong that
they must be virtues.”

Madame du Barry, on the scaffold: “Just a moment,
executioner.”

July 14,1939. A year ago.

On the beach: a man, his arms in the form of a cross,
crucified in the sunlight.

With Pierre, obscenity is like a form of despair.

‘These terrible years of doubt when he waited for mar¬
riage, or for anything at all—during which he was already
building up the philosophy of renunciation which would
justify his failure and cowardice.”
134

April 1939 - February 1942 .

“With his wife. The problem was to discover whether
a man such as he could live among this woman’s lies
without forfeiting his own integrity.”

AUGUST

(1) Oedipus puts an end to the Sphinx, and casts out
mystery by his knowledge of man. The whole universe of
the Greeks is clear.
(2) But it is the same man who is savagely destroyed
by destiny, by the implacable destiny of blind logic. The
unshadowed light of tragic and mortal things.

See Epicurus (essay).
The grotto of Aglauros on the Acropolis. Minerva’s
statue, stripped bare of its clothes once a year. Probable
that all statues were similarly clothed. Naked Greek statues
are our invention.

At Athens, there was a temple consecrated to old age.
Children were taken to visit it.
Coresos and Callirhoe 4 (Play).
He sacrifices himself first. On learning of this proof
of love, she strikes herself dead.
4 It is difficult to discover exactly which mythological characters Camus
had in mind. According to M. Quilliot’s note, Callirhoe was a daughter
of a king of Calydon and was loved by Coresos, a priest of Dionysius. She
rejected him, and in revenge the priest made the god he served strike all
the inhabitants of Calydon with madness. The oracle ordered the sacrifice
of Callirhoe, but Coresos preferred to kill himself. Touched by this devo¬
tion, Callirhoe killed herself too.

135

NOTEBOOK III

Legend of the gods preaching charity disguised as beg¬
gars. Charity was not natural.
At Sicyon, Prometheus tricked Zeus. Two bags made of
bull’s hide, one containing the flesh, the other the bones.
Zeus chose the bones. This is why the use of fire was
taken away from mankind. Low vengeance.

The daughter of the potter Dibutades loved a young
man and traced the outline of his shadow on a wall. Her
father, seeing her sketch, discovered the style of ornamen¬
tation used on Greek vases. Love is at the beginning of all
things.

At Corinth, two temples stood side by side: those of
violence and of necessity.

Dimetos had a guilty love for his niece, who hanged
herself. One day, the little waves carried on to the fine
sand of the beach the body of a marvelously beautiful
young woman. Seeing her, Dimetos fell on his knees,
stricken with love. But he was forced to watch the
decay of this magnificent body, and went mad. This was
his niece’s vengeance, and the symbol of a condition we
must try to define.

At Pallantion, in Arcadia, there was an altar dedicated
to “the pure gods.”
136

April 1939 — February 1942

I’m ready to die for her, said P. But don’t let her ask me
to live.

SEPTEMBER

I939.

WAR

The people who rush to be operated on by a well-known
Algiers surgeon because they are afraid that he will be
drafted.
Gaston: “The main thing is that before being drafted, I
have time for a good lay.”
On the station platform, a mother to a young, thirtyyear-old reservist: “Now be careful.”
In the streetcar: “Poland’s not going to stand for it.”
“The ‘anti-Comertin pact,’ it’s as dead
as a doornail.”
“If you give Hitler your little finger, the
next thing you’ll be doing is taking
your trousers down.”
At the market: “We’ll have a reply Saturday, you know.”
“What reply?”
“Hitler’s.”
“So what?”
“Well, then we’ll know whether it’s war.”
“Terrible, isn’t it?”
At the station, there were reservists slapping ticket col¬
lectors on the face and calling them “draft-dodgers.”

The war has broken out.5 But where is it? Where does
this absurd event show itself, except in the news bulletins
5 This passage, M. Quilliot notes, was initially intended for The Plague.
Later, however, Camus decided not to use it.

137

NOTEBOOK III

we have to believe and the notices we have to read? It’s
not in the blue sky over the blue sea, in the chirring of
the grasshoppers, in the cypress trees on the hills. It isn’t
in the way the light leaps youthfully in the streets of Al¬
giers.
We want to believe in it. We look for its face, and it
hides itself away. The world alone is king, with the mag¬
nificent countenance it shows us.
We have lived hating this beast. Now it stands before us
and we can’t recognize it. So few things have changed.
Later on, certainly, there will be mud and blood and an
immense feeling of nausea. But today we find that the
beginning of a war is like the first days of peace: neither
the world nor our hearts know they are there.

. . . Remember the first days of what will probably
be a highly disastrous war as days of immense happiness
—a strange and instructive destiny. ... I am seeking
to make lawful my revolt which nothing that has so far
happened has justified. . . .

We always exaggerate the importance of an individual
life.6 So many people don’t know what to do with theirs
that it is not completely immoral to take it from them. On
the other hand, everything takes on a new value. But
this has already been said. The essential absurdity of this

6 ®ne °f the passages which show Camus developing some of the ideas
used both in The Myth of Sisyphus—universality of the feeling of the
absurd and in The Plague—impossibility of standing aside from
calamities.
138

April 1939 — February 1942

•

catastrophe does not alter the fact that it exists. It gen¬
eralizes the rather more essential absurdity of life itself. It
makes it more immediate and more relevant. If this war
can have an effect on man, it will be to confirm the idea
which he has of his own existence and the way he judges
it. As soon as this war “is,” any judgment which cannot
take it into account is false. A reflective man generally
spends his time adapting his idea of things to the altera¬
tions imposed by new facts. It is in this process of bending
and adjusting thought, in this conscious elimination of
error, that truth—that is to say, what life can teach us—
is to be found. This is why, however vile this war may be,
no one can stand aside from it. I myself first of all, natu¬
rally, since I can have no fear in risking my life by wager¬
ing on death. And then all the nameless and resigned who
go off to this unpardonable slaughter—and who, I feel,
are all with me as brothers.

A cold wind comes in through the window.7
Mother: “The weather’s starting to change.”
“Yes.”
“Will they keep the electricity low all through the war?”
“Probably.”
“It’s going to be a gloomy winter, then.”
“Yes.”

They have all betrayed us, those who preached re¬
sistance and those who talked of peace. There they are, all
7 Perhaps a conversation which Camus had with his mother. It recurs
in The Plague, p. 112.

139

NOTEBOOK III

as docile and guilty as one another. And never before has
the individual stood so alone before the lie-making ma¬
chine. He can still feel contempt and use it as a weapon.
And if he has no right to stand on one side and feel
scorn, he still has the right to judge. Humanity in general,
the crowd, can offer nothing. It was treason to believe the
opposite. We die alone. They are all going to die alone. Let
the man who is alone at least keep his scorn, and the
ability to pick out from this terrible ordeal what serves
his own greatness.
Accept the ordeal and everything which it entails. But
swear, in the least noble of tasks, to perform only the
noblest of actions. And real nobility (that of the heart) is
based on scorn, courage, and profound indifference.

To be born to create, to love, to win at games is to be
born to live in time of peace. But war teaches us to lose
everything and become what we were not. It all becomes
a question of style.

I dreamed that we entered Rome as triumphant con¬
querors. And I thought of the entry of the Barbarians into
the Eternal City. But I was in the ranks of the Barbarians.

Reconcile the descriptive with the explanatory work.
Give description its true meaning. When it stands alone, it
it admirable but carries no conviction. All we then need to
do is make it clear that our limitations have been chosen
140

April I93g - February 1942

deliberately. They then disappear, and the work can
“prolong its echoes.”

“On the one hand,” the man said when he had been
classed unfit but called in again for another medical check,
“it’s a damned nuisance. But, on the other, I heard too
many jokes. ‘Not gone yet?’ ‘Still around?’ There are fortyfour men in our building, and I was the only one left. So I
came home at night and went out early in the morning.”

The other reservist, whose stomach has been X-rayed:
“They made me drink about six pints of chalk. Before,
I shat black. Now, I shit white. That’s war.”

SEPTEMBER

7

We used to wonder where war lived, what it was that
made it so vile. And now we realize that we know where it
lives, that it is inside ourselves. For most people, it’s the
embarrassment, the need to make a choice, the choice
which makes them go but feel remorse for not having
been brave enough to stay at home, or which makes them
stay at home but regret that they can’t share the way the
others are going to die.
It’s there, that’s where it really is, and we were looking
for it in the blue sky and the world’s indifference. It is in
this terrible loneliness both of the combatants and of the
noncombatants, in this humiliated despair that we all feel,
in the baseness that we feel growing in our faces as the
days go by. The reign of beasts has begun.

NOTEBOOK III

The hatred and violence that you can already feel ris¬
ing up in people. Nothing pure left in them. Nothing
unique. They think together. You meet only beasts, bestial
European faces. The world makes us feel sick, like this
universal wave of cowardice, this mockery of courage, this
parody of greatness, and this withering away of honor.

It is terrifying to see how easily, in certain people, all
dignity collapses. Yet when you think about it, this is quite
normal since they only maintain this dignity by constantly
striving against their own nature.

There is one fatality which is death, and outside this all
other fatality disappears. In the space of time between
birth and death, nothing its predetermined. You can
change everything, you can stop the war and even main¬
tain peace, if you want to do so enough, intensely and for
a long time.

Rule: Start by looking for what is valid in every man.

Cf. Groethuysen, on Dilthey: 8 “Thus, having recognized
the fragmentary nature of our existence, and the acci¬
dental and limited quality which one life has when taken
8 Wilhelm Dilthey (1833-1911) was a German philosopher who in¬
sisted upon the importance of historical study in the human sciences. He
is dealt with in Raymond Aron’s Essai sur la theorie de Vhistoire dans
Vallemagne contemporaine, 1939, which was reviewed by Bernard Groe¬
thuysen in Vol. CCCXIII of the Nouvelle Revue Frangaise for 1939, pp.
622-9. This quotation, however, is not taken from this review, and may be
Camus’s summary of Groethuysen’s argument.

142

April 1939 — February 1942

by itself, we shall begin to seek for what we can no longer
find within ourselves in a number of lives taken to¬
gether.”

If it is true that the absurd has been fulfilled (or, rather,
revealed), then it follows that no experience has any
value in itself, and that all our actions are equally instruc¬
tive. The will is nothing. Acceptance everything. On one
condition: that, faced with the humblest or the most
heart-rending experience, man should always be “present”;
and that he should endure this experience without flinch¬
ing, with complete lucidity.

It is always useless to try to cut oneself off, even from
other people’s cruelty and stupidity. You can’t say: “I don’t
know about it.” One either fights or collaborates. There is
nothing less excusable than war, and the appeal to na¬
tional hatreds. But once war has come, it is both cowardly
and useless to try to stand on one side under the pretext
that one is not responsible. Ivory towers are down. Indul¬
gence is forbidden—for oneself as well as for other people.
It is both impossible and immoral to judge an event
from outside. One keeps the right to hold this absurd mis¬
fortune in contempt only by remaining inside it.
One individual’s reaction has no intrinsic importance.
It can be of some use, but it can justify nothing. The
dilettante’s dream of being free to hover above his time is
the most ridiculous form of liberty. This is why I must
try to serve. And, if they don’t want me, I must also ac143

NOTEBOOK III

cept the position of the “despised civilian.” In both cases,
I am absolutely free to judge things and to feel as dis¬
gusted with them as I like. In both cases, I am in the midst
of the war, and have the right to judge it. To judge it,
and to act.

Accept. And, for example, see the good side of things. If
they don’t want me to fight, it is because my fate is always
to stay on one side. And it is from this struggle to remain
an ordinary man in exceptional circumstances that I
have always drawn my greatest strength and my greatest
usefulness.

Goethe (to Eckermann): “If I had wanted to throw off
all forms of constraint, it would have been in my power to
cause my own complete ruin and that of everyone around
me.”
The first thing is to learn to rule over oneself.

On Goethe: “He is tolerant without being indulgent.”

A Prometheus—as a revolutionary ideal.
“What does not cause my death increases my strength.”
(Nietzsche.) 9

“The desire for a system is a failure in loyalty.” (Twilight
of the Idols.) 1
9 Cf. Twilight of the Idols, tr. Ludovici, maxim 8: From the military
school of life.
1 Idem, maxim 26: “The will to a system shows a lack of honesty.”

144

April iQ3g - February 1942

•

“The tragic artist is not a pessimist. He says ‘Yes’ to
everything terrible and problematical.” (Twilight of the
Idols.) 2

What is war? Nothing. It matters not the slightest
whether one is a soldier or a civilian, whether one joins it
or fights against it.
Man as seen by Nietzsche (Twilight of the Idols ).
“Goethe 3 conceived the idea of a man who would be
strong, highly cultured, skillful in all things physical, keep¬
ing himself well under control, respecting his own indi¬
viduality, able to run the risk of fully enjoying all the
wealth and range of physical things, and strong enough
for liberty; he would be tolerant, not through weakness
but through strength, because he knows how to draw
profit from what would be the ruin of weaker natures; a
man for whom there is now nothing forbidden, except
weakness, whether this is called vice or virtue. . . .
Such a mind, freed of everything, stands forth in the
center of the world, accepting fate with happiness and
2 Page 23: “The tragic artist is no pessimist—he says Yea to everything
questionable and terrible, he is Dionysian.”
3 Page no. My own translation of Camus’s French version.
Ludovici’s translation reads: “Goethe conceived a strong, highly-cul¬
tured man, skillful in all bodily accomplishments, able to keep himself in
check, having a feeling of reverence for himself, and so constituted as to
be able to risk the full enjoyment of naturalness in all its rich profusion
and be strong enough for this freedom; a man of tolerance, not out of
weakness but out of strength, because he knows how to turn to his profit
that which would ruin the mediocre nature; a man unto whom nothing is
any longer forbidden, unless it be weakness either as a vice or as a virtue.
Such a spirit, become free, appears in the middle of the universe with a
feeling of cheerful and confident fatalism; he believes that only individual
things are bad, and that as a whole the universe justifies and affirms it¬
self. He no longer denies. . .

145

NOTEBOOK

III

confidence, with the belief that the only things to be con¬
demned are those which exist in isolation, and that, seen
as a whole, all problems resolve themselves in self-affirma¬
tion. He no longer says ‘No’. . .

”

Overcome this as well? I must. But this unceasing effort
is not devoid of sadness. Could this at least have been
spared us? But this weariness must be overcome as well.
Nothing of it will be lost. One evening, when we look in the
mirror, we see a deeper line around our mouth. What is
it? The stuff from which I made the happiness I overcame.
The story of Jarry 4 on his deathbed, asked what he
wanted and replying: “A toothpick.” They gave him one,
he put it into his mouth, and died happy. And the misery
and desolation is that people laugh, and no one sees the
terrible lesson. Nothing more than a toothpick, nothing
else but a toothpick, as much as a toothpick—herein lies
the whole value of this inspiring life.

“But this little chap is very ill,” said the lieutenant. “We
can’t take him.” “I’m twenty-six, I have my life, and know
what I want.”5

After so many others have said the same thing, Paulhan
writes in the NRF to say how amazed he is that the war of
4 Camus later changed his mind about the author of Ubu-Roi, and wrote
of him, in a footnote to L’Homme Revolt6, p. 119: “Jarry, one of the mas¬
ters of Dadaism, is the last incarnation of the metaphysical dandy, but
had more peculiarities than genius.”
6 Presumably an account of Camus’s own medical examination, in
which he was rejected as unfit for the army.

146

April 1939 - February 1942

'

1939 should not have begun in the same atmosphere as
that of 1914. The simpletons who thought that horror al¬
ways had the same face, who cannot escape from the
physical images on which they have lived.

Spring in Paris; a promise, or a chestnut bud, is enough
to make your heart grow tender. In Algiers, the transition
is more brusque. It’s not a single rosebud but a thousand
rosebuds that, one morning, stifle you with their perfume.
And we are not moved by the subtle quality of an emo¬
tion, but overwhelmed by an enormous flood of a thousand
different individual scents and dazzling colors. It is not
our subtler feeling which grows more perceptive, but our
whole body which has to withstand an atttack.

NOVEMBER

I939

What one uses in war.
(1) What everyone knows about.
(2 ) The despair of those who don’t want to fight.
(3) The pride of those whom nothing compelled to
leave but who left in order to avoid being alone.
(4) The hunger of the men who enlist because they
have lost their job.
(5) Many noble feelings like:
(a) solidarity in suffering.
(b) contempt that wants to remain silent.
(c) the absence of hatred.
It is all put to a despicable use and it all leads to death.
147

NOTEBOOK III

Death of Louis XVI. He asks the man taking him to the
guillotine to deliver a letter to his wife. Reply: “I am not
here to run your errands, but to take you to the guillotine.”

In Italian museums, you see little painted screens that
the priest used to hold before the prisoner’s face to hide
the scaffold from him.
The existential leap is one of the little screens.6

Letter to a man in despair.7
You write that you are overwhelmed by the war, that
you would agree to die, but that what you cannot bear is
this universal stupidity, this bloodthirsty cowardice, and
6 This is repeated in The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 91, where it is linked with
the idea of remaining aware of the inevitability of death and of the
absurdity of life. Thinkers who take the existentialist ‘leap into faith” are
forfeiting this awareness.
7 This letter to a man in despair is similar in style to but very different
in tone and content from the Letters to a German Friend, written in 19431944. (Cf. Resistance, Rebellion, and Death.) The ideas which it puts
forth have a number of parallels in the articles which Camus wrote for
Alger-Republicain and Soir-Republicain in 1938-1940. On April 25, 1939,
for example, he wrote, in an account of a lecture by M. R. E. Chaxlier,
that “the Versailles Treaty is the spiritual father of the Munich agree¬
ments,” and, in an unsigned editorial in Soir-Republicain for November 6,
1939, that “we think, in fact, that there is only one fatality in history,
and it is the one we put there ourselves. We believe that this conflict
could have been avoided, and that it could still be ended to everybody’s
satisfaction.” Similarly, on December 18, 1939, Camus wrote of his “con¬
viction that war was not inevitable, since it would have been avoided
with better luck.” This should not, however, be seen as a sign of Com¬
munist sympathies on Camus’s part: he wrote in Soir-Republicain on
December 19, 1939: “The U.S.S.R. is, today, one of the nations of prey.
Revolutionary imperialism is still imperialism.” Nevertheless, he was still
fairly optimistic about the possibility of an early end to the war when he
wrote, in the same article, that “a reconciliation of imperialisms can
bring about their disarmament.”

148

April 1939 - February 1942

•

this criminal simplemindedness which still believes that
human problems can be solved by the shedding of blood.
I read and understand you. And what I understand
most clearly is the contrast which you make between your
own readiness to die and your revulsion at the idea of
other people’s death. This proves a man’s quality, and
classes him as someone you can talk to. How, in fact, can
we avoid falling into despair? Those we love have often
been in danger before, from illness, death or madness,
but we ourselves and the things we believe in have still
lived on. Often, the values on which our life is built have
almost collapsed. But never before have these values and
those we love been threatened all together and all at the
same time. Never before have we been so completely
handed over to destruction.
I can understand you, but I cease to agree when you try
to base your life on this despair, maintain that everything
is equally pointless, and withdraw behind your disgust.
For despair is a feeling, and not a permanent condition.
You cannot stay on in despair. And feelings must give way
to a clear view of things.
You say: “Besides, what is to be done? And what can I
do?” But the question doesn’t start by presenting itself like
that. You still believe in the individual, since you can
feel what is worthwhile both in those around you and in
you yourself. But these individuals can do nothing, and
so you despair of society. But remember: you and I had
already rejected this society a long time before the catas¬
trophe took place; we knew that it was destined to end in
war, we both denounced this state of affairs, and both
felt that there was nothing in common between this soi49

NOTEBOOK III

ciety and ourselves. It is the same society today, and it
has reached its normal end. And, when you look at things
dispassionately, you have no more reasons to despair now
than you had in 1928. In fact, you have exactly as many,
no more and no less.
And, when you really think about it, the men who went
off to war in 1914 had more reasons to despair, since they
understood things less clearly than we do. You may say
that knowing there were as many reasons to despair back
in 1928 as they are now, in 1939, doesn’t get us any fur¬
ther. This is only apparently true. For you didn’t despair
completely in 1928, whereas today you find everything
completely pointless. If circumstances are the same, then
it must be your opinion of them which is wrong. This hap¬
pens every time that, instead of seeing a truth as reason
presents it to us, we see it in the flesh. You had foreseen
the war, but thought you could prevent it. And this kept
you from falling completely into despair. Today, you think
you can no longer prevent anything at all. That is the crux
of the argument.
But, first of all, you must ask yourself if you really did do
everything necessary to prevent this war. If you did,
then you could look on it as inevitable, and you could con¬
sider that there is nothing more to be done. But I am
not convinced that you yourself, any more than any one
of us, did do all you should have done. You couldn’t pre¬
vent it? No, that is not true. This war, as you know, was
not inevitable. It would have been enough if the Treaty of
Versailles had been revised in time. This was not done,
and that is all there is to it. You see that things could have
happened differently. But there is still time to revise this
150

April 1939

-

February 1942

treaty, or any other cause. We can still make it unneces¬
sary for Hitler to stick to his word. There is still time to
reject those acts of injustice that have led to other, simi¬
lar acts, and thereby make these unnecessary as well.
There is still something useful to be done. You assume
that the role you can play as an individual is practically
nonexistent. But I will reverse my earlier argument and
tell you that it is neither greater nor smaller than it was in
1928. Besides, I know that you are not very set on this
idea of uselessness. For you do not, to my knowledge, sup¬
port conscientious objection. And this is not because you
lack courage or admiration, but because you don’t think
that it does any good. Thus, you already have some notion
of what is useful and what is not which enables you to
follow what I am saying.
There is something for you to do, have no doubt about
it. Every man has at his disposal a certain zone of in¬
fluence, which he owes as much to his defects as to his
qualities. But whichever is the case, this zone is there,
and can be immediately used. Push no one to rebel. We
must be sparing of other people’s blood and liberty. But
you can convince ten, twenty, or thirty men that this war
is not and was not inevitable, that there are ways of pre¬
venting it that have not yet been tried, and that we must
say this, writing it when we can and shouting it if we
must. These ten or thirty men will, in turn, tell it to ten
others, who will repeat what the first have said. If laziness
prevents them, so much the worse, start again with oth¬
ers. And when you have done what you can in your own
zone, in your own field, then you can call a halt and de¬
spair as much as you like. Understand this: we can de-

NOTEBOOK III

spair of the meaning of life in general, but not of the par¬
ticular forms that it takes; we can despair of existence,
for we have no power over it, but not of history, where
the individual can do everything. It is individuals who are
killing us today. Why should not individuals manage to
give the world peace? We must simply begin without
thinking of such grandiose aims. You must realize that
men make war as much with the enthusiasm of those who
want it as with the despair of those who reject it with all
their soul.

A remark quoted by Green in his Journal:
“We must not fear death. This would be paying it too
much honor.”

Green and his Journal.
Notes down a number of dreams. I always find this kind
of thing boring.

Death of Flaubert’s friend, Le Poittevin:
“Close the window. It’s too beautiful.”

Bordeaux Cathedral. In the corner:
“Great Saint Paul, let me be in the first ten.”
“Great Saint Paul, let him come to meet me.”

Montherlant, who quotes at the beginning of Service
Inutile a superb remark by Cardinal Darbout:
152

“Your

April 1939 - February 1942

.

mistake lies in believing that man was put on this earth
to do something.” And Montherlant draws from this some
magnificent and bitter lessons in heroism. But one could
draw exactly the opposite lesson from these words, and
justify Diogenes or Ernest Renan. Only great thoughts
are capable of such contradictory fruitfulness.

Always struck by the “comical” aspect of everything in
Algeria connected with death. I find nothing more justi¬
fied. Impossible to exaggerate the ridiculous quality of an
event that is normally accompanied by sweat and gur¬
gling. Similarly, it could not be too far demoted from the
sacred status normally attributed to it. Nothing is more
despicable than respect based on fear. And, from this
point of view, death is no more worthy of respect than
Nero or the inspector at my local police station.

Lawrence: 8 “Tragedy ought to be like a great kick at
misfortune.” (Cf. his aristocratic communism.)

8 Both these quotations are from D. H. Lawrence’s Letters. The first, to
A. W. McLeod, was written on October 6, 1912, and the full quotation is:
"... I hate Bennett’s resignation. Tragedy ought really to be a great
kick at misery.” (Letters of D. H. Lawrence, ed. Aldous Huxley, 1932.)
The second is an adaptation of a sentence in Lawrence’s letter of De¬
cember 28, 1928, to Charles Wilson: “. . . It’s time there was an enor¬
mous revolution—not to install soviets, but to give life a chance.”
The question of the possible influence of D. H. Lawrence on Camus was
discussed by Rayner Heppenstall as early as 1948 in an article in Penguin
New Writing entitled Albert Camus and the Romantic Protest, and taken
up by the same critic in The Fourfold Tradition in i960. It is not possible
to say whether Camus read Lawrence in French or in English, but the
Letters were translated by Therese Aubray and published by Plon in
1934. Both these letters were included in the translation (Vol. I, p. 33,

153

NOTEBOOK III

Id.: “We should not bring about the Revolution to give
power to a class, but to give a chance to life.”

M.9 “Men are not my fellows. They are the people who
look at me and judge me. My fellows are those who love
me without looking at me, who love me in spite of every¬
thing, in spite of failure, betrayal, or humiliation, who
love me and not what I have done or shall do, who would
love me for as long as I loved myself—up to and including
suicide.”
. . . “with her alone (his wife May) I have this love in
common, whether in anguish or not, as some people share
sick children who might die.”
and Vol. II, p. 224), but there are slight differences between Camus’s
wording in the Notebooks and that of the French translation. I have trans¬
lated them back into English as they stand, and it will be noticed that the
second one, in particular, is not a word-for-word quotation.
Mme Camus told me in August 1962 that her husband, like many of his
friends in Algeria, was a great admirer of Lawrence, most of whose novels
had been translated into French before the war—Lady Chatterley’s Lover,
it may be noted, with a preface by Andre Malraux. Camus refers to Law¬
rence, in a preface to Louis Guilloux’s La Maison du Peuple (Grasset,
1953). and also quotes the phrase about tragedy in an essay entitled
Les Amandiers, written in 1940 and reprinted in L’Ete, 1954, p. 73. In the
typescript of La Mart Heureuse there is also a phrase about the “dieux
noirs” which Mersault intended henceforth to serve. The reviewer in the
Times Literary Supplement of July 6, 1962, p. 487, also mentioned a
likeness between Sea and Sardinia and some of Camus’s early essays, and
it is certain that there are close similarities of attitude between the two
writers.
I should like to thank the readers of the Times Literary Supplement for
replying to my letter asking for information about D. H. Lawrence’s letters
and especially Mr. R. W. Gaskell, of the University of Bristol, who pro¬
vided me with the exact references for these quotations.
9 These two passages are both quoted from Malraux’s La Condition
Humaine (Gallimard, 1933. P- 68), and are thoughts of Kyo Gisors after
his wife May has told him that she has been unfaithful.

154

April 1939 — February 1942

Absurd characters.1
Caligula. The sword and the dagger.
“I don’t think they quite understood me the day before
yesterday when I battered the officiating priest over the
head with the mallet that he was going to use to kill the
heifer. Yet it was very simple. I wanted, just for once, to
change the order of things—just to see what happened.
And what I saw was that nothing was changed. The
spectators were surprised and a little frightened. Apart
from that, the sun went down at the same time. The
conclusion which I drew was that it doesn’t matter if
you change the order of things.”
But why should not the sun one day rise in the West?
Id. (Ptolemy.) I had him killed because there was no
reason for him to display a finer cloak than mine. There
1 The cahier made it quite clear that Caligula, Ptolemy, Quixote, and
La Pallice were all “absurd characters.” La Pallice (or Pallisse) was a
French captain killed at the battle of Pavia in 1525. He was the hero of an
old popular song, revived in the eighteenth century, the refrain of which
was:
Monsieur d’La Palice est mort
Mort devant Pavie
Un quart d’heure avant sa mort
II etait encore en vie.
The last couplet was considered very funny, because it stated so obvious
a fact, and gave rise to the expression “Verite de Monsieur de La Pallice”
—more or less the equivalent of “Queen Anne’s dead.” Camus refers to
him again at the very beginning of The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 4, when he
says that there are only two intellectual methods: that of Monsieur de La
Pallisse and that of Don Quixote. The contrast seems to be between some¬
one who accepts the things that are obviously and completely true, and
someone who completely neglects them. Both, presumably, are equally
absurd, though in The Myth of Sisyphus Camus writes that it is only by a
balance between them that we can “reach at one and the same time both
emotion and clarity.”

155

NOTEBOOK III

was, in the absolute, no reason at all. Naturally, there
was no reason either why my cloak should be finer. But
he wasn’t aware of this, and since I was the only person
who saw things clearly, it was natural for me to benefit
from this.

Don Quixote and La Pallice.
La Pallice: “A quarter of an hour before my death, I
was still alive. This has sufficed to make me famous. But
this is no true claim to glory. My real philosophy is that, a
quarter of an hour after my death, I shall no longer be
alive.”
Don Quixote: “Yes, I have tilted against windmills.
Because it doesn’t matter in the slightest whether you
fight windmills or giants. It matters so little that they are
easily confused. My metaphysics are those of the short¬
sighted.”

Vedas: What a man thinks, that does he become.

Gisele and the war: “No, I don’t read the papers. What
interests me is the weather. I’m going camping on Sunday.”

“Do you know, Fontanes, what most amazes me in the
world? The inability of force to maintain anything at all.
There are only two powers in the world: the sword and
the mind. In the long run, the sword is always defeated by
the mind.” Napoleon.2
2 Napoleon’s remark to Fontanes is repeated at the beginning of Les
Amandiers, 1940, L’Ete, 1954.

156

April 1939

—

February 1942

•

Louis XIV: “My child, you are going to become a great
king. Do not follow me in my taste for war. Try to ease the
lot of your peoples . . . something which I am unfortu¬
nate enough not to be able to have done.”

Oran 3
The plain of Le Tlelat as a preparation for Oran. A
place for achieving freedom and renouncing desire before
plunging into the senses, for withdrawing into meditation
before going down into the bliss of hell.
You can travel to Oran either by day or by night. I don’t
know what happens by day. But by night, I know that you
arrive at dawn at Sainte-Barbe du Tlelat, after having
passed by the quivering eucalyptus trees of Perregaux at
that doubtful hour which is no longer night but not yet
day. At Tlelat, you find that little station with green shut¬
ters and its large clock.
. . . But Tlelat, when it rains. . . .
Sainte-Barbe du Tlelat, you who are indifference, equiv¬
alence, and freedom, keep us from overhasty choices and
leave us that undivided liberty which is called emptiness
of the senses. In a few moments, we shall be in Oran, in
the heaviness of a fife of the body lived without hope. We
shall see motionless Santa Cruz and smell the aniseed in
the streets of Mers-el-Kebir. There will be the “Vieilles
Cures” which the cafe Cintra serves in powdered ice, and
3 Most of these passages on Oran were incorporated into The Minotaur,
or the Stop in Oran, 1940, L’Ete, 1954 (tr. O’Brien in The Myth of
Sisyphus, 1955). However, it should also be noted that The Plague is set
in Oran, and that a number of Camus’s best effects in the novel are ob¬
tained by contrasting the dullness of the city with the extraordinary
events that take place there.

157

NOTEBOOK III

the women of Oran whose ankles are rather thick and who
always go out bareheaded. Sainte-Barbe, preserve these
women of Oran until they reach the threshold of old age,
and then replace them by many exactly identical women
who will also walk under the trees of the old Prefecture.
Prevent, O Sainte-Barbe, prevent the women of Oran from
thinking of Algiers and of Paris, and teach them the truth
of this world, which is that it has none. You who are like
a quayside where one dreamily smokes a cigarette, wait¬
ing for the blast of a whistle that will speed one again to
the landscapes of the earth, you know that I do not often
feel religious. But if such a mood does come over me, you
know that I have no need of God, and that I can be re¬
ligious only when I want to play at it, because a train is
going to leave and because there will be no tomorrow to
my prayer. Sainte-Barbe, you who are a point in space on
the line from Algiers to Oran, closer to Oran, very close to
Oran, and a pause in the time carrying me to Oran, you
who are both so carnal and so punctual, so earthly and so
cardinal, be for a brief moment an unbeliever’s saint and
an innocent’s counselor.

Oran. An extravagant town, where shoe shops display
ghastly models on plaster casts of tortured feet, where
“practical jokes and tricks” lie side by side in shop windows
with tricolor wallets, where you can still find extraordinary
cafes, their grease-proof counters scattered with the feet
and wings of dead flies, where you are served in chipped
glasses. Happy cafes of a happy country where a small
cup of coffee costs twelve sous and a large one eighteen.
158

April 1939

-

February 1942

In an antique shop, a vulgar Virgin Mary carved in wood
smiles indecently, bearing the name of a famous unknown
artist. But underneath it, to dispel any ignorance, the
owners have placed a card: “Wooden virgin by Maya.” The
photographers’ shops display astonishing faces, from the
Oranais sailor leaning with one elbow on a console table
to the oddly clad young lady of marriageable age against a
sylvan background, and including the authentic product
of Oran, the handsome young man with plastered-down
hair and a mouth like an air-raid trench.
Easy and unrivaled city, with its parade of imperfect
but touching young girls, their faces free both of make-up
and of feigned emotions, whose attempts at coquetry are
so charmingly unsuccessful.
Apollo’s cafe, Melos’s Place, little bars, tramways in the
form

of

gondolas,

eighteenth-century pastels

leaning

against a mechanical donkey in plush velvet, eau de
Provence for preparing green olives, patriotically colored
displays of flowers in the florists’ windows—Oran, the
Chicago of our absurd Europe.
Santa Cruz hewn out of the rock, the mountains, the
flat sea, the sun, and the violent wind, the great cranes,
the immense flights of stairs going up the City Rock, the
streetcars, bridges, and warehouses—one feels, neverthe¬
less, that there is a kind of greatness in all this.

I

have

often

heard people from

Oran

complain:

“There’s no interesting milieu.” But, by heaven, you
wouldn’t want it if there were! Certain forms of greatness
do not inspire elevating thoughts. They are sterile by their
i59

NOTEBOOK III

very nature, and keep man face to face with his own condi¬
tion. Leave circles of society alone and go down into the
street. (But Oran is not made for the people of Oran.)

Oran. Canastel, and the motionless sea at the foot of
the red cliffs. Two immense and sleepy headlands stand¬
ing out of the clear water. The faint noise of a motorboat coming toward us. And, advancing imperceptibly on
the dazzling sea, a coast-guard vessel bathed in radiant
light. An overfullness of beauty and indifference—the call
of inhuman and glittering forces. On the plateau, ex¬
quisitely colored quivering saffron.

The bay of Mers-el-Kebir and the path under the almond
trees in full bloom. The perfect shape of the bay—its
average width—the water like a sheet of blue metal. In¬
difference.
Id. above the tile factory. Red and blue. Transparency
of things. Indifference.

NOVEMBER

When Borgia was elected Pope, a fire of tow was lit three
times before him to recall to this master of the world that
the world’s glory is a fleeting thing.
He dispensed justice “admirably” (Burchard 4).
4 The numerous references to the Italian Renaissance which now fol¬
low are, for the most part, taken from the Journal of Jean Burchard,
which, as Camus obligingly tells us, was published by Turmel in 1933
(P-135).

160

April 1939

—

February 1942

Innocent VIII, whom a Jewish medium gave woman’s
milk to drink, mingled with human blood.
Ferdinand of Naples, embalming the bodies of his
tortured victims and using them “to decorate his apart¬
ments.”
Alexander and Lucrezia Borgia, who protected the Jews
on every occasion. Alexander divided the world between
Spaniards and Portuguese by drawing a straight line from
the Azores to the South Pole. The world is worth no
more than that.

According to Burchard
After the death of his son, the Duke of Gandia, Alexan¬
der VI remained stupefied by frenzied suffering.

He

looked with staring eyes at the bloodstained and motionless
corpse—and then shut himself in his room, where he was
heard sobbing.
Took no food or drink from Thursday to Saturday, and
did not sleep until Sunday.
Cesare Borgia. Strong, suffered from “health accidents,”
abscesses which kept him in bed, “gloomy forebodings
mingled with his youthful glory.” Interspersed his work
with violent pleasures. Slept by day, worked by night.
“Aut Caesar, aut nihil.”

NOVEMBER

29 5

Novel. He has achieved and will achieve nothing because
he tries to do too many different things, because he can5 Both Meursault and Mersault sleep a lot.

NOTEBOOK III

not choose between his various duties,

and because

one can only create a work of art if. . . .
He can be completely explained by his habits, of which
the most deadly is to stay in bed. He can’t do anything
about it. And what he wants to become, what he admires
and dreams about, is exactly the opposite. He longs
for a work bom of the very opposite of habit—the resolu¬
tions that he takes.

NOVEMBER 29

It is legitimate to glory in the diversity and quantity of
experience—and especially in the life of the senses and
the surrender to passionate impulses—only if one is com¬
pletely disinterested in the object of one’s desires.
There is also the leap into material things—and many
men who glory in the senses do so only because they are
slaves to them. Here, too, they embrace the vulture which
is eating them away.
Hence the absolute necessity to have gone through the
experience of chastity, for example, and to have been
ruthless with oneself. Before any deliberately thoughtout enterprise aimed at glorifying the world of immediate
experience, a month’s asceticism in everything.
Sexual chastity.
Mental chastity—prevent your desires from straying,
your thoughts from wandering.
One single, unchanging subject for meditation. Reject
everything else.
Work continuously, at a definite time, with no falling
off, etc., etc. (Moral training and asceticism too.)
162

April 1939 - February 1942. .

A single moment of weakness and everything col¬
lapses, both practice and theory.

At Ferrara, the palace of Schifanoia, built by Alberto
d’Este, to “avoid boredom.”
The Este.
Hippolytus, who had his brother Giulio’s eyes torn out
because the woman he loved said that she “preferred
Giulio’s eyes to Hippolytus’s body.”
Giulio and Fernando try to murder Hippolytus and Al¬
fonso d’Este. Their plot is discovered, they are sentenced
to death, but sadistically pardoned on the scaffold. Thirtyfive years in a dungeon for Fernando, who died there,
and fifty-four for Giulio, who came out mad.
Alfonso d’Este had a statue of Giulio II by Michelangelo
melted down and made into a cannon.
Cf. Gonzague True: 6 “They built only for themselves,
and because they refused to efface their own personality in
the presence of a work of art, humbly ordering it in the
direction of the mysterious labor of the universe (?), and
nourishing it with eternal values ( ? ), they condemned it
to disappear the moment it was born. Their own lives
left behind them only haughty and accursed names.”
Quite.

Bibliography for the Borgias.
Louis deVillefosse (Machiavel etnous, 1937).
6 Cf. Rome et les Borgia (Grasset, 1939). The question marks are
Camus’s own, and seem to indicate a certain reluctance to accept so
moral a standpoint.

NOTEBOOK

III

Rafael Sabatini (Cesar Borgia, 1937).
Fred Berence (Lucrece Borgia, ’37).
Gab. Brunet (Ombres vivantes, ’36 ).
L. Collinson-Morley (Histoire des Borgia).
Charles Benoist (Machiavel).
The Journal of Jean Burchard (edited by Turmel,
i933)> etc-> etc-

1940
Evenings on the terrace of the Deux Merueilles. The
palpitation of the sea that is sensed in the hollow
of the night. The quivering olive trees and the smell of
smoke rising from the earth.
The rocks in the sea covered with white seagulls. With
their gray mass, lit up by the whiteness of the birds’
wings, they look like luminous floating cemeteries.

Novel.7
This story, begun on a blue, burning hot beach, in the
sunburned bodies of two young creatures—swimming,
games in the sun and water—summer evenings on the
roads leading to the beaches, with the scent of fruit and
smoke in the empty shadows—the body relaxing in light
clothes. The attraction between two beings, and the secret,
tender bliss in a heart of seventeen.
—Ended up in Paris, with the cold or the gray sky, the
7 At first sight, it would appear that Camus is talking either about La
Mort Heureuse or about The Stranger. However, it would be unwise to see
the whole passage as autobiographical, since Camus was twenty-seven in
1940, not twenty-four.

164

April iQ3Q - February 1942 .

pigeons among the black stones of the Palais Royal, the
city and its lights, rapid kisses, tiring and uneasy ten¬
derness, wisdom and desire rising in the heart of a man
of twenty-four—the “let’s stay friends.”
Id. This other story, begun on a cold and stormy night,
lying with my back on the earth under a sky crossed by
stars and clouds:
—continued on the hills around Algiers or in front of
the wide and mysterious port.
—Poverty-stricken and magnificent Kasbah, the ceme¬
tery of El Kettar emptying out all its tombstones toward
the sea, warm soft lips among the promegranate flowers,
and a tomb—trees, hills, the climb to the pure and driedout Bouzareah, and, turning back to the sea, the taste of
lips and our eyes full of sunlight.
It begins not in love but in the desire to live. But is love
so far off when, after climbing up through the wind to
the great square house above the sea, two bodies cling
close together, while from the far horizon the soft breath¬
ing of the sea rises to this room cut off from the rest of
the world? The marvel of night, when the hope of love is
one with the rain, the sky, and the earth’s silences.
Exact balance of two beings joined together by their bodies,
and made alike by a common indifference to everything
which is not this moment in the world.
This other moment which is like a dance, she in a pe¬
riod dress and he in a dancer’s costume.

The first almond trees in blossom along the road by
the sea. One night has been enough for them to be cov165

NOTEBOOK III

ered with this fragile snow that we cannot imagine stand¬
ing up to the cold and the rain which drenches all their
petals.

In the streetcar.
The old lady with a face like a procuress, but wearing a
cross on her nonexistent bosom.
“Honest women know how to behave. Not like the ones
who do well out of war. Their husbands gone, they get
the allowance, and then they have another man. Why,
one of them said to me: £He can die at the front for all I
care. He was a nasty devil before he went into the army.
The war’s not going to change that.’ It was no good my
saying: ‘Now that he’s at the front, you must learn to for¬
give.’ No good at all. But, you know, when they’re bad
they’re like that. It’s in their blood, you know, in their
blood.”

FEBRUARY

Oran. From a long way off, as soon as you get to Valmy,
you can see the mountain of Santa Cruz, with the deep
gash in the earth and the cathedral itself like a stone
finger pointing up into the blue sky.
The thing to do, at the corner of the boulevard Gallieni,
is to have your shoes cleaned at ten in the morning. A gen¬
tle breeze blows, the sun shines, men and women hurry
by, and perched on your high stool, you feel an extraordi¬
nary happiness at the sight of the shoeshiners at work.
Everything is finished, worked out, minutely organized
right down to the last detail. There is a moment when
166

April 1939

-

February 1942.

the whole astonishing operation seems to be finished, when
you see them using the soft brushes and can gaze on the
final gleam of the shoes. But no. The same fanatically
enthusiastic hand spreads polish once again over the shin¬
ing surface, dulls it, rubs it, sends the polish down into the
very depths of the hide, and brushes it until the double
and truly final shine springs out from the heart of the
leather.

The maison du colon, which expresses at one and the
same time a metaphysical, a moral, and an aesthetic atti¬
tude. An elaborate edifice crowned by an Egyptian pschent.
A curious mosaic, for some reason in Byzantine style,
shows charming nurses, sandals on their feet, carrying
cushions piled high with grapes, and a whole procession of
natives, clad in antique style, hurrying toward an ele¬
gant settler wearing a topee and a bow tie.

The rue d’Austerlitz and its age-old Jews. Every action
is a miniature drama.

Tailors like Marie-Christine are “not only fashionable but
always up to date.” Laxatives are “only a temporary
remedy. The roots of constipation remain untouched.” 8

From the top of the coast road, the cliffs are so thick
that the landscape becomes unreal through its very quali8 Meursault also likes to cut out advertisements for laxatives (cf. The
Stranger, p. 25). The phrase “not only fashionable but always up to date”
is in English in the text.
167

NOTEBOOK III

ties. Man is an outlaw there, so much so that all this
beauty seems to come from another world.

The tiny Place de la Perle, where the children play at
two in the afternoon. Mosque, minarets, benches, a small
piece of sky. The chattering of a Spanish radio. What I
like here is not this particular hour, but another which I
feel exists, when the summer sky loses its heat, the little
square softens in the evening, and soldiers and women
wander around while the scent of aniseed draws the men
into the bars.

Novel about women: One theme. Sincerity.

“Oh my soul, do not aspire to immortal life, but ex¬
haust the limits of the possible.” Pindar, Pythian iii.9

Characters.1
The old man and his dog. Eight years of hatred.
The other man, and his verbal mannerism: “He was
charming and, moreover, very pleasant.”
“A deafening noise and, moreover, one that made you
jump.”
“It’s eternal and, moreover, human.”
A.T.R.
9 The quotation from Pindar was placed at the beginning of The Myth
of Sisyphus. It is also, it may be noted, used by Paul Valery to introduce
Le Cimetiere Marin.
1 These two characters both figure in The Stranger, as Salamano and
Raymond’s friend Masson, respectively. Mme Camus tells me that she
does not know what A.T.R. refers to.

168

April iQ39 — February 1942,

.

A morning spent with bare bodies and sunlight. A
shower, then light and heat.

FEBRUARY

This Florentine countenance which tells of its love and
tormented past. How much of its expression is play¬
acting? And also, how much is real emotion, so great
and overwhelming at certain moments, so slight at others?
Maria—like the soul of Paris. This morning spent in
the sun, and the town full of lights—her eyes like the
town, and this easy life. “O dolore dei tuoi martiri, o diletto
del tuo amove”
“It is not love that she represents, but a chance for
life—everything that is not exile, everything that says
‘yes’ to life. And never was a chance for life given so
touching a face. Who can be sure that he is in love? But
everyone can recognize emotion. This song, this face, this
deep and supple voice, this free and expertly planned life,
is all I hope for or expect. And if I give up, these visions
nevertheless remain as so many promises of freedom,
and as this image of myself from which I cannot break
loose.”

MARCH2

What does this sudden awakening mean, in this dark room,
with the sounds of a city that has suddenly become foreign
to me? And everything is foreign to me, everything, with2 The translation of etranger by “foreign” is unavoidable but mislead¬
ing. In French, the reference to the title and atmosphere of The Stranger
—and to the opening pages of The Myth of Sisyphus—is obvious.
169

NOTEBOOK III

out a single person who belongs to me, with no hiding
place to heal this wound. What am I doing here, what is
the point of these smiles and gestures? My home is
neither here nor elsewhere. And the world has become
merely an unknown landscape where my heart can lean
on nothing. Foreign—who can know what this word
means?

Foreign, admit that I find everything strange and foreign.
Now that everything is clear-cut, wait and spare noth¬
ing. At least, work in such a way as to achieve both si¬
lence and literary creation. Everything else, everything,
whatever may happen, is unimportant.

Evening: Events. Characters. Personal reactions.

Trouville. A plateau, covered with asphodels, facing
the sea. Little villas with green or white gates, some
buried under tamarisks, a few others bare and surrounded
by stones. A slight complaint rises from the sea. But
everything, the sun, the slight breeze, the whiteness of
the asphodels, the already hard blue of the sky, brings to
mind the summer, the gilded youth of its daughters and
sunburned sons, passions coming to life, long hours in the
sun, and the sudden softness of the evenings. What other
meaning can we find to our days but this, and the lesson
we draw from this plateau: a birth, a death, and, be¬
tween the two, beauty and melancholy?
170

April 1939 — February 1942

R. C. The kind of man who gives the impression that
he hides to go to the lavatory. But then, you find that they
have developed a theory about it, and that man’s great¬
ness lies in being aware of what humbles him. And, im¬
mediately, it is we who feel disgusted.

S. who wants to write the diary of a novel which re¬
mained unwritten by its author.

More and more,3 when faced with the world of men,
the only reaction is one of individualism. Man alone is an
end unto himself. Everything you try to do for the com¬
mon good ends in failure. Even if you like to try it from
time to time, decency demands that you do so with the
required amount of scorn. Withdraw into yourself com¬
pletely, and play your own game (Idiotic).

The man who receives a letter from his mistress’s hus¬
band. In it, the husband proclaims his love, and confesses
that, before giving way completely to his anger, he would
like to speak directly to his rival. What the lover is afraid
of is anger. Consequently, he is full of admiration for the
husband’s generous impulse. And the more afraid he is,
the more he says this. He insists. This gives him the best
part to play. He will give up everything, simply out of
gratitude for this generous impulse, he will sacrifice him¬
self—without a murmur—since he is unworthy compared
3 The word “idiot” was written across this remark in red pencil by
Camus himself.

NOTEBOOK

III

to the husband. Moreover, he partly believes all this. But
we must also take into account his fear of being hit.

A dog in the house. S. makes it welcome, in spite of his
mother. The dog steals two anchovies. The mother chases
him, and the dog runs away, terrified, while S. says: “Don’t
run away, don’t be frightened.”
Afterwards, S.: “Poor dog, he believed in heaven.”
His mother: “Yes, I’ve believed in heavens too, but I’ve
never seen them in my lifetime.”
S.: “Yes, but he was there already.”

Journey down to the sea from above Mers-el-Kebir. The
line of hills and cliffs surrounding the bay. My heart
closed to all this.

Marseilles. The fair: “Life? Nothingness? Illusions?
But truth none the less?” Big drum. Boom, boom, come
into Nothingness.
At the dawn of modern times: All is fulfilled? 4 Right
—then let us start to live.

PARIS.

MARCH

194O

What is hateful in Paris: tenderness, feelings, a hideous
sentimentality that sees everything beautiful as pretty and
4 Perhaps a reference to John: xix: 30, except that the wording in the
most frequently used French Bible, the Segond, is: “Tout est accompli,”
and Camus writes: “Tout est consomme.” If it is a Biblical quotation,
then it is yet another indication of the Nietzschean climate of Camus’s
early thought.

17 2

April 1939 - February 1942

everything pretty as beautiful. The tenderness and de¬
spair that accompany the murky skies, the shining roofs
and endless rain.
What is inspiring: the terrible loneliness. As a remedy to
life in society, I would suggest the big city. Nowadays, it
is the only desert within our means. Here, the body has
lost its magic. It is covered over, and hidden under shape¬
less skins. The only thing left is the soul, the soul with all
its sloppy overflow of drunken sentimentality, its whining
emotions and everything else. But the soul also offers us
one source of greatness: silent solitude. When you look at
Paris from the Butte Montmartre, seeing it like a mon¬
strous cloud of steam beneath the rain, a gray and shape¬
less swelling on the surface of the earth, and then turn
to look at the Calvary of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre, you
can feel the kinship between a country, an art, and a reli¬
gion. Every line of these stones, and every one of these
scourged or crucified bodies is quivering with the same
wanton and defiled emotion as the town itself, and is
pouring it into men’s hearts.
But, on the other hand, the soul is never right, and here
less than elsewhere. For the most splendid expressions
which it has given to this soul-obsessed religion have been
hewn out of stone in imitation of bodily forms. And if this
god touches you, it is because his face is that of a man.
It is a strange limitation of the human condition that it
should be unable to escape from humanity, and that it
should have to clothe in bodies those of its symbols which
try to deny the body. They do deny it, but it gives them
their titles to greatness. Only the body is generous. And
we feel that this Roman legionary is alive because of his
*73

NOTEBOOK III

extraordinary nose or hunched back, this Pilate because of
the expression of ostentatious boredom that stone has
preserved for him over the centuries.
From this point of view, Christianity has understood.
And if it has made so deep an impact on us, it is by its God
who was made man. But its truth and greatness come to
an end on the cross, at the moment when this man cries
out that he has been forsaken. If we tear out the last pages
of the New Testament, then what we see set forth is a
religion of loneliness and grandeur. Certainly, its bitter¬
ness makes it unbearable. But that is its truth, and the
lie about everything else.
Hence the fact that being able to live alone in one
room in Paris for a year teaches a man more than a hun¬
dred literary salons and forty years’ experience of “Parisian
life.” It is a hard, terrible, and sometimes agonizing ex¬
perience, and always on the verge of madness. But, by
being close to such a fate, a man’s quality must either
become hardened and tempered—or perish. And if it
perishes, then it is because it was not strong enough to live.

Eisenstein 5 6 and Mexican death festivals.
Ghoulish masks to amuse the children, sugar skulls that
they nibble at with delight. The children play with death,
5 An indication of Camus’s attitude toward Christianity which was al¬
ready partly expressed in a leading article in Soir-Republicain, where he
wrote, on January i, 1940: “There was a night in the history of humanity
when a man weighed down with all his destiny looked at his sleeping com¬
panions and, alone in a silent world, declared that no one must sleep, but
that all must watch to the end of time. We are still living in times like
these.”
6 Camus had probably been to see Time in the Sun (Qut* viva Mexico).

174

April 1939 — February 1942

finding it funny, finding it sweet and sugary. Likewise the
“little dead ones.” Everything leads up to “Our friend
Death.”

Paris
The woman from the floor above has killed herself by
jumping into the courtyard of the hotel. She was thirtyone, said one of the tenants. Old enough to live, and, since
she had lived a little, to die. The shadow of the drama still
fingers on in the hotel. She sometimes used to come
down and ask the owner’s wife to let her stay for supper.
She suddenly used to kiss her—from a need to feel an¬
other person’s warmth and presence. It ended with a
three-inch split in her forehead. Before she died she said:
“At last.”

Paris
The black trees against the gray sky, and the gray
pigeons. The statues on the grass, and this melancholy
elegance.
The pigeons fly away with a sound like clothes flap¬
ping on a fine. You hear them cooing in the green grass.

Paris
The little cafes at five in the morning—their windows
steamed over—boiling hot coffee—the people who work
in the markets and who bring in the food—the little morn¬
ing glass of liqueur, and Beaujolais later on.
La Chapelle. Mists—airy paths and candelabra.
175

NOTEBOOK III

Leger7 Intelligence—and this metaphysical painting
which rethinks matter. Odd: as soon as one starts to re¬
think matter, the only thing that turns out to be perma¬
nent is what made it look as it did: color.

The man in a restaurant who hears a woman calling
him up and giving his name and telephone number. He
replies from the other end. She talks to him as if he were
there (about his family, with precise details and so on).
He doesn’t understand. That’s how things are.

No future.
“The works here mentioned by J. M. have been burned.
But he could, naturally, have just as easily published
them, and they would have contained only contradictions
or matters of no concern, which amounts to the same
thing.” S. L.

To give punctuation and regularity of breathing, note
down all the events of my life: “Today, I am twentyseven,” and so on.

Have a system of notes by a commentator—or a preface
which sums up.
7 This note recurs in The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 99, where Camus re¬
marks that “the most intellectual kind of painting, the one that tries to re¬
duce reality to its essential elements, is ultimately but a visual delight. All
it has kept of the world is its color.”
176

April 1939

—

February 1942

The little Spanish soldier in the restaurant. Not a- word
of French, and this desire for human warmth when he
talks to me. A peasant from Estremadura, fought on the
Republican side, was in Argeles concentration camp,
joined the French Army. When he says the word “Spain,”
the whole sky of his native country leaps into his
eyes. Has a week’s leave. Has come to Paris, which has
reduced him to pulp in a few hours. Wandering in the
metro, not speaking a word of French, a foreigner, foreign
to everything that is not his own country, his joy would be
to find the friends from his own regiment again. So that
even if he is to die under low clouds, in thick mud, it will
at least be by the side of men from his own country.

APRIL

At The Hague. The man who lives in a boardinghouse
without knowing that it is a brothel. Never anyone in the
dining room. He comes down in his dressing gown. Enter
a gentleman in morning coat and top hat. He is stiff,
punctilious, and black. He asks for a very good meal. The
dove coos in the dining-room cage. Then the man de¬
parts, leaving the price of the meal on the table. Sudden
silence. The waiter comes back and goes into a panic. The
Negro has taken the dove away under his opera hat.

Novel ( Part II—consequences ).
The man (J. C.) has picked such and such a day on
which to die—fairly soon. His immediate and astonishing
superiority over all social and other forces.
177

NOTEBOOK III

The little soldier in the metro. About forty. Tries to ar¬
range a meeting with a fairly young girl. “Perhaps I might
drop in one day if I came that way.” “Oh no, my brother
would be cross.” “Oh, yes, of course, naturally, you’re quite
right. But could I write to you?” “No, I’d rather meet you.”
This direct acceptance of his roundabout suggestion over¬
whelms him. “Yes, right, very good. Yes, you’re quite right,
that’s much better. Well now, let’s think. Tomorrow’s Mon¬
day. Yes, that’s right, Monday. Now, about what time? I
have to think about it, you see, because in this kind of job.
. . . Well now, yes, Monday’s tomorrow. Well, what about
five o’clock?”
She (still direct): “You couldn’t come after dinner?”
He (still left behind): “Yes, yes, that’ll be fine, very
good.”
She: “Eight o’clock.”
He: “Yes, yes, eight o’clock. At the Terrace, if that’s all
right.”
She: “Yes.”
He stops talking. But suddenly you can feel him starting
to panic but not admitting it. He needs to make sure that
the chance of an adventure that has become so easy
and so precious does not escape. “And if something went
wrong, could I write to you?” “No, I’d rather you didn’t.”
“Well, we could set another time, in case you couldn’t
come on Monday.” “Yes, Thursday at the same place.” This
reassures him, but he is suddenly afraid that this new
arrangement will take some importance from tomorrow’s.
“But, in any case, eight o’clock tomorrow, without fail. It’s
only in case something should go wrong.” “Yes,” she re¬
plies. She gets off at Concorde and he at Saint-Lazare.
178

April 1939

—

February 1942

An artist who goes to Port-Cros in order to paint. And
everything is so beautiful that he buys a house, puts his
paintings away, and never touches them again.

At Paris-Soir you feel the whole heart of Paris and its
despicable shopgirl values. Mimi’s garret has become a
skyscraper, but her heart is still the same. Rotten with sen¬
timentality, prettiness, self-indulgence, all the sticky ref¬
uges which man uses to defend himself in so harsh a town.

You would not write about loneliness so much if you
knew how to get the most out of it.

“I,” he said, “am an olfactive type. And there is no art
that addresses itself to the sense of smell. Only life.”

Short story. A priest, happy with his lot in a country
parish in Provence. By accident, has to succor a man
sentenced to death just before his execution. Loses his
faith because of it.

Preface to Terracini: 8 “There are many of us who feel
the same nostalgia for this sense of exile. These lands of
8 Probably Enrico Terracini, an Italian diplomat in 1909, the author of
two books published in Algiers by Chariot, Camus’s first publisher: D’un
soir, d’un pays lointain, and Les Miens. The second was translated by
Jacques Heurgon, the writer to whom Camus dedicated the essay Sum¬
mer in Algiers in The Myth of Sisyphus.

179

NOTEBOOK III

Spain and Italy have given their form to so many Euro¬
pean souls that they belong a little to Europe themselves,
to this Europe of the mind that will triumph over all those
welded together by force of arms. It is here, perhaps, that
the meaning of these pages is to be found. For this rea¬
son, they were already modem two hundred years ago.
They remain so today. And we must not lose hope that
their youth will still be alive on the day when flowers grow
again out of the ruins.”

Second series. For Don Juan.9 See Larousse: the
Franciscan monks killed him and pretended that he had
been struck dead by the Commander. Last act. Speeches
of the Franciscans to the people: “Don Juan has been con¬
verted,” etc. “Glory to Don Juan.”
Second to last act: Don Juan challenges the Com¬
mander, who does not turn up. The bitterness of being
right.

Second series. For Don Juan.
(Don Juan and the Franciscan father go into Don
Juan’s entrance hall, and Don Juan accompanies the
monk to the door.)
Opening.
The Franciscan: “So, Don Juan, you believe in nothing?”
Don Juan: “No, Father, I believe in three things.”
9 Don Juan fascinated Camus during his whole life, and is said to have
been the hero of a play which Camus was preparing when he was killed.
The phrase about the bitterness of being right occurs in The Myth of
Sisyphus, p. 76, where Don Juan is studied as one of the “absurd men.”

180

April 1939

—

February 1942

The Franciscan: “And may one know what these are?”
Don Juan:
women.”

“I believe in courage, intelligence, and

The Franciscan: “Then we must give up all hope for
you.”
Don Juan: “Yes, if you must pity a man who is happy.
Good-bye, Father.”
The Franciscan (at the door): “I shall pray for you, Don
Juan.”
Don Juan: “Thank you, Father. I like to look on prayer
as a form of courage.”
The Franciscan (gently): “No, Don Juan, it is simply a
matter of two feelings that you insist on misunderstand¬
ing : charity and love.”
Don Juan: “I know only tenderness and generosity,
which are the manly forms of these female virtues. But
farewell, Father.”
The Franciscan: “Farewell.”

MAY

The Stranger is finished.

What an admirable play Le Misanthrope is, with its
crude contrasts and its typed characters.1
Alceste and Philinte
Celimene and Eliante
The monotony of Alceste—the absurd consistency of a
character pushed to its logical conclusion—which is
1 The remark about Le Misanthrope recurs in The Myth of Sisyphus,
p. 82, as an illustration of the absurd destiny of the actor.

l8l

NOTEBOOK III

the whole theme of the play. And the line of poetry, the
“bad line,” with about as little scansion in it as the mo¬
notony of the main character.

The exodus from Paris.
Clermont. The lunatic asylum and its curious clock. The
dirt of the five-o’clock dawns. The blind patients—the
madman in the block who screams all day—this earth
on a small scale. The whole body turned in the direction
of two poles, the sea or Paris. It is at Clermont that one
can get to know Paris.

SEPTEMBER

Finished the first part of The Absurd.
The man who razes his house to the ground, burns his
fields, and covers them with salt so as not to surrender
them.

Little man from the Banque de France. Transferred to
Clermont, tries to keep the same habits. Almost succeeds.
But is just very slightly out of tune.

OCTOBER

1940.

LYONS

Saint Thomas (himself one of Frederic’s subjects)
acknowledges that subjects have the right to revolt. Cf.
Baumann, Politique de Saint Thomas, p. 136.
182

April 1939 ~ February 1942

The last of the Carraras, a prisoner in a Padua emptied
by the plague and besieged by the Venetians, strode
through all the rooms of his palace shouting at the top of
his voice: he was calling on the devil and asking him for
death.2
At Siena, a condottiere saves the city. He asks for
everything. The people argue thus: “Nothing will ever re¬
ward him sufficiently, not even absolute power. Let us kill
him. Afterwards, we will worship him.” Which they did.
Gian-Paulo Baglioni, of whom Machiavelli says that he
missed the chance of rendering himself immortal when he
missed that of killing Pope Julius II.
Burchard: “Villainy, impiety, military talent, and intel¬
lectual culture could all be found in J. Malatesta” (died
1417).
Filippo-Maria Visconti, condottiere of Milan, forbade
people to talk about death in his presence and asked that
his favorites be taken out of his sight when they were
dying. And yet Burchard tells us: “He died with dignity
and nobility.”
At Dante’s tomb, at Ravenna, the people took the candles
from the holy altar to honor him:

“Thou art more

worthy than the other, the one they crucified.”

Short story: Follow the Rhone and Saone along their
course, see the first leap ahead, the other hesitate but
finally join up again and lose itself in its headlong rush.
One person goes down each of them: parallel.
2 cf. The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 90. Camus there continues:
means of surmounting it.”

“It was a

NOTEBOOK III

Short story: Story of Y.

Ternay. Cold, forsaken little village overhanging the
Rhone. A gray sky, and a wind as cold as a shantung dress.
The uplands left fallow. A few black furrows with crows
flying above them. A little cemetery open to the heavens:
they were all good husbands and fathers. They all leave
eternal regrets.

The old church with a copy of a painting by Boucher.
The woman who looks after the chairs: she was so afraid
when the German bombers came. The village had already
had thirty men killed in the last war. Now, there are only
eighteen prisoners, but it’s hard all the same. Two young
people are going to be married soon. The schoolmistress is
a refugee from Alsace, who has had no news from her
parents. “Do you think it’s going to end soon?” The chairattendant’s son was killed in ’14, she went to get him when
he was wounded, and was near the retreat from the
Marne. She brought him back home, where he died. “I
shall never forget what I saw.”
Outside, the same sky and the same cold. The plowed
fields are just warm, and down below the river is flat and
shiny, with the occasional ripple. A little farther on, the
waiting room of a little station at Serresin. Wartime light¬
ing—a shadow on the notice inviting people to lead a
happy life at Bandol. The stove has gone out, and the figure
eights made by the water sprinkled there by the street
cleaners look like tracings on the cold flagstones. An hour
184

April 1939

—

February 1942

to wait with the trains rumbling in the distance and the
evening wind in the valley. So cut off and so near. Here,
you actually touch your liberty and feel how atrocious it
is. Linked, linked forever to this world where the flowers
and the wind will never make us forgive all the rest.

DECEMBER

(Egypt)
The Greeks—the Etruscans—Rome and its decadence—
the Alexandrians and the Christians—The Holy Roman
Empire and the audacity of its thought—Provence and
the

Provencal

schisms—the

Italian

Renaissance—the

Elizabethan period—Spain—from Goethe to Nietzsche
—Russia.
India, China, Japan.
Mexico—the United States.
Styles of architecture—from the Doric column to the
concrete arch through Gothic and Baroque.
History

Philosophy

Art

Religion.

P.S.M.

DECEMBER

The Greeks. History—Literature—Art—Philosophy.

Consciously or not, women always make use of this feel¬
ing for honor and respect for promises which is so in¬
tense among men.
185

NOTEBOOK III

Cain’s sons 3—as they were. The father watches Abel’s
murder and does nothing about it. But Cain grows in suffer¬
ing and in strength. The father offers forgiveness, which
Cain refuses. “I no longer want to see your face.”
( Or else a poem—id. Judah.)

ORAN.

JANUARY

I94I

Story of P.4 The little old man who throws scraps of paper
down from the balcony to attract the cats. Then spits on
them. When he hits one, the old man laughs.

There is nowhere that the people of Oran have not dis¬
figured by some hideous piece of building that ought by
rights to destroy any landscape. A town which turns its
back on the sea and then turns around on itself like a
snail. You wander through this labyrinth, looking for the
sea as for Ariadne’s thread. But you turn around and
around in these awkward and ugly streets. Finally the
Oranais are devoured by the Minotaur: boredom.
But it is all in vain. One of the most powerful lands in
the world bursts open the clumsy decor with which men
have tried to cover it, and makes its violent cries heard be¬
tween every house and over all the rooftops. And the life
which can be lived above the boredom in Oran is like this
3 Surely Camus means Adam’s. The phrase “I no longer want to see
your face” may be Camus’s version of Genesis: iv: 14.
4 Recurs in Tarrou’s notebooks in The Plague.
Most of these remarks were incorporated into Camus’s essay on Oran.
186

April 1939

-

February 1942

land. Oran proves that there is something stronger in
men than their works.
You cannot know what stone is if you have never been
to Oran. In one of the dustiest cities in the world, the pebble
and the stone are king. Elsewhere, Arab cemeteries have
their accustomed charm. Here, above the ravine of Raz el
Ain, facing the sea, flattened against the blue sky, fields
of chalky, crumbling stone whose whiteness blinds. In the
midst of these bones of the earth, the occasional red
geranium grows, looking like new blood and life.

Books are written about Florence and Athens. These
towns have formed so many European minds that there
must be a meaning to be found in them. They can calm
or excite, and satisfy a certain hunger of the soul which
feeds on memories. But no one would have the idea of
writing about a town where there is nothing to attract the
mind, where ugliness has played an overwhelming role,
and where the past is reduced to nothing. And yet there
is sometimes a temptation to do so.
What makes us grow fond of and interested in what
has nothing to offer us? What attracts us about this empti¬
ness, this ugliness, and this boredom under a magnificent
and implacable sky? My reply is: human beings. There is
a certain race of men for whom human beings, wherever
they are beautiful, offer a country with a thousand capi¬
tals. Oran is a country like this.
Cafe. Lobsters, sticks of meat, snails served with a sauce
that takes the roof off your mouth. You then cool it with a
187

NOTEBOOK III

sweet, sickly muscat wine. Things like that aren’t just in¬
vented. At the side, a blind man is singing flamenco.

The hills above Mers-el-Kebir as a perfect landscape.

Servitude et Grandeur militaires. An admirable book,
that one must reread as a man.
“Montecuculli, who withdrew from war after Turenne
had been killed, not deigning to match himself against
an ordinary player.”
Honor is “a wholly human virtue, which one can con¬
sider as born of death, with no celestial palm promised
after death. It is the virtue of life.”

Oran. The ravine of Noiseux: a long path between two
dry and dusty slopes. The earth cracks under the sun.
The lentisks are the color of stone. The sky above regu¬
larly pours down its supply of heat and fire. Little by little,
the lentisks start to grow and become green. At first, the
vegetation swells almost imperceptibly, then surprisingly
fast. At the end of a very long road, the lentisks gradually
turn into oak trees, everything becomes bigger and softer
almost at the same moment. Then suddenly, coming
around a corner, you see a field of almond trees in full
blossom: it is like a drink of cool water for the eyes. A little
valley like a lost paradise.
The road along the side of the hill, looking over the sea.
Still usable, but abandoned. Now it is covered with
188

April 1939

-

February 1942

flowers. Daisies and buttercups make it into a road of
yellow and white.

FEBRUARY

21,

I94I

Finished Sisyphus. The three absurds are now complete.5
Beginnings of liberty.

march

15, 1941

In the train: “You knew Camps, didn't you?”
“Camps? Tall, thin chap with a black mustache?”
“Yes, he was switchman at Bel-Abbes.”
“Yes, of course.”
“He’s dead.”
“Oh? What of?”
“Chest.”
'"Well, he didn’t look like that.”
“Yes, but he went in for music, with the male-voice
choir. Always blowing away, killed him in the end.”
“Well, yes, of course. When you’re ill you’ve got to look
after yourself. Mustn’t go blowing into a cornet.”
5 The other two absurds are, one assumes, Caligula and The Stranger,
since The Misunderstanding, classed by some critics as an “absurd work”
had not yet been completed. In the cahier, two pages were left blank after
this entry in order to emphasize the idea of “beginnings of liberty.” Signifi¬
cantly enough, the next entry is a conversation later used in The Plague,
P- 23.
This entry is to be compared to a later one, on March 7, 1951, when
Camus wrote: “Completed the first version of The Rebel. This book brings
to an end the first two cycles. 37 years old. And now, can creation be
free?” In both cases, he seems to have looked upon the completion of a
particular “cycle” of works almost as a duty, and to have looked forward
to a future period when he no longer felt obliged to write a particular type
of book.

NOTEBOOK III

The woman who looked as if she had been constipated
for three years: “Oh, these Arabs, they still make their
girls cover their faces. Oh, they’re not civilized yet.”
Little by little, she lets us see what her idea of civiliza¬
tion is: a husband earning 1200 francs a month, a tworoom apartment, kitchen and bath, the movies every
Sunday, and furniture from the Galeries Barbes for week¬
days.

The Absurd and Power—develop (cf. Hitler).

march

18, 1941

In spring, the hills around Algiers are overflowing with
flowers. The little streets run with the scent of honey from
the yellow roses. From the top of enormous black cypress
trees spring out bursts of wistaria and hawthorn blossom,
their branches hidden inside. A gentle wind, and the im¬
mense, flat bay. Strong and simple desire—and the ab¬
surdity of leaving all that.

Santa Cruz and the ascent through the pine trees. As
you go up, the bay grows wider and wider until, at the
very top, your eyes cannot take in its immensity. Indif¬
ference—and I too have my pilgrimages.

march

19

Every year, the young girls come into flower on the
beaches. They have only one season. The following year,
igo

April 1939 — February 1942,

they are replaced by other flower-like faces which, the
previous season, still belonged to little girls. For the man
who looks at them, they are yearly waves whose weight
and splendor break into foam over the yellow sand.

march

20

On Oran. Write an insignificant and absurd biography.
On Cain, the insignificant nonentity who carved the in¬
significant lions in the parade ground.

march

21

The icy water of springtime sea bathing. The dead jelly¬
fish on the beach. Jelly gradually being absorbed into the
sand. The enormous dunes of pale sand. Sea and sand—
these two deserts.

The weekly paper Gringoire suggests that the Spanish
refugee camps be transferred to the extreme south of
Tunisia.

Give up the tyranny of female charm.

Rosanov: “Michelangelo and Leonardo built something.
The revolution will tear out their tongue and slaughter
them at the age of twelve or thirteen as soon as they show
their own personality, their own soul.”

NOTEBOOK III

“Deprived of what is sin, man could not live; he would
live only too well, deprived of what is holy.” Immortality is
an idea without a future.

Sakyamuni6 lived for many years in the desert, motion¬
less, with his eyes turned toward the heavens. The gods
themselves envied this wisdom and destiny of stone. In his
stiff and outstretched hands, the swallows had made their
nests. But one day they flew off, forever. And the man
who had killed in himself all will and desire, all glory and
pain, began to weep. Thus flowers grow out of stones.

“They may torture but shall not subdue me.”

Abbot: “And why not live and act with other men?”
Manfred: “Because my nature was averse to life.”

On what should the heart base its actions? Love? Noth¬
ing is less reliable. We can know what the pains of love are
like, but not love itself. Here, it is deprivation, regret, and
empty hands. I shall never have the courage; I am left
6Cf. The Minotaur, or the Stop in Oran, p. 181 in The Myth of
Sisyphus. The phrase “They may torture but shall not subdue me” is
quoted in English in the French text.
The quotation from Act III, scene I, of Manfred was rather oddly trans¬
lated in the version quoted by Camus—or, it may be, in his own transla¬
tion from the English text. It reads, translated literally back into English:
But why not live, why not act with men?
Because their existence revolts my soul.

19 2

April 1939

—

February 1942.

with anguish. A hell where everything presupposes para¬
dise. It is hell, nevertheless. What I call life and love is
whatever

leaves

me

empty.

Departure,

constraint,

breaches of love or friendship, my heart scattered in
darkness within me, this salt taste of tears and love.

The wind, one of the few clean things in the world.

APRIL.

SECOND

SERIES

The world of tragedy and the spirit of revolt.
—Budejovice (3 acts).7
Plague or adventure (novel).

The liberating plague 8
Happy town. People live according to different systems.
The plague: abolishes all systems. But they die all the
same. Doubly useless. A philosopher is writing an “an¬
thology of insignificant actions.” He will keep a diary of
the plague, from this point of view. (Another diary, this
time from the point of view of the suffering involved. A
classics teacher. He realizes that he had not understood
Thucydides

and

Lucretius

until

then.)

His

favorite

phrase: “In all probability.” “The streetcar company had
only 760 workers available instead of 2,130. In all proba¬
bility, this is due to the plague.”
7 The first version of The Misunderstanding, which, according to this
entry, belongs to the “second cycle” of Camus’s work (that of revolt)
rather than to the first (that of the absurd).
8 These notes for The Plague were first printed in Symposium. The
most insignificant character becomes Grand, the clerk.

193

NOTEBOOK III

A young priest loses his faith at the sight of the black
pus flowing out of the wounds. He takes his holy oil away.
“If I get out alive. . . .” But he does not. Everything must
be paid for.
The bodies are taken away in streetcars. Whole strings
of cars, filled with flowers and dead bodies, drive along the
cliffs. They immediately fire all the conductors: the pas¬
sengers no longer pay.
The agency “Ransdoc-S.V.P.” (Information Please),
-gives all information on the telephone. “Two hundred vic¬
tims today. A charge of two francs will be added to your
telephone bill.” “Impossible, I’m afraid, no more coffins for
four days. Consult the Transport Authority. A charge.
. . .” The agency advertises on the radio. “Do you want to
know the daily, weekly, or monthly number of plague
victims? Phone “Information Please”—five lines: 253-91
to 253-96.”
The town gates are closed. People die cut off from the
world and packed together. One gentleman, however,
keeps to his habits. He continues to dress for dinner. One
by one, the members of his family disappear from the
table. He dies with his meal in front of him, still dressed
for dinner. As the maid says: “Well, there’s something to
be said for it. We don’t need to get him ready for the
funeral.” They stop burying the dead, and throw them
into the sea. But there are too many of them. It’s like a
monstrous foam on the blue sea.
A man loves a woman and reads the signs of the plague
on her face. Never will he love her so much, and never
has he been so disgusted by her. He is divided against
himself. But it is always the body that wins. Disgust pre194

April ig39 — February 1942

vails. He takes her by the hand, drags her from the bed,
into the room, the hall, the corridor of the apartment
house, through two side streets into the main road. He
leaves her near a sewer. “After all, there are other
women.”
At the end, the most insignificant character decides to
speak: “In a way,” he says, “it’s a disaster.”

In the meantime: essay on Oran. The Greeks.

The whole effort of Western art is to provide our
imagination with types. And the history of European
literature seems to be nothing but a series of variations on
the same types and themes. Racinian love is a variation
on a type of love which is perhaps never found in life. It
is a simplification, a style. The West does not recount the
events of everyday life. It is forever feeding its frenzy on
great images. It is in pursuit of them. It wants to be
Manfred or Faust, Don Juan or Narcissus. But it never
quite manages to make itself coincide with these images.
It is always carried away by the fever for unity. In des¬
peration, it has invented the movie hero.

The sand dunes facing the sea. The faint heat of early
dawn, and our bodies stripped bare before the first
waves, still bitter and dark with night. The sea lies heavily
on the body, which is renewed and runs on to the beach
in the first rays of sunlight. Every summer morning on the
beach feels like the first morning of the world, and every
195

NOTEBOOK III

evening like its solemn ending. Evenings on the sea knew
no restraint. The sunbaked days on the sand dunes were
overwhelming. At two in the afternoon, you feel drunk
after walking a hundred yards along the burning sand. In
a moment you feel you will fall and be slain by the sun.
In the morning, the beauty of brown bodies against the
yellow sand. The terrible innocence of games on the beach
and bare bodies in the bounding light.
At night, the dunes turn white under the moon. A
little earlier, the evening brings out all the colors, makes
them deeper and more violent. The sea is ultramarine, the
road red, the color of clotted blood, the beach yellow.
Everything disappears as the green sun goes down, and
the dunes glisten with moonlight. Nights of limitless hap¬
piness under a rain of stars. Is it another body that we
hold in our arms, or the soft warmth of the night? And
then the night of the storm, when flashes of lightning
grew paler as they ran along the dunes, and put an orange
or whitish color on the sand and in our eyes. These are
nuptials that can never be forgotten. To be able to write: I
have been happy for a whole week.

We must pay and dirty ourselves with the meanness of
human suffering. The dirty, repulsive, and slimy universe
of pain.

“A low moan mingled with sobs was all that could be
heard over the sea, until dark-faced night put an end to
everything” (The Persians—battle of Salamis).
196

April 1939

—

February 1942

In 477, to consecrate the Federation of Delos, blocks of
iron were cast into the depths of the sea. The oath of
alliance was to be kept for as long as the metal remained
underwater.
Men have not been sufficiently aware, in politics, of how
some kinds of equality are enemies of liberty. In Greece,
there were free men because there were slaves.

“It is always a great crime to deprive a people of its
liberty on the pretext that it is using it wrongly.”
(Tocqueville.)

The problem in art is a problem of translation. Bad
authors are those who write with reference to an inner
context which the reader cannot know. You need to be
two people when you write. Once again, the first thing is
to learn to govern yourself.

War manuscripts, from prisoners or fighting men. They
have all been close to unspeakable experiences, and have
drawn nothing from them. Six months working in a post
office would have taught them no more. They parrot
the papers. What they have read has made a much deeper
impression than what they have seen with their own eyes.

“Now is the moment when we should prove by our ac¬
tions that man’s dignity is in no way inferior to the great¬
ness of the gods.” (Iphigenia in Tauris.)
i97

NOTEBOOK III

“I want empire and possession. Action is everything,
glory nothing.” (Faust.)

The world is no secret for the wise man. Why does he
need to stray into eternity?

Will is also loneliness.

Liszt on Chopin: “He now used his art only to perform
his own tragedy for himself.”

SEPTEMBER

Everything is decided. It is simple and straightforward.
But then human suffering intervenes, and alters all our
plans.

An overwhelming impulse to cast ourselves away and
reject everything, to become like nothing at all, utterly
destroying what makes us what we are, offering the pres¬
ent only solitude and nothingness, and returning to the
only platform where our destinies can suddenly be re¬
newed. The temptation is a permanent one. Should we
resist or give way? Is it possible to live a monotonous,
repetitive life while perpetually haunted by the thought of
a work to be created, or should we adjust our life to this
work, follow the lightning flash? It is my concern for
beauty, and for liberty, which causes me most anguish.
198

April 1939

-

February 1942

J. Copeau: ‘Tou must look for the playwright, in pe¬
riods of great artistic creation, not in his study but in the
theater, surrounded by his actors. He is both an actor and
a producer.”
We are not in a period of great artistic creation.

On the Greek theater:
G. Meautis: Eschyle et la Trilogie.
L’aristocratie athenienne.
Navarre: Le theatre grec.

In pantomime, strolling players use an incomprehensi¬
ble language (an esperanto of farce) not for what it means
but for the sake of life.
Chancerel is quite right to insist upon the importance
of mime. The body in the theater: the whole contempo¬
rary French theater (except for Barrault) has forgotten it.

Constitution of the Zibaldone in the commedia dell’ arte.
(Louis Moland: Moliere et la Comedie italienne.) (Cur¬
tain of trimmed cloth.)
Moliere, on the point of death, has himself carried to the
theater, not wanting to deprive the actors, musicians,
and stagehands “who had only their wages to live on” of
their share of the takings.
Chancerel’s book—interesting in spite of one defect: it
might discourage readers. Significant also to see a man
preoccupied with the moral influence of the theater neveri99

NOTEBOOK III

theless recommending a list of plays including the Eliza¬
bethans. We have lost the habit of this kind of intelli¬
gence.

Opinion of Nicholas Clement, Louis XIV’s librarian, on
Shakespeare: “This English poet had quite a good imagi¬
nation, and expresses himself with some skill; but these
fine qualities are hidden by the filth which he puts into
his plays.”
The “great century” achieved greatness only by a mutila¬
tion of the body and soul, of which this remark is an il¬
lustration. During this time, the English poet was writing
magnificently, in Richard II:
“Let’s talk of graves, of worms and epitaphs.”
And Webster wrote:
“Man, like to cassia, is proved best being bruis’d.” 9

Masques, amusements for particular occasions. On the
floor, the dancers followed the pattern made by the initials
of the couple whose marriage the feast was held to cele¬
brate.

“Oh! no, there is not the end; the end is death and
madness.” (Kyd: The Spanish Tragedy.) And at thirty

9 Cf. Webster: Duchess of Malfi., Act III, scene V. Translated directly
back into English, Camus’s quotation of it in French reads: “A man is like
cassia; to bring out his smell, you need to bruise him.”
200

April 1939

-

February 1942

Marlowe died of a dagger wound in the forehead, killed
by a cop.
Fifty-three manuscript plays of the Warburton collection
(Phihp Massinger and Fletcher) burned by a head cook
who used them to wrap his pies in. That is how it ends.

Cf. Georges Conne: Le Mystere shakespearien (Boivin).
Etat present des etudes shakespeariennes (Didier).

OCTOBER

Plague. Bonsels, pp. 144 and 222.
1342—The Black Death in Europe. The Jews are mur¬
dered.
1481—The plague ravages the South of Spain. The In¬
quisition says: The Jews. But the plague kills an inquisi¬
tor.

In the second century, discussion about Christ’s personal
appearance. Saint Cyril and Saint Justin: to give all its
meaning to the incarnation, it was maintained that Christ
must have looked mean and disgusting. (Saint Cyril: “the
most hideous of the sons of men.”)
But the Greek attitude was: “If he is not handsome,
he is not God.” The Greeks won.

On the Cathari: Douais: Les Heretiques du Midi au
XIII siecle.
201

NOTEBOOK III

La hermosa Sembra. Denounces her father for plotting
against the Inquisition, since she has a Castilian lover and
they are “conversos.” She goes into a convent. Obsessed
with physical desires, she leaves it. Has several children.
Grows ugly. Dies with a grocer as her “protector.” Asks
that her skull be put above the door of the house to re¬
mind people of her wicked life. At Seville.

Alexander Borgia was the first to come into conflict with
Torquemada. Too knowing and “distinguished” to stand
this fury.

See Herder. Ideas to use in a philosophy of the His¬
tory of Humanity.

Men who have created works of art in periods of great
historical disturbances:

Shakespeare, Milton, Ronsard,

Rabelais, Montaigne, Malherbe.

Initially, the Germans had no feeling for themselves as
a nation. What took the place of this was a racial con¬
sciousness that was wholly made up by the intellectuals.
Much more virulent. What interests the Germans is
foreign policy—and the French, home policy.

On Monotony.
Monotony of Tolstoy’s last works. Monotony of Hindu
books—of the Biblical prophets—of Buddha. Monotony
202

April 1939

—

February 1942

of the Koran, of all religious books. Monotony of Nietzsche
—of Pascal—of Chekhov—the terrible monotony of Proust,
of the Marquis deSade, etc., etc. . . .

At the siege of Sebastopol, Tolstoy jumped out of the
trenches and ran toward the bastion under heavy fire from
the enemy. He was horribly afraid of rats, and had just
seen one.

Politics can never be the subject of poetry (Goethe).
To add to the Absurd—quotation from Tolstoy as a
model of illogical logic:
“If all the worldly goods for which we live, if all the de¬
lights which life, wealth, glory, honors, and power give
to us are taken away by death, then these goods have
no meaning. If life is not infinite, it is quite simply ab¬
surd, it is not worth living, and we must rid ourselves of
it as soon as possible by committing suicide.” (Confession.)
But, later on, Tolstoy modifies his remarks: “The exist¬
ence of death compels us either to give up life of our
own free will, or to change our life in such a way as to
give it a meaning that cannot be taken from it by death.”

Fear and suffering: the most fleeting of emotions, ac¬
cording to Byrd. In the complete solitude of the North,
he notices that the body makes just as absolute demands
as the mind: “He cannot do without sounds, colors, and
voices.”
203

NOTEBOOK III

T. E. Lawrence enlisting again after the war, in the
ranks,

and under

a false name.

He must

discover

whether anonymity can give what greatness could not. He
refuses the decorations offered to him by the king, gives
his medal to his dog. Sends his manuscripts anonymously
to publishers, who reject them. Motorcycle accident.
Hence the definition of A. Fabre-Luce: the superman
can be recognized by the strictness with which he shuts
himself up in history, and the inner liberty which he keeps
toward it.

On

rereading.

The

Notebooks

of

Malte

Lauris

Brigge. An insignificant book. The place responsible:
Paris. It is a Parisian defeat. A Parisian infection that
was not overcome. Ex.: “The world looks on the solitary
man as an enemy.” Wrong. It couldn’t care less, and has
every right to do so.
The only thing any good. The story of Arvers who, on his
deathbed, corrects a mistake in French: “One must say
‘collidor.’ ”

As Newton said: by thinking of it all the time.

Jean Hytier, on the dramatist: “He does what he wants
on condition that he does what he must.”

For Montherlant (the decay of chivalry brought about
by women). Jehande Saintre, p. 108. MA.LF.
2 04

April 1939 — February 1942

Pierre de Larivey: 1 translator. Les Esprits, translation
of Lorenzino de Medici—Saint-Evremond.

All the headlands of the coast look like a fleet of ships
putting out to sea. The vessels of rock and azure tremble
on their keels as if ready to set sail for the islands of light.
The whole landscape of Oran is lifting anchor, and each
day at noon it quivers with a great feeling of adventure.
One morning, perhaps, we shall set out together.

As I he in the burning heat of these immense dunes,
the world seems to shrink down to no more than a cage
of heat and blood. It goes no further than my body. But if
a donkey brays afar off, then the dunes, the desert, and
the sky fall into place. And then they lie at an infinite
distance from me.

Essay on tragedy.
(1) The silence of Prometheus.
(2) The Elizabethans.
(3) Moliere.
(4) The spirit of revolt.

Plague. “I want something which is just.” “That is
exactly what the plague is.”
1 Camus later adapted the play by Larivey and produced it at the Festi¬
val of Angers in 1953205

NOTEBOOK III

“The night, a ‘true night/ how many men now know
what it is really like? The waters and the earth, and the
return of silence. ‘And my soul too is a gushing fountain.
Ah, let the world sink away and be silent. Over there,
above Pollensa. . . .”
Have no more to do with this empty heart—reject
everything which dries it up. If the living waters are
elsewhere, why stay here?

A time comes when one can no longer feel the emo¬
tion of love. The only thing left is tragedy. Living for some¬
one or for something no longer has any meaning. Nothing
seems to keep its meaning except the idea of dying
for something.

A Spartan was publicly rebuked by an ephor because
he had too fat a belly.
An Athenian proverb put the man who could neither
read nor swim in the very lowest class of citizens.
Alcibiades, according to Plutarch: 2 “At Sparta, he
was devoted to athletic exercises, was frugal and reserved;
in Ionia, luxurious, gay and indolent; in Thrace, always
drinking; in Thessaly, ever on horseback; and when he
lived with Tissaphernes the Persian satrap, he exceeded
the Persians themselves in magnificence and pomp.”

The people one day applauded him, which caused
Phocion to remark: “Have I said something stupid?”

2 Plutarch is quoted in the Everyman edition translated by A. H. Clough.
206

April 1939 - February 1942

Decadence! Speeches about decadence! The third cen¬
tury b.c. was a “decadent” century for Greece. With Eu¬
clid, Archimedes, Aristarchus, and Hipparchus, it gave
the world geometry, physics, astronomy, and trigonometry.

There are still people who confuse individualism and
the cult of the personality. They are talking about two
different things: social and metaphysical reality. “You are
not concentrating our efforts.” To go from life to life
means having no personality of your own. But to have a
personality of your own is an idea which is peculiar to a
certain form of civilization. Other people may find it the
worst of misfortunes.

Contradiction in the modern world. In Athens, the peo¬
ple could really exercise their power only because they
spent most of their time on politics, while slaves did all
the work which still had to be done. Once slavery is
abolished, everyone has to work. And it is when the Euro¬
pean has reached the furthest extreme of proletarianiza¬
tion that the idea of popular sovereignty is at its strongest:
the two things cannot be combined.

Only three actors in the Greek theater. The aim was
not to create a character.
In Athens, there was nothing at all frivolous about
the theater; performances took place only two or three
times a year. And in Paris? And they want to go back to
207

NOTEBOOK III

something dead. It is much better to create your own style
of drama.

“However innocent a thing may be, men can still dis¬
cover crime in it.” Moliere. Preface to Tartuffe.

Last scene of Act I of Tartuffe: “increases our interest
and holds it in suspense”: continued next Friday.
Solon creates the laws that made him famous and, in
his old age, gives his work immortality through poetry.

Thucydides3 makes Pericles say of the Athenians
that they are “capable at the same time of taking risks
and of estimating them beforehand.”
The victorious triremes at Salamis were manned by the
poorest Athenian citizens.

Cf. Cohen: “Athens had a theater worthy of the name
only when she no longer had a poet worthy of bringing to
life.”

O. Flake on Sade: 4 “No value is stable for the man
who cannot bow down before it. Sade cannot see why he

8 Thucydides is quoted in Rex Warner’s translation.
4 Otto Flake’s book on Sade was translated into French in 1933 by Pierre
Klossowski. Camus devoted a long passage to discussing Sade in The
Rebel, 1951, where he repeated the now generally accepted idea that Sade
actually did very little, and argued that his work was important largely for
historical and philosophical reasons, as an illustration of the dangers of a
particular type of revolt.
208

April 1939 — February 1942

should bow down, having long searched for such a reason
in vain.” According to Sade, the man who is without grace
is responsible for nothing.
Cf. the mathematics of evil in Juliette.
“A monomaniac of revolt against fundamental law, a
man who gives the same importance to the mind and to
sexuality.” He ends his life at Charenton, persecuted and
in his right mind, making madmen perform in the plays
where he directs everything: Tableau.
“He invented cruelties that he never put into practice
himself and never wanted to—in order to enter into con¬
tact with great problems.”

Moby Dick5 and the symbol, pp. 120, 121, 123, 129,
I73-I77. 203, 209, 241, 310, 313, 339, 373, 415, 421,
452,457,460,472,485,499, 503, 517, 520,522.
5 Camus probably read Moby Dick in the French translation by Lucien
Jacques, Joan Smith, and Jean Giono published by Gallimard in 1941. If
this is the case, then the page numbers refer more or less to the following
episodes (page references to the Everyman edition):
120— End chap. XXX. Ahab’s leg. Everyman, p. 114.
121— Beginning chap. XXXI. Everyman, p. 115.
123—Everyman, p. 117. Whether a whale is a fish.
129—Everyman, pp. 122—3. Black Fish—Narwhal.
173—7—Chap. XLI. The Whiteness of the Whale. Everyman, pp. 163-7.
203—Everyman, p. 192. “Now the advent of these outlandish stran¬
gers . . .”
209—Everyman, p. 197. Queequeg as the standard-bearer “hopelessly
holding up hope in the midst of despair.”
241—Chap. LIII. The Town-Ho’s story of how the mate Radney was
eaten by Moby Dick. Everyman, p. 227.
310—Everyman, p. 290. The Right Whale’s Head.
313—End of chap. LXXIV. Resolution in facing death.
339—End of chap. LXXXII, beginning of chap. LXXXIII. Everyman,
pp.317-8.
373—Chap. XC. Everyman, p. 350. The smell of the Rosebud.
415—Chap. CIII. Everyman, pp. 393-4.
209

NOTEBOOK III

Feelings and images multiply a philosophy by ten.

In Athens, men concerned themselves with the dead
only during the period of the Anthestaria. Once these were
ended: “Depart, souls, the Anthestaria are over.”
Originally, in Greek religion, everyone is in Hades.
There are neither rewards nor punishments—similarly
in Jewish religion. It is social considerations which give
rise to the idea of rewards.
452—Chap. CXXII. Everyman, p. 420. The tempering of the harpoon.
457—Everyman, p. 425. The meeting with the Bachelor.
460—Everyman, p. 248. Beginning of chap. CXVI.
472—Everyman, pp. 438-9. Chap. CXX.
485—Everyman, p. 451. End of chap. CXXV.
499—Everyman, p. 463. Beginning of chap. CXXXI. The Symphony—
Ahab weeps into the sea.
503—Everyman, p. 480. Moby Dick breaks Ahab’s ivory leg.
520—End of chap. CXXXIII.
522—Everyman, p. 482. “I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick.”
It should be noted that there is a difference in the chapter numbers be¬
tween the French translation and the Everyman edition referred to here.
Thus, the French edition is consistently one chapter number ahead—so
that chapter CXXXIV in the Everyman edition is chapter CXXXV in the
French edition. The chapter headings here refer to the Everyman edition.
The question of Melville’s influence on Camus has been raised by a
number of critics, and there is an essay on “Les etrangers chez Melville”
by Leon S. Roudiez in Configuration Critique, Revue des Lettres Modemes,
1961, nos. 64—66. Mr. Roudiez has also written a study of the particular
relationship of Moby Dick and The Plague which appeared in Sym¬
posium, Spring 1961, pp. 30-9. Mr. Roudiez also points out that Camus
wrote an essay on Melville which was published in the series Les Ecrivains celebres (Paris: Mazenod; 1952). He agrees that Camus almost
certainly did read the 1941 translation of Moby Dick, and suggests, prob¬
ably rightly, that Moby Dick is “not a major source in the usual literary
meaning of the term.” This seems particularly true if Camus did, indeed,
mark down only the page numbers which most interested him, since the
passage where the Jeraboam is described as stricken with plague is not
one which he noted.
210

April 1939

-

February 1942

404. Athens having signed the armistice with Lysander, the end of the Peloponnesian War was marked by
Lysander’s attack on the walls of Athens to the sound of
flutes.

The striking story of Timoleon, tyrant of Syracuse (he
had had his father imprisoned in order to kill him as a
traitor).

In certain Greek cities, in the fourth century, the fol¬
lowing oath was taken by the oligarchs: “I shall always
be an enemy of the people, and I shall advise it to do
what I know will be most harmful to its interests.”
The flight of Darius pursued by Alexander (293-4).
The nuptials at Susa: Alexander, 80 generals, 10,000
soldiers, marry Persian women.

Demetrius Poliorcetes—sometimes on the throne, at the
height of power, sometimes wandering from village to
village.
Antisthenes: “It is a regal thing to do good and hear
evil spoken of oneself.”

Cf. Marcus Aurelius: “Wherever it is possible to live, it is
possible to live well.”
“What prevents a work from being completed becomes
the work itself.”
What bars our way makes us travel along it.
Ended February 1942

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

APPENDICES A AND B

■

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

11.7.13. Birth of Albert Camus at Mondovi, Constantine,
French North Africa.
10.11.14. Lucien Camus, his father, is killed at the first Battle
of the Marne. His mother, nee Catherine Sintes, goes
to five in Belcourt, a working-class suburb of Algiers.
She works as a charwoman to provide for Camus and
his elder brother Lucien, who are brought up largely
by their maternal grandmother.
1918—1923. Camus attends the ecole communale of Belcourt.
His Nobel Prize speech of 1957 is dedicated to his
teacher, Louis Germain.
1923. Wins scholarship to the lycee in Algiers (now Lycee
Albert Camus).
1928-1930. Is goalkeeper for the Racing Universitaire d’Alger.
1930. First attack of tuberculosis.
1933. First marriage, to Simone Hie.
1934. Joins Communist Party. Works on the Arab question.
Laval’s visit to Moscow in 1935 brings about a change
in the Party line, and Camus begins to feel critical. He
did not, however, Roger Quilliot tells me, actually leave
the Party until 1937, the date at which the Theatre du
Travail, which he had been instrumental in founding,
broke its Communist links and became the Theatre
de LTlquipe.
1935. Begins the cahiers. Completes his licence de philosophic
(B.A.) in June. Plays an active part in the Communist
Maison de la Culture in Algiers. Co-operates in writing
Revolte dans les Asturies, a play about the revolt of
the Oviedo miners in Spain. The play was not allowed
215

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
to be publicly performed but was privately published.
Begins research on Plotinus, for his diplome d’etudes
superieures (roughly an M.A. by thesis). During the
whole of this time he is supporting himself by various
jobs, and works for the Institut de Meteorologie.
1936. May. Successfully presents his thesis, on Neo-Platonisme
et Pensee Chretienne. Begins to work as an actor for
the touring company of Radio Algiers. His first mar¬
riage is dissolved. In the summer, travels to Austria
and returns via Prague and Italy.
1937. Publication of L’Envers et L’Endroit (written 1935—6).
Compelled to go to Embrun, in France, for reasons of
health in summer, and again travels back through
Italy. Refuses a post as teacher in Sidi-bel-Abbes.
Breaks with Communist Party.
1938. Foundation, in October, of Alger-Republicain, an inde¬
pendent left-wing paper edited by Pascal Pia. Camus
joins the staff, and his first article appears on Octo¬
ber 10, 1938. He reviews books regularly, but also
writes a large number of other articles. Completes first
version of Caligula.
1939. January-March. Series of articles in Alger-Republicain
leading to the acquittal of Michel Hodent. July. Pub¬
lication of eleven articles on Kabylia, describing the
poverty of the area and criticizing government policy.
The more important of these were republished in
Actuelles III in 1938, and some were translated in
Resistance, Rebellion, and Death in i960.
1939- September. Camus made editor of the evening paper
Le Soir-Republicain, where he signs a number of
articles Jean Mersault. Publication of Noces. Rejected
for military service for reasons of health.
1940. January-February. Both Soir-Republicain and AlgerRepublicain cease to appear. Camus is unable to find
a job in Algeria because of his political affiliations,
and goes to Paris, where Pascal Pia finds him a place
in Paris-Soir. Camus contributed no articles to this
216

Appendices A and B
paper, which he disliked, and worked only as a type¬
setter.
1940. June. Leaves Paris with Paris-Soir and goes to ClermontFerrand. Then to Bordeaux and Lyons. December.
Second marriage, to Francine Faure.
1941. Return to Oran. Teaches for a short time in a private
school. Completes Le Mythe de Sisyphe.
December 19. Execution of Gabriel Peri—an event
which, according to Camus himself, crystallized his re¬
volt against the Germans.
1942. Return to France. July. Publication of L’Etranger.
Camus joins the resistance network Combat in the
Lyons region. January. New attack of tuberculosis.
1943. Publication of Le Mythe de Sisyphe. First of the Lettres
a un Ami Allemand (translated in Resistance, Rebel¬
lion, and Death). Combat sends him to Paris, where he
is by now well known in literary circles. He becomes a
publisher’s reader and permanent member of the ad¬
ministrative staff at Gallimard. In order to avoid ever
feeling that he had to publish books in order to earn
his living, Camus kept this job until the end of his life.
1944. August. Editor of Combat. His unsigned, and supposedly
anonymous, editorials are characteristic of the hopes
and aspirations of the liberation period, and, coming
after the first performance, in June 1944, of Le Malentendu (written 1942-1943), emphasized the dual na¬
ture of his attitude toward the world.
1945. Still with Combat, though writing less frequently. First
performance of Caligula, in September, with Gerard
Philipe in title role. Publication of Lettres a un Ami
Allemand and of La Remarque sur la Revolte, starting
point of L’Homme Revolte. Birth of his twin children,
Catherine and Jean.
1946. Visit to America. Completion of La Peste.
1947. June. Publication of La Peste. Great success. On June 3,
1947, Camus leaves Combat, whose financial difficulties
no longer allow an independent editorial policy.
217

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
1948. October. First performance of L’Etat de Siege.
1949- June-August. Lecture tour in South America, described
in detail in the later Notebooks. Camus falls ill, and
has to spend a long time convalescing.
1950. Publication of Actuelles I. Performance of Les Justes.
1951. L’Homme Revolte.
1952. Public quarrel with Sartre.
1953. Replaces Marcel Herrand as producer at the Festival
d’Angers. Actuelles II.
1954. Publication of L’Ete, a collection of essays written be¬
tween 1939 and 1954. Includes Le Minotaure ou la
Halte d’Oran, many passages of which were first writ¬
ten in the Carnets. (Cf. English translation by Justin
O’Brien in the volume containing the 1955 English
translation of Le My the de Sisyphe.)
1955. Travels to Greece. Goes back to journalism in L’Express
to support the election campaign of Mendes-France.
Appeals for an agreement by both sides in the Algerian
War to respect the civilian population.
1956. Publication of La Chute. Adaptation of Faulkner’s Re¬
quiem for a Nun.
1957. Publication of the short stories L’Exil et le Royaume.
Publication of the Reflexions sur la Guillotine, in a
companion volume with Arthur Koesder’s Reflections
on Hanging. Awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature.
1958. Publication of Actuelles III. Articles on Algeria dating
from 1939-58.
1959. Adaptation of Dostoevsky’s The Possessed. Camus con¬
tinues work on his projected novel Le Premier Homme.
1960. January 5. Killed in an automobile accident.
The two most useful studies on Camus’s life are by Roger
Quilliot, La Mer et les Prisons (Gallimard 1956), and by
Germaine Bree, Camus (Rutgers 1959). I am indebted to
M. Quilliot for additional information used both in the bio¬
graphical note and in certain other notes in the Notebooks.

218

APPENDIX A

Newspaper articles published by Camus
between 1938 and 1940

A. Alger-Republicain (began publishing October 6, 1938)
All these articles were signed Albert Camus or A. C.

1938
10.9.38. Review of Aldous Huxley: Those B arren Leaves.
10.10.38. Review of Erich-Maria Remarque: Les Camarades.
10.11.38. Review of Blanche Balain: La Seve des Justes.
10.20.38. Review of Jean-Paul Sartre: La Nausee.
10.23.38. Jean Hytier: Andre Gide.
10.24.38. Le point de vue de ceux qui n’ont pas vote (account
of a senatorial election in Algiers).
11.2.38. Review of Rene Janon: Les Salopards.
11.11.38 Review of Paul Nizan: La Conspiration.
11.19.38. Au pays du Mufie (defense of the International
Brigade).
11.22.38. Review of Edmond Bruca: Les Fables Bonoises.
11.26.38. “Un vapeur frangais? Stoppez ou je tire . . .” (a
Spanish gunboat arrests a French merchant vessel in
the Mediterranean ).
11.27.38. Les Meetings d’Alger. A la bourse du travail (ac¬
count of the demonstrations against the DaladierReynaudlaws).
11.28.38. Revue des revues.
219

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
12.1.38. Ces hommes quon raie de I’humanite.
12.3.38. Dialogue entre un President du Conseil et un em¬
ploye a 12,00 francs par mois.
12.21.38. 15 municipaux seront mis a pied pendant huit jours
(protest against the suspension from their jobs of
fifteen municipal employees of the town of Algiers by
the mayor, Monsieur Rozis, because they took part in
a strike).
12.30.38. Une cassure dans une conduite de gaz est mise a
jour rue Blanchard.
12.31.38. L’enquete sur Vexplosion de la rue Blanchard con¬
tinue dans le secret.

1939

1 .3.39. Review of Renaud de Jouvenel: Commune Mesure.
Jean Giono: Le Lettre aux Pay sans sur la Pauvrete et
la Paix.
1.10.39. Lettre ouverte a Monsieur le Gouverneur General
(Camus’s first intervention on behalf of Michel Hodent,
a technical agent of the Office National du Ble who
had been imprisoned on a false accusation of fraud).
1.14.39. Grace au couscous offert par Mme Chapauton, des
enfants ont pu manger.
1.16.39. Review of Felix de Chazoumes: Caroline ou le depart
pour les lies.
1.28.39. Review of Marie Mauron: Le Quartier Mortisscm.
Review of a lecture entitled De la Modemite des
Anciens given by M. Louis Gernet.
2.4.39. L’Affaire Hodent ou les caprices de la justice.
2.5.39. Review of Henry de Montherlant: L’Equinoxe de
Septembre.
2.7.39. Monsieur Rozis revoque cinq employes municipaux.
2.18.39. Livres de Femmes.
2.19.39. Sur une conference de Monsieur Claude Farrere
(very critical account of a lecture given in defense of
Japanese policy in China).
220

Appendix A
2.22.39. L’Affaire Hodent ou la multiplication des abus du
pouvoir.
3.1.39. L’Affaire Hodent prend de Vextension.
3- 5-39-

Michel Hodent comparaitra le 20 mars devant le
tribunal correctionnel de Tiaret.
Review of Amaud Guibert: Periple des lies Tunisiennes.

Abd-Errahmann ben El-Haffaf: Introduction a Vetude
de VIslam.
Aime Dupy: Du Bled a la cote.
3.7.39. Depuis quand poursuit-on la conscience professionnelle? (OnHodent.)
3.9.39. Comment on circonvient et on eloigne un temoin
genant (on Hodent).
3.12.39. Review of Jean-Paul Sartre: LeMur.
3.13.39. Un homme juste plaide pour un innocent (Hodent).
3.16.39. Les “Complices” de Michel Hodent et les fantaisies de
Vinstruction.
3.18.39. L’Affaire Hodent: Pour s’effondrer dans le ridicule,
I’instruction n’en est que plus hideuse.
3.21.39. L’Affaire Hodent devant le tribunal correctionnel de
Tiaret.
3.23.39. L’Innocence de Hodent et du magasinier Mas a fini
par triompher.
3.28.39. Review of Ferreira de Castro: Foret Vierge.
4.7.39. Du cirque des puces au roi de I’evasion (an hour at the
Fair of Algiers).
4.9.39. Review of Jorge Amado: Bahia de tous les saints.
4.16.39. Roman d’aventures.
4.20.39. La situation des Nord Africains travaillant en
France (I).
4.21.39. Idem (II).

4- 23-39-Idem (HI).
Romans frangais.
4.25.39. La situation des Nord Africains . . . (IV).
Account of lecture by M. R. E. Charlier:
L’Imperialisme.
221

Contre

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
4.30.39. La situation des Nord Africains . . . (V).
5.23.39. Review of Ignazio Silone: Le Pain et le Win.
Andre Chamson: La Galere.
Review of the production of Jean Cocteau’s La Machine
lnfernale by the Groupe Theatral Universitaire.
5.25.39. Account of lecture by M. R. E. Charlier: Pas de Guerre.
6.5.39. First of the articles on Kabylia: I. Le Grece en Haillons.
6.6.39. II. Le Denuement.
6.7.39. III. Cinq enfants meurent pour avoir mange des racines
veneneuses.
6.8.39. IV. Les Salaires insultants.
6.9.39. V. L’Habitat.
6.10.39. VI. L’Assistance.
6.11.39. VII. L’Enseignement.
6.12.39. VIII. Deux aspects de la vie economique kabyle:
L’artisanat et Vusure.
6.13.39. IX. L’Avenir politique.
6.14.39. X. Pour vivre, la Kabylie reclame. . . .
6- 15-39- XI. Misfire de la Kabylie. Conclusion.
6.22.39. -6.29.39. Le Film des Debats (account of the trial of
Sheik El Okbi, acquitted of the false accusation of
having organized the assassination of the Mufti of
Algiers. Camus covered this trial, but did not play as
important a part as in the Affaire Michel Hodent).
6.25.39. Les Ecrivains et leurs critiques.
7.4.39. Review of Georges Bernanos: Scandale de la Verite.
Albert Ollivier: La Commune.
7- 15-39- Review of Armand Guibert: L’oiseau prive.

7.24.39. Livres espagnols.
7.25.39. L’Affaire des “incendiaires” d’Auribeau en cassation
(I). First of four articles concerning ten Moslems who
were sent to prison on a false charge of having com¬
mitted arson in a strike in February 1939.
7.26.39. II. Comme au moyen age: La torture au service des
accusations.
7.28.39. III. Un odieux deni de justice.
7.31.39. IV. Des Innocents condamnes aux travaux forces et
222

Appendix A
les leurs condamnes a la misere “au nom du peuple
frangais.”
8.18.39. De Malencontreuses poursuites (protest against the
arrest of members of the Parti Populaire Algerien).

B. Le Soir-Republicain
Camus was editor of this newspaper from the first number on
September 15, 1939, to the last of January 9, 1940. He
did not, however, sign many articles in it, but used
pseudonyms (Mersault, Caligula, Cesar Borgia, Ary
Delman) and, occasionally, his own initials. I should
like to thank Mme Camus for helping me to identify
certain articles and allowing me to consult her list of
articles published in Le Soir Republicain, which I
have used to supplement my own.
Both this newspaper and Alger-Republicain are available at
the annex of the Bibliotheque Nationale at Versailles.
The library index number of Alger-Republicain is Gr.
Fol. Jo. 1478; that of Le Soir Republicain, Gr. Fol. Jo.
1826. There is a delay of two or three days before the
papers can be consulted in Paris.

1939
g.17.39. La Guerre. A. C.
9.21.39. La France est libre (unsigned editorial).
11.6.39. Sous les eclairages de guerre (a review of the press).
Signed Cesar Borgia.
11.7.39. Un effort genereux (unsigned editorial).
H-I5-39- Notre revue de presse. “Ils sont sinceres.” Signed Ary
Delman.
11.25.39. Une Interview de Dieu le Pere. Signed Ary Delman.

11.27.39. La Censure avec nous (unsigned).
12.6.39. Notre position (unsigned).
12.12.39. Les Conditions d’une collaboration (unsigned).
12.14.39. De Richelieu a Leon Blum (unsigned).
223

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
12.16.39. Comment alter vers un ordre nouveau (unsigned).
12.17.39. Defense de notre liberte. Signed Liber.
12.18.39. A nos lecteurs (unsigned).
12.19.39. Va-t-on entrer en guerre contre I’URSS? (Unsigned.)
12.23.39. Lettre a un Jeune Anglais sur Vetat d’esprit du peuple
frangais. Signed Jean Mersault.
12.30.39. Recherche du Possible (unsigned).

1940
1.1.40. Le Soir Republicain (unsigned editorial).
1.3.40. Caligula (remarks on censorship).

22 4

APPENDIX B

Plays performed by the Theatre du Travail, later the Theatre
de l’Equipe, between 1935 and 1939.

Andre Malraux: Le Temps du Mepris. Camus’s own adapta¬
tion.
Charles Vildrac: Le Paquebot “Tenacity.”
Andre Gide: Le Retour de I’enfant prodigue. Camus in the title
role.
Ben Jonson: The Silent Woman.
Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound. Camus’s adaptation.
Dostoevsky: The Brothers Karamazov. Adaptation by Jacques
Copeau. Camus played the part of Ivan.
Pushkin: The Stone Guest, or Don Juan.
Gorki: The Lower Depths.
Fernando de Rojas: La Celestina. Directed by Camus.
John Synge: The Playboy of the Western World.
The Theatre de l’Equipe consisted entirely of amateurs who
seemed, to judge from the occasional reviews of their produc¬
tions in Alger-Republicain, to perform anonymously. The in¬
formation about the parts played by Camus is taken from the
studies of Roger Quilliot and Germaine Bree.

A Note on the Type

The text of this book was set on the Linotype

in a face called Primer, designed by Rudolph
Ruzicka, earlier responsible for the design of
Fairfield and Fairfield Medium, Linotype faces
whose virtues have for some time now been
accorded wide recognition. The complete range
of sizes of Primer was first made available in
1954) although the pilot size of 12 point was
ready as early as 1951. The design of the face
makes general reference to Linotype Century
(long a serviceable type, totally lacking in
manner or frills of any kind) but brilliantly
corrects the characterless quality of that face.
Composed, printed, and bound by
Kingsport Press, Inc., Kingsport, Tennessee
Typography and binding design by
GEORGE

SALTER

'

DATE DUE
OC 21 '68 JA 12 '86
OC 2b '684? 2Q '80
ja
m HP 30 -m

ff 11 w

'

.

JY19 '69
OC 1 '69
nu 1 u ’69
JA

5 70

if, 72'YO
FF 1 ? 70
AP 2 70
AP 20 70
UY 1170
,y]

FH 2 475
yn
Mrt—r1 x)a *TC
fu
MR 2 s '84
GAYLORD

PRINTED IN U..S. A.

-

848
Cl^car
tT3n

848

C15car
tT3n

Camus, A.
Notebooks: 1935-1942
tr. by Thody

