‘ OS

aie

ee

ae ORR

G2

A

NN

ID AI

ALBERT CAMUS
WINNER OF THE NOBEL PRIZE
FOR LITERATURE, 1957

Salter

eee

ORR

The first volume of Camus’s Notebooks
was primarily a working diary, a testing
ground for rough drafts and themes, a
storehouse of commentary and quotation.
The second volume, written at the height
of his career as a novelist, constitutes

more of an involuntary self-portrait, revealing a conscience tormented throughout this dark decade of history by the need
to find an ethic in an absurd world.
The certainties that Camus expressed
in finished works of this period, like The

Rebel, were acquired only through the
anguish of doubt. Here we witness his
struggles: the struggle between God and
history, between the world’s beauty and
man’s

wretchedness,

between

freedom

and justice, between his passion for death
and the desire to cure himself of it. At once
attracted and repelled by both Marxism
and Christianity, he is drawn to Greek
values. One understands the mythical
basis of the heroes of The Stranger and
The Plague; and one sees the extent of his
disillusionment with modern man that
later expressed itself in the profound irony
of The Fall.
A generation has looked to Camus as
the conscience

of our time; here we see

what fed that spirit, how
forged that strength.

Typography, binding, and
GEORGE

SALT

even

frailty

ign by

AOR

DATE DUE

84.8

Camus

3

A

Notebooks

S

192-1951.
eb

Richmond Public Library
Richmond, California

OTHER BOOKS BY Albert Camus
Awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1957

NOTEBOOKS

1935-1942

1963

(Carnets, mai 1935-février 1942)

RESISTANCE,

REBELLION,

(Actuelles—a
THE

DEATH

(Les Possédés)

1960

1961

selection)

POSSESSED

CALIGULA

AND

anp THREE

OTHER

PLAYS

1958

(Caligula, Le Malentendu, L’Etat de siége, Les Justes)

EXILE AND THE KINGDOM (L’Exil et le Royaume)
THE FALL (La Chute)

I957

THE

AND

MYTH

OF SISYPHUS

OTHER

ESSAYS

(Le Mythe de Sisyphe)

THE

REBEL

(L’Homme

THE

PLAGUE

(La Peste)

THE STRANGER
These

révolté)

(L’Etranger)

are BORZOI

1954

1948

1946

BOOKS,

published in New York by Alfred A. Knopf

1958

1955

NOTEBOOKS

let

One Ons al

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/notebooksO000camu

NOTEBOOKS
1942-1951

Br Albert Camus

TRANSLATED
AND

FROM

THE

ANNOTATED

JUSTIN

FRENCH
BY

O’BRIEN

“yee

;

=

ALFRED. A+-KNOPF.NVEW
1OLG.D

YORK

ae”

K
Ys
L. C. catalog card number:

63-9127

OOOOCOOOOOCOOOO
THIS

IS

A

BORZOI

PUBLISHED

BY

ALFRED

BOOK,

A. KNOPF,

INC.

OOODOOOOOOOOO

Copyright © 1965 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. All
rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who
may quote brief passages in a review to be printed

in a magazine or newspaper. Manufactured in
the United States of America, and distributed by
Random House, Inc. Published simultaneously in
Toronto, Canada, by Random House of Canada,
Limited.
FIRST

Originally
Carnets,

AMERICAN

published
janvier

tions Gallimard.

in

EDITION

French

1942—mars

under

1951.

©

the

title

1964,

Edi-

EDITORS

NOTE

(from the French edition)

THIS SECOND VOLUME of the Notebooks raised some problems. Albert Camus had left a typewritten copy, which he
had

not

corrected.

In order

to establish

the text, Mme

Albert Camus and M. Roger Quilliot went back to an
earlier typescript, partially corrected by the author, and
to the manuscript. This settled most of the problems.
In the few cases where an uncertainty remains, a note
calls attention to it. The text is given in toto, except for

eighteen lines (p. 200) concerning the health of a living person. Likewise, a few names had to be replaced
by X. Two passages that Albert Camus had transferred
to other files for later use have been reintegrated in the
text, as the notes

indicate.

The accounts of the trips Albert Camus made to North
America (March to May 1946) and South America (June
to August 1949) constitute a real travel book; therefore

it seemed more logical to publish them later in a separate
volume.

—y

ay

oh

og

-

oe

a

-

hue

-

Lor

a
—_

.

-*

|

A
ae

“<PO

REGS

o SPY

Srey

;
~

_

Ss

—

F
a

ea

eal

ss

a.

sl

ho

Giro
ae

siligd tmetig

apa. Se)

abe

sn

—

i._

-iue’

tes ‘scqitipaste a ques? mene,

a

ee

rateit dela :

sel. AR Daye et

ee
oo ee

Ss

Aine abt.

ie:

MOTE

nl.

D2

'Ye See

et al1es

£57)

idhaacedke

sat

Viren

eel Na

gy, pilaf

eretk ASL

Detain eee

#1 bt. Ais

ane

iscatiess sone

Pen eal

voi24

wok pean, Andy deg ah ae

ute:

.

. ae

Eye
mee
eng!
oe

sore
bi

OP

“i

7

(eres Se
a

.

f

a

-

CONTENTS

page
NOTEBOOK

IV.

January 1942—-September

1945

I

NOTEBOOK

V.

September 1945-—April 1948

107

NOTEBOOK

VI.

April 1948—March 1951

189

7

i

mat

|

:

~~

ne

ites

Raa
_

-

—
p «

a

i

f

rs

<

nil

si

i

i
‘i

7

g

7

Fy

f 4

9
_

a

—=

K

em

rn

2
2

‘

:
i:

oe

¥

——

:
"
Miss’

7m

wT

power
—,

-

t,o

Get

—

WiweA-245)

t

on

;

-

at
re

a

a

7

7

if

a
-

—

aes
it

;

ruse

4

Fane

Wiberg?
~

> “Sas AE

hk ee

J

7

NYY

NAAT AAA [AKX DAME LDMAL JAMAL BBMAL

acl,
Osi BO.Owk
NUL

FI

January

1942 — September 1945

PYPPFPPFIFPFIFFPFFPPFPFPFPFFP

JANUARY—-FEBRUARY

“Whatever does not kill me strengthens me.” Yes, but...
And how painful it is to dream of happiness. The crushing weight of it all. Better to say nothing and pay attention to everything else.

A dilemma, Gide says, between morality and sincerity.

And again: “The only beautiful things are those that madness prompts and reason writes.”

I must break with everything. If there is no desert at
hand there is always the plague or Tolstoy’s little railway
station.

NOTEBOOK

IV

Goethe: “I felt myself God enough to descend to the
daughters of men.”

There are no great crimes of which an intelligent man
does not feel capable. According to Gide, great minds do
not give in to this because they would limit themselves by
so doing.*

Retz? readily calms an initial uprising in Paris because
it is suppertime. “The most excited don’t want to upset their
schedule.”

Tolstoy

Foreign landmarks

Melville
D. Defoe
Cervantes

Retz: “With the exception of courage, the Duc dOrléans had everything that is essential to a gentleman.”
Aristocrats during the Fronde meeting a funeral procession charged the crucifix with drawn swords shouting:
“There’s the enemy.”

There are many reasons behind the official hostility toward England (good or bad, political or not). But nothing
1This reference

to Gide, like the earlier one

and

the quotation

from

Goethe, alludes to The Journals of André Gide (Alfred A. Knopf, 1947),
Vol. I, pp. 71, 19, 38, and 31, originally published in French in 1939.
2Paul de Gondi, Cardinal de Retz (1613-79), played a part in the
revolt of the Fronde, which he recorded in his lively Mémoires.

4

January 1942 —September 1945

is said of one of the worst motives—fury and the base
desire to see the downfall of someone who dares to resist
the force that has crushed you.

The Frenchman has preserved the habit and traditions
of revolution.* The only thing he lacks is guts: he has
become civil servant, Philistine, midinette. It was a stroke

of genius to make of him a legal revolutionary. He indulges
in plotting with official approval. He reshapes a world without stirring from his easy chair.

Epigraph for “Oran or the Minotaur.”
Gide, An Unprejudiced Mind: “I fancy him at the court
of Minos,

anxious

to know

what

sort of unmentionable

monster the Minotaur may be, whether he is as frightful
as all that or perhaps charming?”

In ancient drama, the one who pays is always the one
who is right—Prometheus, Oedipus, Orestes, etc. But that’s
not important. Anyway they all end in Hades, right or

wrong. There is neither reward nor punishment. This explains, to our eyes clouded over by centuries of Christian

perversion, the gratuitous nature of those dramas—and
also the pathos of such plays.

Contrast Gide’s remark: “The great danger is to let oneself be monopolized by a fixed idea” with Nietzschian “obe3 Instead of révolution, the manuscript originally had grande pensée
(“great thought”).
4 The following epigraph, which appears in the original Algiers edition
of L’Eté in 1939, was

omitted from

the later Paris edition.

5

NOTEBOOK

dience.”

Gide

again,

speaking

IV

of the underprivileged:

“Leave them eternal life or give them revolution.” For my

essay on revolt. “Don’t take me out of my dear little grotto,”
the Poitiers girl locked up by her parents said of the room
in which she lived surrounded by dung.®

The pull that justice and its absurd procedure has for
certain minds—Gide,

Dostoevsky, Balzac, Kafka, Malraux,

Melville, etc. Find the explanation.

Stendhal. One can imagine the story of Malatesta or of
the Este family told by Barrés and then by Stendhal. Stendhal would adopt the style of the historical chronicle, the
reportage of the “great writer.” It is in the disproportion between the tone and the story that Stendhal’s secret lies
(compare with certain Americans). Just the same dispro-

portion that exists between Stendhal and Beatrice Cenci.
Unsuccessful if Stendhal had adopted the tone of pathos
(despite literary histories, Tyrtaeus is comic and hateful).
The Red and the Black has as a subtitle “Chronicle of
1830.” Italian Chronicles, etc.

MARCH
Milton’s Lucifer:
Farthest from Him is best...
The mind is its own place, and in itself
Can make a Heavn of Hell, a Hell of Heavn.
Better to reign in Hell, than serve in Heaven.
5See

La Séquestrée

de Poitiers

(1930)

by André

Gide.

6

January 1942—September 1945

Brief psychology of Adam and Eve: he formed for contemplation and courage; she for softness and alluring
grace. He for God alone; she for God in him.

Schiller dies “having saved all that could be saved.”

Book X of the Iliad. Those leaders sapped by insomnia,
their defeat unbearable, changing their minds, wandering,
loving one another, banding together to seek adventure,
a raid on the enemy “just for the hell of it.”
The horses of Patrocles weep in battle, their master
being dead. And (Book XVIII) Achilles’ three great shouts
on his return

to battle, standing over the defense

ditch,

dazzling in his arms, fierce. And the Trojans retreat. Book
XXIV. Achilles’ grief as he weeps in the night after the victory. Priam: “For I have done what no man has done on
earth—I have lifted to my mouth the hands of the man who
killed my children.”
(Nectar was red!)

The highest praise that can be given the Iliad is that,
knowing the outcome of the fight, we nevertheless agonize
with the Achaeans behind their lines of defense hard
pressed by the Trojans. (Same observation for the Odyssey;
we know that Ulysses will kill the suitors.) What a thrill
for those who heard the tale for the first time!

For a generous psychology.
We help a person more by giving him a favorable image
of himself than by constantly reminding him of his short@

NOTEBOOK

IV

comings. Each individual normally strives to resemble his
best image. Can be applied to teaching, to history, to philosophy, to politics. We are for instance the result of twenty
centuries of Christian imagery. For two thousand years

man has been offered a humiliating image of himself. The
result is obvious. Anyway, who can say what we should be
if those twenty centuries had clung to the ancient ideal
with its beautiful human face?

In the psychoanalyst’s view, the ego is constantly putting
on a show for itself, but the libretto is false.
F. Alexander and H. Staub. The Criminal.®

Centuries

ago, people affected by hysteria were condemned; there will
come

a time when criminals will be treated.

“Live and die in front of a mirror,” Baudelaire says.
The words “and die” are not sufficiently noticed. As for
living, everyone agrees. But to be master of one’s death,
that is the hard thing.

Psychosis of arrest.’ He regularly frequented smart public places—concert halls, famous restaurants. Creating
bonds, a solidarity with the people there, is a defense in
itself. And it’s warm rubbing elbows with others. He
dreamed of publishing impressive books that would surround his name with a halo and make him untouchable.
All that was needed, he thought, was to get the cops to
read his books. They’d say: “But that fellow has great sensitivity. He’s an artist. You can’t condemn such a soul.” But at
6 The Criminal, the Judge, and the Public by Franz
Hugo Staub, originally published in Vienna in 1929.
7 See the character

of Cottard

in The

Plague,

Alexander

last chapter

8

of I.

and

January 1942 —September 1945

other times he felt that an ailment, some infirmity, would

protect him just as much. And just as criminals used to flee
to deserted places, he made plans to flee to a hospital, a
sanatorium, a nursing home.
He needed contact and warmth. He counted up his contacts. “Impossible for them to do that to the friend of Mr.
X, the guest of Mr. Y.” But there were never enough con-

tacts to stay the calm arm that threatened him. So he
would turn to epidemics. Just suppose typhus, a plague—
such things happen. It’s plausible in a way. Well, all is
changed; the desert has come to you. No one has time any
more to be concerned with you. Because that’s it: the idea
that someone, without your knowing it, is concerned with
you and you don’t know how far he has got, what he has
decided, and even if he has decided. Then the plague—
and I’m not talking of earthquakes.
Thus that wild heart called on his fellow men and begged

their warmth. Thus that furrowed, shriveled soul sought
fresh waters in the desert and found peace in an ailment,
a curse, and catastrophes. (To be expanded.)
A.B.’s grandfather decided at the age of fifty that he had
done enough. In his little house in Tlemcen he took to

bed and never got up again, except for essentials, until
his death at eighty-four. He was so stingy he had never
even bought a watch. He measured time and especially
mealtimes by two pots, one of which was filled with chickpeas.’ He would fill the other using a careful, mechanical

motion and thus have his guide marks in a day measured in
pots.
He had already given signs of his vocation by the fact
that nothing interested him, not his work, nor friendship,

nor music, nor the café. He had never left his home town

except once when, obliged to go to Oran, he got off at the
8 See

the old asthmatic

in The

Plague,

sixth

chapter

9

of II.

NOTEBOOK

IV

station nearest to Tlemcen, frightened by the adventure.
He then returned home by the first train. To those who
were astonished by his life during the thirty-four years he
spent in bed, he used to say that religion stipulated that
half a man’s life was an ascent and the other half a descent
and that in the descent his days were no longer his. More-

over, he contradicted himself by pointing out that God did
not exist, for if he did the existence of priests would have
been useless, but such a philosophy was attributed to the
anger he felt at the frequent passing of the plate in his
parish.
To cap it all was his profound wish, which he repeated to
everyone, to live to a very old age.

Is there a tragic dilettantism?

Once he has reached the absurd and tries to live accordingly, a man always perceives that consciousness is

the hardest thing in the world to maintain. Circumstances
are almost always against it. He must live his lucidity in a
world where dispersion is the rule.
So he perceives that the real problem, even without God,

is the problem of psychological unity (the only problem
really raised by the operation of the absurd is that of the
metaphysical unity of the world and the mind) and inner
peace. He also perceives that such peace is not possible
without a discipline difficult to reconcile with the world.
That's where the problem lies. It must indeed be reconciled

with the world. It is a matter of achieving a rule of conduct in secular life.

The great obstacle is his past life (profession—marriage
—previous opinions, etc.). What has already taken place.
Io

January 1942 —September 1945

Not to elude any of the elements of this problem.

Hateful,

the writer who talks about and exploits what

he has never experienced. But be careful, a murderer is
not the best man to talk of crime. (But isn’t he the best
man to talk of his crime? Even that is not certain.) Es-

sential to imagine a certain distance between creation and
the deed. The true artist stands midway between what he
imagines and what he does. He is the one who is “capable
of.” He could be what he describes, experience what he
writes.

The mere

act would limit him; he would

be the

one who has acted.

“Superiors never forgive their inferiors for possessing
the external signs of greatness.” The Country Curate.
Id. “There’s no more bread.” Véronique and the Valley
of Montignac grow at the same rate. Same symbolism as
in The Lily in the Valley.
For those who say that Balzac writes badly, see the death

of Mme Graslin: “Everything in her was purified and illuminated, and on her face shone a reflection of the flaming

swords held by the guardian angels surrounding her.”
Study of a Woman: The tale is impersonal, but Bianchon
is relating it.
Alain? on Balzac: “His genius consists in taking the

commonplace as his subject and making it sublime without changing it.”
Balzac and cemeteries in Ferragus.

Balzac’s baroque quality: the pages on the organ in
Ferragus and the Duchess of Langeais.
9 Alain (pseud. of Emile Chartier, 1868-1951 ) exerted a great influence

through his teaching and his philosophical

and literary essays.
If

NOTEBOOK

IV

That flame of which the Duchess sees the glowing and
dim reflection at Montriveau’s glows throughout the work
of Balzac.

There are two kinds of style: Mme de La Fayette’s and
Balzac’s. The first is perfect in detail; the second works in
the mass and even four chapters barely give an idea of its
force. Balzac writes well not despite but because
errors in grammar.

of his

Secret of my universe: imagining God without human
immortality.

Charles Morgan and singleness of mind:? the felicity of
the single intention—the sure talent of excellence—
“genius is this power of dying”—opposition to woman and
her tragic love of life—so many themes, so many nostalgias.
Shakespeare’s sonnets:

“Looking on darkness which the blind do see.”
“To this I witness call the fools of time,

Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.”
The lands that shelter beauty are the hardest to defend
—so eager are people to spare them. Thus artistic nations
ought to be the natural victims of barren nations—if the
love of freedom did not outweigh the love of beauty in

men’s hearts. That is an instinctive wisdom, freedom being
the source of beauty.
1The

English

writer

Charles

Morgan

(1894-1958)

prefaced

his play

The Flashing Stream in 1938 with a long essay “On Singleness of Mind.”
I2

January 1942-—September 1945

Calypso offers Ulysses a choice between immortality and
the land of his birth. He rejects immortality. Therein lies
perhaps the whole meaning of the Odyssey. In Book XI,

Ulysses and the dead facing the ditch full of blood, and
Agamemnon says to him: “Be not too good to your wife
and do not confide all your thoughts to her.”

Note also that the Odyssey speaks of Zeus as the Creator. A dove falls on the rock “but the Father creates another one so that the number will be full.”

XVII—The dog Argos.
XXII—The women who have
hanged—unbelievable cruelty.

given

themselves

are

Again for Stendhal as a chronicler—See Journal, pp.
28-9.

“The height of passion may be to kill a fly for one’s
mistress.” “Only women with strong character can make
me happy.”
And this touch: “As often happens with men who have
concentrated their energy on one or two vital points, he
had an indolent and casual manner.”
Vol. II: “I felt so intensely this evening that I have a
stomach ache.”
Stendhal, who was not wrong about his own literary
future, was lamentably wrong about Chateaubriand’s: “I
shall bet that in 1913 his writings will be forgotten.”

Heinrich Heine’s epitaph:
Brenta.”

“He loved the roses of the

13

NOTEBOOK

IV

Flaubert: “A man judging another is a sight that would
make me burst with laughter if it did not fill me with
pity.”

What he saw at Genoa: “a marble city with rose-filled
gardens.”
And: “Folly consists in trying to draw conclusions.”

Flaubert’s Correspondence:

Vol. II: “Success with women

is generally a sign of

mediocrity.” (?)

Id. “Live as a common man and think as a demi-god.”
(??) See the story of the tapeworm.
“Masterpieces are stupid; they have the calm exterior of
big animals.”
“If I had been loved at seventeen, what an artist I should

be now!”

“In art, one must never fear being exaggerated . . . But
the exaggeration must be continuous—in proportion to itself.”
His aim: ironic acceptance of existence and its total
recasting through art. “Living doesn’t concern us.”
Explain the man by this far-reaching, key remark: “I
maintain that cynicism leads to chastity.”
Id. “We should accomplish nothing in this world if we
were not guided by wrong ideas.” (Fontenelle )
At first sight a man’s life is more interesting than his
works. It constitutes an obstinate, taut whole. Unity of
2 At the top of the manuscript page is written:
spondence. Theologico-political treatise.”

“See

14

Berlioz

corre-

January 1942—September 1945

mind dominates. There is a single inspiration through all
those years. He is the novel. To be rewritten, obviously.

There is always a philosophy for lack of courage.

Art criticism, through fear of being classed as literature,
tries to speak the language of painting, and then it becomes literary. One has to go back to Baudelaire. Human
transposition,

but objective.

Mme V. surrounded by smells of rotting meat. Three
cats, two dogs. Discoursing about inner melody. The
kitchen is closed; it is frightfully hot there.
The whole sky and the heat weigh heavily upon the bay.
All is luminous. But the sun has disappeared.

The difficulties of solitude are to be treated fully.

Montaigne: a life that slips past, somber and mute life.

Modern intelligence is in utter confusion. Knowledge has
become so diffuse that the world and the mind have lost
all point of reference. It is a fact that we are suffering
from nihilism. But the most amazing things are the admonitions to “turn backward.”* Return to the Middle Ages,
to primitive mentality, to the soil, to religion, to the arsenal

of worn-out solutions. To grant a shadow of efficacy to
3 Allusion to the speeches

and writings

of the Vichy period.

I5

NOTEBOOK

IV

those panaceas, we should have to act as if our acquired
knowledge had ceased to exist, as if we had learned
nothing, and pretend in short to erase what is inerasable.
We should have to cancel the contribution of several centuries and the incontrovertible acquisitions of a mind that
has finally (in its last step forward) re-created chaos on
its own. That is impossible. In order to be cured, we must
make our peace with this lucidity, this clairvoyance. We

must take into account the glimpses we have suddenly had
of our exile. Intelligence is in confusion not because knowledge has changed everything. It is so because it cannot
accept that change. It hasn’t “got accustomed to that idea.”
When this does happen, the confusion will disappear.
Nothing will remain but the change and the clear knowledge that the mind has of it. There’s a whole civilization to
be reconstructed.

Any proofs must be palpable.

“Europe,” Montesquieu said, “will be lost by its military
men.

”»

Who can say: I have had a perfect week? My memory
tells me so and I know it doesn’t lie. Yes, the image is
perfect as those long days were perfect. Purely physical
joys with the mind’s consent. There lies perfection, harmony with one’s condition, man’s gratitude and respect.
Wild and pure sloping dunes! Glory of the water, so
black in the morning,

so clear at noon,

and warm

and

gilded in the evening. Long mornings on the dune among
naked bodies, and immediately everything has to be re16

January 1942 —September 1945

peated, everything said that has been said. There was
youth. There is youth and, at the age of thirty, I want
nothing else but such youth to continue. But...

The writings of Copernicus and Galileo remained on the
Index until 1822. Three centuries of obstinacy; it really is
touching.

Capital punishment. The criminal is killed because the
crime has spent all the capacity for living a man has. He
has experienced everything if he has killed. He can die.
Murder drains a man.

How is the literature of the nineteenth and especially
of the twentieth century different from that of classical
periods? It too is a moral study because it is French. But
classical morality is a critical morality (except for Cor-

neille), hence negative. The morality of the twentieth century on the other hand is positive: it defines styles of life.

Take the romantic hero, Stendhal (he belongs to his time
precisely in this regard),
Gide, etc.

Barrés, Montherlant,

Malraux,

Montesquieu: “Certain kinds of foolishness
that a greater foolishness would be better.”

are such

The “Eternal Return” is easier to understand
imagined as a repetition of great moments—as

if it is
if every-

thing tended to reproduce or echo the climactic moments
17

NOTEBOOK

IV

of humanity. The Italian primitives or the Passion according to St. John reliving, imitating, commenting endlessly
on the “It is finished” of Golgotha. Every defeat has in it
something of Athens thrown open to the Roman barbarians; every victory reminds us of Salamis, etc., etc.

Brulard: “My writings have always inspired in me the
same reticence as my loves.”
Id. “A salon of eight or ten persons, where all the women
have had lovers, where the conversation is lively and
anecdotal and a light punch is served shortly after midnight, is the one place in the world where I am most
comfortable.”

Psychosis of arrest. On the point of sending his son
his allowance, he increased it by a hundred francs. He felt
pushed to affection, to generosity. Anxiety makes him altruistic.*
Thus the two men hunted down in a city all day long
become sentimental as soon as they can talk. One of them
weeps, speaking of his wife he has not seen in two years.

Imagine evenings in cities where the hunted man wanders
alone.

To J.T. on The Stranger.
It’s a very studied book and the tone . . . is intentional.
The tone is heightened four or five times, to be sure, but

this is to avoid monotony and to provide composition. With
the Chaplain, my Stranger does not justify himself. He gets
angry, and that’s quite different. 'm the one to explain
4 See Cottard

in The

Plague,

last chapter

of I.

18

January

1942 —September

1945

then, you say? Yes, and I thought about that considerably.
I made up my mind to this because I wanted my character

to be led to the single great problem by way of the daily
and the natural. The great moment had to stand out. But
just notice that there is no break in my character. In that
chapter, as in the rest of the book, he limits himself to
answering questions. Before there were the questions that

the world asks us every day; at this moment there are the
questions of the Chaplain. So I define my character negatively.

In all this of course I am talking of artistic means and
not of the end. The meaning of the book lies precisely in
the parallelism of the two parts. Conclusion: society needs
people who weep at their mother’s funeral; or else one is
never condemned for the crime one thinks. Moreover, I see

ten other possible conclusions.

Napoleon’s great remarks: “Happiness is the greatest
development of my faculties.”
Before Elba: “A live scoundrel is better than a dead
emperor.”

“A really great man will always place himself above the
events he has caused.”
“One must will to live and know how to die.”

Criticisms of The Stranger. An epidemic of “Moralitis.”

You fools who think that negation is a forsaking when it
is a choice. (The author of The Plague shows the heroic

side of negation.) There is no other possible life for a
man deprived of God; and all men are. Fancying that viril-

ity lies in prophetic fidgeting, that greatness lies in spiritual
affectation! But that struggle through poetry and its obIg

NOTEBOOK

IV

scurities, that apparent revolt of the mind is the one that
costs least. It is invalid and tyrants are well aware of this.

Without Sequel>
.
“What am I thinking that is greater than I and that
I experience without being able to define it? A sort of
arduous progress toward a sanctity of negation—a heroism
without God—man

alone, in short. All human

virtues, in-

cluding solitude in regard to God.
“What constitutes the exemplary superiority (the only
one)

of Christianity?

Christ

and his saints; pursuit of a

style of life. My work will count as many forms as it has
stages on the way to an unrewarded perfection. The
Stranger is the zero point. Likewise The Myth of Sisyphus.

The Plague is a progress, not from zero toward the infinite, but toward a deeper complexity that remains to be
defined. The last point will be the saint, but he will have
his arithmetical value, measurable like man.”

Concerning

criticism. Three years to make

a book, five

lines to ridicule it, and the quotations wrong.
Letter to A.R., literary critic (fated not to be sent)...
One sentence in your criticism struck me: “I am not taking
into account . . .” How can an enlightened critic, aware of
the careful planning that goes into any work of art, fail
to take into account, in the depiction of a character, the
sole moment when he talks about himself and entrusts the
reader with some of his secret? And how could you fail to
feel that that ending was also a convergence, a privileged
5It appears
sequel”)

was

that sans
added

lendemain

(which

to the manuscript

might be rendered

after a rereading.
20

“without

January 1942 —September

1945

spot for the fragmented creature I have described to come
together at last...
. . . You attribute to me an ambition to be realistic.
Realism is an empty word (Madame Bovary and The
Possessed are both realistic novels and they have nothing
in common). I never thought of such a thing. If a label
had to be given to my ambition, I should speak rather of
the symbol. You were well aware of this, moreover. But
you attribute to that symbol a meaning it does not have
and, in short, you have gratuitously attributed to me a
ridiculous philosophy. Nothing in the book, in fact, can
allow you to assert that I believe in the natural man, that

I identify a human being with a vegetable, that human
nature is foreign to morality, etc., etc. The chief character
in the book never takes an initiative. You didn’t notice that
he always

limits himself to answering

questions,

those

asked by life or those asked by men. Hence he never asserts
anything. And I gave only a negative snapshot of him.
Nothing could make you leap to a presumption as to his
deeper attitude except, it so happens, the last chapter.
But you “are not taking it into account.”
The reasons for my insistence on “saying the minimum”
would be too long to give you. But I can at least regret
that a superficial reading prompted you to attribute to me
a philosophy of the man in the street that I am not ready
to assume. You will be more aware of what I am stating
if I point out that the only quotation in your article is
wrong (give it and correct it) and that it consequently
serves as a basis for illegitimate deductions. Perhaps there
was another philosophy and you were close to it when describing the word “inhumanity.” But what is the use of
pointing this out?
You will think perhaps that 'm making much ado over
a short book by an unknown writer. But I believe that this
2I

NOTEBOOK

IV

affair goes beyond me. For you have taken a moral point
of view that prevented you from judging with the lucidity
and the talent you have been known for. Your position is
untenable and you know it better than anyone. There is a
very vague frontier between your criticisms and the judg-

ments that may soon be made by a dictatorship (that were
made in France not so long ago) as to the moral character
of this or that work. Let me tell you without anger, that
is hateful. Neither you nor anyone has a right to judge
whether a work may serve or harm the nation at this
moment or forever. I refuse in any case to submit to such
judgments, and this is the reason for my letter. I beg you
to believe, indeed, that I should have accepted more serious

criticisms with serenity if they had been expressed in a
less didactic spirit.
In any case I hope that this letter will not lead to a
new misunderstanding. I am not indulging here in the
protest of a discontented writer. I beg you not to allow
any of this letter to be published. You have not seen my
name often in the periodicals, though they are not difficult of access. This is because, having nothing to say in
them, I do not like sacrificing to publicity. I am publishing
at present books that took years of work, simply because
they are now finished, and I am planning the next manuscript. I am not expecting any material advantage or any
consideration from them. I merely hoped that they would
win me the attention and patience granted to anything
undertaken in good faith. Apparently even that hope was
excessive.

Nevertheless, please believe me, sir . . . Yours

sincerely.

Three characters entered into the composition of The
Stranger: two men (I am one) and one woman.
22

January 1942 —September 1945

Brice Parain. Essay on the Platonic logos.® Studies the
logos as speech. Ends up by endowing Plato with a philosophy of expression. Traces Plato’s effort in pursuit of
a reasonable realism. What is the “tragic” element of the
problem? If our speech has no meaning, nothing has
meaning. If the sophists are right, the world is mad. Plato's
solution is not psychological; it is cosmological. What is
the originality of Parain’s position? He considers the problem of speech as metaphysical rather than social and psychological . . . etc., etc. See notes.

French workmen—the only ones among whom I feel at
home, whom I want to know and to “live” among. They are
like me.
LATE

AUGUST

’42

Literature. Be wary of that word. Don’t pronounce it too
fast. If one

took literature from

great writers, one would

remove what is probably most personal to them. Literature
=nostalgia. Nietzsche’s superman, Dostoevsky’s abyss,
Gide’s

gratuitous

act, etc., etc.

This sound of babbling springs throughout my days.
They flow around me, through sunny fields, then closer to
me and soon I shall have this sound in me, that spring
in my heart and that sound of a fountain mingled with
my every thought. It’s forgetfulness.
6A
Poésie

long essay by Camus,

“Sur

44, No.

1943-February

17

(December

une

philosophie

de l’expression,”

1944),

examines

with

in
evi-

dent favor the metaphysics of speech elaborated by Brice Parain in Essai
sur le logos platonicien (1942) and Recherches sur la nature et les
fonctions du langage (1942).

23

NOTEBOOK

IV

Plague. Impossible to get away from it. Too many elements of “chance” this time in the composition. I must
cling closely to the idea. The Stranger describes the nakedness of man facing the absurd. The Plague, the basic
equivalence of individual points of view facing the same
absurd. It’s a progress that will become clearer in other
works. But in addition The Plague shows that the absurd

teaches nothing. It’s a definitive progress.

Panelier.?

Before

sunrise,

above

the high hills, the fir

trees are not distinguishable from the rolling ground on

which they stand. Then the sun from a great distance behind them gilds the crest of the trees. Hence against the
but slightly faded background of the sky they look like an

army of feathered savages rising over the hill. Gradually,
as the sun rises and the sky brightens, the fir trees grow

larger and the barbarian army seems to move forward
and become more compact in a tumult of feathers before
the invasion. Then, when the sun is high enough, it sud-

denly lights up the fir trees, which pour down the slope
of the mountains. And it seems like a wild race toward
the valley, the outbreak of a brief and tragic battle in
which the barbarians of daylight will drive out the fragile
army of nocturnal thoughts.

What is touching in Joyce is not the work but the fact
of having undertaken it. Need for distinguishing thus the
emotional aspect of the undertaking (which has nothing

to do with art) and the artistic emotion proper.
7 For reasons of health, Camus spent several months in the winter and
spring of 1942-43 at Panelier, near Le Chambon-sur-Lignon
(HauteLoire), where the altitude is close to 3,000 feet.

24

January 1942 —September 1945

Convince oneself that a work of art is a human thing
and that the creator has nothing to expect from a transcendental “dictation.” The Charterhouse, Phédre, Adolphe

might have been quite different—and no less beautiful.
All depended on their author, the absolute master.

An essay on France years from now could not do without a reference to the present period. This idea came to me
in a little local train® as I saw pass by, grouped in front
of tiny stations, those French faces and silhouettes I shall
never forget: old peasant couples—she with a weathered
face and he with a smooth face lighted by two bright eyes
and

a white

mustache,

silhouettes

that two

winters

of

privations have twisted, dressed in shiny, darned clothing.
Elegance has left these people, now inhabited by poverty.
On trains their suitcases are worn-out, tied up with strings,

patched with cardboard.

All the French look like immi-

grants.
Id. in manufacturing towns. The old workman seated
at his window, wearing eyeglasses, taking advantage of
the fading daylight to read, his book lying like a good
little schoolboy’s between his hands flat on the table.
At the station, a mass of hurried people absorb with
good grace a vile fare, then go out into the dark town,
rub elbows without mingling and go back to their hotels,
their rooms, etc. Desolating and silent life that all France

endures while waiting.
Around the tenth, the eleventh, the twelfth of the month,

everyone smokes. By the eighteenth, impossible to get a
light in the streets. In trains everyone is talking of the
drought. It is less spectacular than in Algeria but it is no
8 Every week Camus traveled from Le Chambon-sur-Lignon
Etienne for medical treatment.

25

to Saint-

NOTEBOOK

IV

less tragic. An old workman tells of his poverty: his two
rooms an hour away from Saint-Etienne. Two hours of
travel, eight hours work; nothing to eat at home; too poor

to use the black market. A young woman does hours of
washing because she has two children and her husband
came home from war with a stomach ulcer. “He should
have white meat well cooked. Where are you going to get

that? He was given a diet certificate. So they give him %4 of
a quart of milk but they won’t allow him any fatty matter.

Did you ever hear of keeping a man alive on milk?” It
sometimes happens that her clients’ laundry is stolen, and
then she has to pay.
Meanwhile the rain is inundating the squalid landscape
of an industrial valley—the pungent smell of that poverty
—the dreadful straits of those lives. And the others indulge in speeches.
Saint-Etienne in the morning fog with the factory
whistles calling to work amid a jumble of towers, buildings, and tall chimneys belching toward a darkened sky
their deposit of cinders—the whole looking like a monstrous artificial cake.

Budejovice, Act III.® The sister returns after the mother’s
suicide. Scene with the wife:

“What gives you a right to speak?”
“My love.”
“What's that?”
The sister leaves for her death. The wife screams

weeps. The mute maidservant
weeping:
9 Notes for the next-to-last
entitled Budejovice.

scene

comes

and

in, drawn by the

of The Misunderstanding,

26

originally

January 1942 —September 1945

“Ah you, you at least will help me!”
“No.” (Curtain)

All great virtues have an absurd aspect.

Nostalgia for the life of others. This is because, seen
from the outside, another’s life forms a unit. Whereas ours,

seen from the inside, seems broken up. We are still chasing
after an illusion of unity.

Science explains what happens and not what is. Ex.:
why various species of flowers rather than a single one?

Novel. “He used to wait for her mornings under big hazel
bushes in the cold wind of autumn. Buzzing of wasps without summer’s heat, the wind in the leaves, a rooster insist-

ing on crowing behind the hills, hollow barkings, at intervals the croaking of a raven. Between the dark September sky and the damp earth, he felt as if he wereSens
for winter as well as for Marthe.”

Sexual relations with animals suppress the conscience
of the other. They are “freedom.” This is why they have
attracted so many minds, even Balzac.

Panelier. First September rain with a slight wind mingling the yellow leaves in the shower. They glide for a
moment and then the weight of water they are carrying
wins

a7

IV

NOTEBOOK

.

nature is

suddenly flattens them on the ground. When

banal as it is here, one is more aware of the change in sea-

sons.

Poor childhood. The raincoat too big—the siesta. The
duckling Vinga—Sundays at the aunt’s. Books—the public
library. Coming home Christmas night and the corpse in
front

of the

restaurant.

Games

in the

cellar

(Jeanne,

Joseph, and Max). Jeanne picks up every button; “that’s
the way to become rich.” The brother’s violin and the singing sessions—Galoufa.

Novel. Don’t put “the plague” in the title. But something like “The Prisoners.”

Avvakum! with his wife on foot in icy Siberia. The
Archpriestess: “Shall we have to suffer much longer, Archpriest?” Avvakum: “Daughter of Mark, unto death.” And
she, sighing: “Very well, son of Peter, then let us keep on
walking.”

I Corinthians 7:27: “Art thou bound unto a wife? Seek
not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? Seek not a
wife.”

Luke 6:26: “Woe unto you, when all men shall speak
well of you!”
1The

memoirs

of the Archpriest

considered the earliest Russian

Petrovich

autobiography.

Avvakum

(1620-82)

Twice banished

are

to Siberia

as the leader of the Old Believers, Avvakum was finally burned at the
stake. His memoirs were published in French in 1938 in a translation
by Pierre Pascal.

28

January 1942 -—September 1945

As

an

Apostle,

Judas

performed

miracles

(St. John

Chrysostom ).

Chuang Tzu (third of the great Taoists—second half
of the fourth century B.c.) has the point of view of
Lucretius: “The great bird rises on the wind to a height
of 90,000 stadia. What does he see from up there? —herds
of wild horses galloping.”

Until the Christian era, Buddha is never represented because he is in a state of Nirvana;
sonalized.

in other words, deper-

According to Proust, it is not a question of nature imitating art. The great artist teaches us to see in nature what
his work, in an individual

way, has managed

to isolate.

All women become Renoirs.?
“At the foot of the bed, shaken by all the waves of that
death agony, not weeping yet at times bathed in tears,
my

mother

whipped

had

by

the inanimate,

the

rain

and

desolate

look

twisted

by

of foliage

the wind.”

(Guermantes )

“Rarely do the individuals who have played an important part in our life disappear from it suddenly and
definitively.” (Guermantes )
2 Proust states that after refusing to recognize even the presence of
women in Renoir’s paintings we come, through familiarity with the new
style, to see all women as if they had been painted by Renoir. This and
the two following quotations, also from The Guermantes Way, may be
found

in the Pléiade

edition

in II, pp.

327,

344,

and

348 respectively.

The quotation that Camus has identified as from Cities of the Plain is in
II, p. 608.

29

NOTEBOOK

IV

Remembrance of Things Past is a heroic and virile
book
1) by the perseverence of the creative will;
2) by the effort demanded of an invalid.
“When my attacks had forced me to spend several days
and nights in succession, not only without sleep, but without lying down, without drinking and without eating, at the
moment when exhaustion and pain became such that I
thought I should never recover, I would think of a traveler
thrown up on the shore, poisoned by deadly weeds, shivering with fever in his clothes soaked by the sea, and who

nevertheless felt better after two days, resuming his way
at random,

in search

of any inhabitants

whatever,

who

might be cannibals. His example strengthened me, gave me
hope,

and

I was

discouragement.”

ashamed

of having

had

a moment

of

(Cities of the Plain)

He doesn’t go with a prostitute who accosts him and appeals to him because he has nothing but a thousand-franc
note on him and doesn’t dare ask her for change.

Feeling that is the reverse of Proust’s: in reference to
every town, every new apartment, every person, every rose
and every flame, force oneself to wonder at their novelty
while thinking of what habit will do to them; seek in the

future the “familiarity” they will give you; go in pursuit of
time that has not yet come.

Example: Solitary arrivals at night in strange cities—
that sensation of stifling, being transcended by an organism
a thousand times more complex. It is enough to locate the
main street on the morrow, everything falls into place
in relation to it, and we settle in. Collect memories of
go

January 1942 —September 1945

night arrivals in strange cities, live on the power of those
unknown hotel rooms.

In the streetcar: “He was born normal. But a week later
his eyelids stuck together. So, of course, his eyes rotted
away.”

As when we are attracted toward certain cities (almost
always those one has already lived in) or certain lives, the
images of sex—and then we are taken in. For even the
least spiritual among us never live according to sex, or at
least there are too many things in everyday life that
have nothing to do with sex. So that after having painfully
incarnated, and at rare intervals, one of those images or
come closer to one of those memories, life is filled with

long spaces of empty time like dead skins. And then it is
time to long for other cities.

Criticisms on The Stranger: Impassivity, they say. The
word is bad. Good will would be better.

Budejovice (or God does not answer).? The mute maidservant is an old manservant.
The wife in the last scene: “O Lord, have pity on me.
Turn your eyes on me. Hear me, O Lord. Hold out your
hand. O Lord, have pity on those who love each other and
are separated.”
The old man comes in.
“Did you call me?”
3 Notes for the final scene of The Misunderstanding.

31

NOTEBOOK

IV

The wife: “Yes... No...I don’t know. But help me,
help me, for I need to be helped. Have pity and deign
to help me.”
The old man: “No.”
(Curtain)

Look for details to strengthen the symbolism.

How can it be that, linked to such suffering, her face is

still the face of happiness for me?

Novel. Beside the dying body of the woman he loves: “I
can’t, I can’t let you die. For I know that I shall forget you.
Hence Ill lose everything and I want to keep you on this
side of the world, the only one where I am capable of
embracing you, etc., etc.”

She: “Oh, its a dreadful thing to die knowing one will
be forgotten.”
Always see and express at the same time the two aspects.

Sum up clearly my intentions with The Plague.

October. In the still green grass the already yellow
leaves. A spasmodic wind was forging with a sonorous sun
on the green anvil of the fields a rod of light from which
the buzzing of bees reached me. Red beauty.
Splendid, poisonous, and solitary like the red agaric.

There can be seen in Spinoza the love of what is and
not of what tends to or is to be—the hatred of values in
82

January 1942 —September 1945
black and white, of moral hierarchy—a certain equivalence

of virtues and evils in the divine light. “Men prefer order
to chaos as if order corresponded to something real in
nature.” (Appendix to Book One)
The inconceivable thing for him would be, not that God
created imperfection at the same time as perfection, but

that he hadn’t created it. For, possessing power to create
the whole gamut from the perfect to the imperfect, he
could not fail to do so. It’s unfortunate only from our point
of view, which is not the proper one.
His God, his universe are motionless

and their reasons

harmonize. Everything is given once and for all. It is up
to us, if we so wish, to distinguish the consequences

and

the reasons (whence the geometric form). But that universe tends toward nothing and comes from nothing because it is already complete and has always been so. It has
no tragedy because it has no history. It is consummately
inhuman. It is a world for courage.
[A world without

art also—because

devoid

of chance

(the Appendix to Book One denies that there is ugliness
or beauty ).]

Nietzsche says that the mathematical form in Spinoza
is justified only as a means of aesthetic expression.

See Ethics, Book One. Theorem XI gives four demonstrations of the existence of God. Theorem XIV and the big
Scholia of XV which seems to negate creation.
Could justify those who speak of Spinoza’s pantheism?
Yet it contains a postulate (a word that Spinoza avoids

throughout the Ethics): the void does not exist (proven,
to be sure, in the preceding works).

It is possible to contrast XVII and XXIV: the first proving necessity and the second capable of serving to reintroduce contingency. Theorem XXV establishes the relation between distance and modes. In XXXI, finally, will is limited.
33

NOTEBOOK

IV

God also by his own nature. XXXIII narrows even more
this so restricted world. It would seem that for Spinoza
the nature of God is even greater than he; but in Theorem
XXXIII he declares (in opposition to the partisans of Sovereign Good) that it is absurd to subject God to fate.
This world is established.once

and for all; this “is the

way it is’—necessity is infinite—originality and chance
have no role at all. Everything in it is monotonous.

Strange. Intelligent historians recounting the history of
a country bend every effort to praise a certain policy (realistic for instance) to which they attribute that country’s
great periods. Yet they themselves point out that such a

state of affairs has never managed to last because rather
soon another statesman or a new regime came along to
spoil everything. Nonetheless they persevere in defending a
policy that does not resist a change in personalities,
whereas politics is made up of a change in personalities.
This is because they think and write only for their own
era. The alternative to the historians: skepticism or the
political theory that does not depend on a change in person-

alities. (?)

This fine effort is to genius as the jerky flight of the
locust is to the flight of the swallow.

“At times, after all those days when will alone directed
me, when hour by hour that labor was accomplished which
admitted neither distraction nor weakness, which tried to

pay no attention to sentiment or the world, ah! what abandon seized me, with what relief I hurled myself into the dis34

January 1942 —September 1945

tress which, all those days, had accompanied me. What
a longing, what a temptation to cease being anything that
had to be consciously constructed and to forsake the work
and the difficult face I had to model. I loved, I had regrets,
I desired,

Iwas

aman at last...

“, . . The deserted summer sky, the sea I loved so much,
and those lips offered.”

Sexual life was given to man to distract him perhaps
from his true path. It’s his opium. With it everything falls
asleep. Outside it, things resume

life. At the same

time,

chastity kills the species, which is perhaps the truth.

A writer must never speak of his doubts regarding his
creation. It would be too easy to answer him: “Who is forcing you to create? If it is such constant anguish, why do
you endure it?” Doubts are the most intimate thing about
us. Never speak of one’s doubts, whatever they may be.

Wuthering Heights, one of the greatest love novels be-

cause it ends in failure and revolt—I mean in death without hope. The main character is the devil. Such a love can
be maintained only through the ultimate failure that is
death. It can continue only in hell.

OCTOBER

The great red forests in the rain, the meadows all covered
with yellow leaves, the smell of drying mushrooms, the
wood fires (the pine cones reduced to embers glow like
infernal diamonds), the wind moaning about the house—

85

NOTEBOOK

IV

where could there be a more conventional autumn? Peasants now walk bent forward, against the wind and the rain.
In the autumn woods, the beeches form spots of golden
yellow or stand out on the edge of the woods like big nests
flowing with golden honey.

OCTOBER

23.

BEGINNING

The Plague has a social meaning and a metaphysical
meaning. It’s exactly the same. Such ambiguity is in The
Stranger too.

People say: it means no more to him than the life of
a fly; and that doesn’t speak to the imagination. But if we
watch flies dying stuck to flypaper, we realize that the inventor of the device watched at length that dreadful and
insignificant death agony, that slow death which barely
gives off a slight smell of putrefaction. (Genius is responsi-

ble for the commonplace. )

Idea: He rejects everything offered him, every happiness
proposed because of a deeper exigence. He ruins his marriage, gets involved in only half-satisfactory liaisons, waits
and hopes. “I couldn’t really define it, but I feel it.” Thus

it is to the end of his life. “No, I'll never be able to define

itz

Sex leads to nothing. It is not immoral but it is unproductive. One can indulge in it so long as one does not want
to produce. But only chastity is linked to a personal progress.
36

January 1942 —September 1945

There is a time when sex is a victory—when it is separated from moral imperatives. But soon after it becomes
a defeat—and the only victory is then won over it: chastity.

Think of the commentary to Moliére’s Don Juan.4
NOVEMBER

’42

In the autumn

this landscape

blossoms

with leaves, the

cherry trees becoming quite red, the maples yellow, the
beeches all bronze. The plateau is covered with the thousand flames of a second spring.

Renouncing youth. I am not the one giving up persons
and things (I could not), but rather things and persons are
giving me up. My youth is fleeing me; that’s what it is to
be ill.
The first thing for a writer to learn is the art of transposing what he feels into what he wants to make others
feel. The first few times he succeeds by chance. But then
talent must take the place of chance. Hence there is an
element of chance at the root of genius.
He always says: “It’s what in my region would be
called .. .” and he adds a trite expression that belongs to
no region. Example: It’s what in my region would be called
ideal weather (or a dazzling career, or a model girl, or
poetic lighting
).°
4 Nothing corresponding to an outline of such a commentary has been
found in Camus’s files.
5 See Grand’s verbal mania

in The Plague, sixth chapter of I.

37

NOTEBOOK

NOVEMBER

11.

IV

Caught like rats!é

In the morning everything is covered with hoarfrost; the
sky is shining behind the garlands and streamers of an
immaculate village fair. At ten o’clock, when the sun begins to warm everything, the whole countryside is filled
with the crystalline music of an aerial thaw: little cracklings as if the trees were sighing, fall of the frost on the
ground like a sound of white insects dropped on one another, late leaves constantly falling under the weight of
the ice and barely bouncing on the ground like weightless
bones. All around,

the hills and valleys vanish

in wisps

of smoke. After looking at it for a time, one becomes aware
that this landscape, as it loses its colors, had suddenly aged.

It is a very ancient landscape returning to us in a single
morning through millennia . . . This spur covered with
trees and ferns juts out like the prow of a ship into the
joining of the two streams. Freed from the hoarfrost by

the first rays of the sun, it is the only living thing in this
landscape white like eternity. In this spot at least the mingled voices of the two rushing streams join together against
the endless silence surrounding them. But gradually the

song of the waters is itself fused into the landscape. Without diminishing a jot, it nevertheless becomes silence. And

from time to time nothing but the flight of three smokecolored ravens brings signs of life back into the sky.
Seated at the peak of the prow, I follow that motionless
navigation in the land of indifference. Nothing less than
all nature and this white peace that winter brings to overheated hearts—to calm this heart consumed by a bitter
love. I watch as this swelling of light spreads over the sky
negating the omens of death. Sign of the future in short,
6 The allied landing in North Africa isolated Camus
home.

38

from family and

January 1942 —September 1945

above me to whom everything now speaks of the past. Keep
quiet, lung! Fill yourself with this icy, pure air that feeds
you. Keep silent. May I cease being forced to listen to your
slow rotting away—and may I turn at last toward...

Saint-Etienne
I know what Sunday is for a poor working man. I know
especially what a Sunday evening is, and if I could give
a meaning and a shape to what I know, I could make of a
poor Sunday a work of humanity.

I ought not to have written: if the world were clear, art
would not exist—but if the world seemed to me to have
a meaning I should not write at all. There are cases when
one must be personal, out of modesty. In addition, the
remark would have forced me to think it over and, in the
end, I should not have written it. It is a brilliant truth, with-

out basis.

Unbridled sex leads to a philosophy of the non-significance of the world. Chastity on the other hand gives the
world a meaning.

Kierkegaard. Aesthetic value of marriage. Definitive
views but too much verbiage.
Role of ethics and aesthetics in the formation of the
personality: much more solid and stirring. Apology for
the general.

For Kierkegaard aesthetic morality has as an aim originality—and in fact what counts is to achieve the general.
39

NOTEBOOK

IV

Kierkegaard is not mystical. He criticizes mysticism because
it stands apart from the world—because it does not belong
to the general. If there is a leap in Kierkegaard, it is therefore an intellectual leap. It is the pure leap; on the ethical
plane. But the religious plane transfigures everything.

At what moment does life change into fate? At death?
But that is a fate for others, for history and for one’s family.
Through consciousness? But it is the mind that creates
an image of life as fate, that introduces a coherence where
there is none. In both cases, it is an illusion. Conclusion? :

there is no fate?

Excessive use of Eurydice’ in the literature of the forties.
Because never have so many lovers been separated.

The whole art of Kafka consists in forcing the reader to
reread.® His endings—or his absence of endings—suggest
explanations which, however, do not appear clearly and
require the story to be reread from another point of view

to seem justified. Sometimes there is a double or triple
possibility of interpretation, whence the necessity for two
or three readings. But it would be wrong to try to interpret
everything in Kafka in detail. A symbol is always general
and the artist gives a wholesale translation of it. There is
no literal application. Only the rhythm matters. And as
for the rest, one must allow for chance, which is great in

any creator.
7See The Plague, first chapter of IV.
8 See Camus’s article on Kafka published as an Appendix to The Myth
of Sisyphus

(Alfred

A. Knopf,

1955).

40

January 1942 -—September 1945

In this region where winter has suppressed all color
(everything is white), the least sound (the snow smothers
it), all scents (the cold covers them), the first scent of

growing things in the spring must be like the joyous call,
the trumpet blast of sensation.

Illness is a convent which has its rule, its austerity, its
silences, and its inspirations.

Algerian nights, the barkings of dogs reverberate through
spaces ten times greater than in Europe. Thus the sound
takes on a nostalgia unknown in these narrow regions. It
is a language that I am the only one to hear today—thanks
to memory.

Development of the absurd:
1) if the basic concern is the need for unity;
2) if the world (or God) cannot suffice.

It is up to man to forge a unity for himself, either by
turning away from the world, or within the world. Thus
are restored a morality and an austerity that remain to be
defined.

Living with one’s passions amounts to living with one’s
sufferings, which are the counterpoise, the corrective, the

balance, and the price. When a man has learned—and
not on paper—how to remain alone with his suffering,
how to overcome his longing to flee, the illusion that others
may share, then he has little left to learn.
41

NOTEBOOK

IV

Let’s suppose a philosopher who after having published
several works declares in a new book: “Up to now I was
going in the wrong direction. I am going to begin all over.
I think now that I was wrong.” No one would take him seriously any more. And yet he would then be giving proof
that he is worthy of thought..

Outside of love, woman is boring. She doesn’t know.
You must live with one and keep silent. Or else sleep with
all and make love. What matters is something else.

Pascal:

Error comes from exclusion.

Balance in Macbeth:

“Fair is foul and foul is fair,” but

this is of diabolical origin. “And nothing is but what is
not.” And elsewhere, Act II, Scene 3: “For from this instant

there’s nothing serious in mortality.” Garnier translates
“The night is long that never finds the day” by “Il n’est si
longue nuit qui n’atteigne le jour.” (?)
Yes.® “It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing.”

The gods granted man great and dazzling virtues that
put him in a position to overcome all. But at the same time
they granted him a bitterer virtue which makes him scorn
afterward everything that can be overcome.
. . Constant enjoyment is impossible; weariness comes
in the end. Perfect. But why? In reality one cannot always
9In the manuscript
case it would

this word

stand for Macbeth,

might be Oui, or simply M, in which
who

speaks

this line.

42

January 1942 —September 1945

enjoy because one cannot enjoy everything. One feels as
much weariness counting up the number of enjoyments
that one will never have, whatever one does, as calculating
those one has already had. If one could embrace everything, in fact, really, would there be weariness?

Question to be asked: Do you love ideas—passionately,

with your life? Does this thought keep you from sleeping?
Do you feel that you are risking your life on it? How many

philosophers would retreat!

In publishing the plays: Caligula:
(or Budejovice): comedy.

DECEMBER

tragedy; The Exile

I5

Accept the test; extract its unity. If the opponent does not
reply, die in diversity.

Beauty, Nietzsche says after Stendhal, is a promise of
happiness. But if it is not happiness itself, what can it
promise?

. . . It was when everything was covered with snow that
I perceived that the doors and windows were blue.

If it is true that crime exhausts all man’s faculty for
life (see above?) . . . This is the way in which Cain’s crime
1 Page

17 of this Notebook.

43

NOTEBOOK

IV

(and not Adam’s, which in comparison seems a venial sin)
exhausted our strength and our love of life. To the extent
to which we share in his nature and his condemnation, we
suffer from that strange abeyance and that melancholy
lack of adaptation that follow too great outbursts and exhausting deeds. At a single stroke Cain emptied for us every
possibility of an effective life. That’s the meaning of hell.
But obviously it is on earth.

The Princesse de Cléves.? Not so simple as that. It develops by means of several tales. It starts out in complexity
even though it ends in unity. In comparison with Adolphe,
it is a complicated thriller.*
Its real simplicity lies in its conceptions of love: for
Mme de La Fayette love is a danger. That is her postulate.
And one feels throughout her book, as one does in La
Princesse de Montpensier or La Comtesse de Tende, a con-

sistent fear of love
indifference ).

(which, by the way, is the contrary of

“His pardon was brought him as he was awaiting the
final stroke of death; but fear had gripped him to such an
extent that he had lost consciousness and died a few days
later.” (All the characters of La Fayette who die, die of
emotion. It is easy to understand why emotion inspires such
a fear in her.)

“I told her that so long as his affliction had limits I had
approved it and shared it; but that I should cease to pity
him if he yielded to despair and lost his reason.” Magnificent. That is the reticence of our classic age. It is virile.
2See “L’Intelligence et l’échafaud,” published in Confluences
1943 and reprinted in the Pléiade volume of Camus, p. 1887.

3 Both
Adolphe,

in July

the seventeenth-century novel by Mme de La Fayette and
Benjamin Constant’s psychological novel of the Romantic

period, analyze love.

44

January 1942 —September 1945

But it is not unfeeling. For the same man (the Prince de
Cléves) who says that, later dies of despair.
“The Chevalier de Guise .. . resolved never to think again
of being loved by Mme de Cléves. But in order to forsake
that undertaking that had seemed to him so difficult and
so glorious, he needed another great enough to keep him
busy. He conceived the idea of conquering Rhodes.”
“What Mme de Cléves had said of his portrait had restored him to life by revealing to him that he was the one
she did not hate.” The very word burns her lips.
Poverty is a state of which the virtue is generosity.

Poor childhood. Essential difference when I would go to
my uncle’s:* at home objects had no name; we used to say:
the deep plates, the pot on the mantle, etc. In his house:
the glazed earthenware from the Vosges, the Quimper dinner service, etc.—I awakened to the possibility of choice.
Brute physical desire is easy. But desire at the same time

as affection calls for time. One has to travel through the
whole land of love before finding the flame of desire. Is
that why it is always so hard to desire, in the beginning,
what one loves?
Essay on revolt.> Nostalgia for “beginnings.” Id. The
theme of the relative—but the relative with passion. Ex.:
Torn between the world that does not suffice and God
4 Camus’s uncle, M. Acault, was a butcher with a passion for literature

and ideas. In the Hommage

a André Gide of the N.R.F. (November 1951),

Camus tells how this uncle lent him the first Gide he read.
5 See “Remarques sur la Révolte” in L’Existence (1945),

figures the first chapter of The Rebel.

45

which

pre-

NOTEBOOK

IV

who is lacking, the absurd mind passionately chooses the
world. Id.: Divided between the relative and the absolute,
it leaps eagerly into the relative.
Now that he knows its value, he is deprived. The condition of possession is ignorance. Even on the physical plane:
one really possesses only a stranger.

Budejovice (or The Exile)
I

The mother:

“No, not tonight. Let’s leave him this time

and this pause. Let’s allow him that latitude. Perhaps it’s
within that latitude that we can be saved.”
The daughter: “What do you mean by be saved?”
The mother: “Receive eternal forgiveness.”

The daughter: “Then I am already saved. For everything
to come I forgave myself in advance.”
II

Id. See above.
Sister: “In the name of what?”
The wife: “In the name of my love.”
Sister: “What does that word mean?”
(Pause)

Wife: “Love is my past joy and my present sorrow.”
Sister: “Decidedly you are speaking a language I don’t
understand.

Love,

joy, and

sorrow—I

have

never

heard

those words.”
Til

“Ah!” he said before dying, “so this world is not made
for me and this house is not mine.”
46

January 1942—September 1945

The sister: “The world is made to die in and a house to

sleep in.”
IV

Second Act. Meditation on hotel rooms. He rings. Silence.
Footsteps. The old mute appears. For a moment motionless
and silent outside the door.
“Nothing,” he says. “Nothing. I wanted to know if someone would answer, if the bell worked.”
The old man motionless a moment; then he goes away.

Footsteps.
Vv

The sister: “Pray God to make you like a stone. That
is true happiness and that is what he chose for himself.
“He is deaf, I tell you, and dumb as a piece of granite.
Make yourself like him until you know nothing of the world
but the trickling water and the warming sun. Join the stone
while there is still time.” (To be expanded.)
The absurd world can receive only an aesthetic justification.

Nietzsche: Nothing decisive is ever built except on a
“despite everything.”

The metaphysical novels of Maurice Blanchot*®
Thomas lObscur. What attracts Anne in Thomas is the

death he bears in him. Her love is metaphysical. Therefore
6 Maurice Blanchot (1907-—
) is the author of at least five other
novels of the inexplicable, in addition to the first two mentioned here,

and

of several stimulating

essays,

including

one

on Lautréamont

Sade.

47

and

NOTEBOOK

IV

she separates from him at the moment of dying. For at
that moment she knows and one loves though not knowing.
Hence, only death is true knowledge. But at the same time
it is what makes knowledge useless: its progress is sterile.
Thomas discovers the death in him that prefigures his
future. The key of the book is given in Chapter XIV. Then
one has to reread and everything lights up, but with the
muted light that bathes the asphodels of the realm of the
dead. (Near the farm, an odd tree, made up of two interlocked trunks, one of which, long dead and with rotten base,

does not even touch the ground any more. It has remained
clinging to the other one and the two together symbolize
Thomas rather well. But the live trunk has not let itself be
strangled. It has thickened its bark’s grip around the dead
trunk; it has sent its branches

out around

and above; it

has not let itself be dragged down.)
Aminadab, despite appearances, is more obscure. It’s
a new form of the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice (worth
noting that in both books the impression of fatigue the
character seems to feel and communicates to the reader is
an impression of art).

Plague. Second version
Bible—Deuteronomy 28:21, 32:24; Leviticus 26:25;
Amos 4:10; Exodus 9:4, 15; 12:29; Jeremiah 24:10, 14:
12,,6:10, 21:7 and’9; Hzechiel 5.126: 73,7416.
“Each man seeks out his desert and as soon as it is found

recognizes it to be too harsh. It shall not be said that I cannot endure mine.”

Originally’ the first three parts, composed of newspapers,
notebooks, notations, sermons, treatises, and objective nar7At this point, the manuscript reads: “See Notebook”—where
following paragraph was found among the notes for The Plague.

48

the

January 1942 —September 1945

ration, were to suggest, intrigue, and open up the depths
of the book. The last part, composed solely of events, was
to translate the general significance through them and
through them alone.
Each part was also to tighten the links between the
characters a little more—and was to make the significance
felt by the progressive fusion of the diaries into a single
diary and to complete this in the scenes of the fourth part.

Second version
The picturesque and descriptive Plague—little bits of
documentation and a disquisition on scourges.

Stephan*—Chapter 2: He curses that love that cheated
him of all the rest.
Put everything in the indirect style (sermons, newspapers, etc.) and monotonous

relief through pictures of

the Plague?
Decidedly it must be a narrative, a chronicle. But how
many problems that raises.
Perhaps: reconstruct Stephan altogether by suppressing
theme of love. Stephan doesn’t develop. What came after
suggested a broader development.
Carry along to the end the theme of separation.
Have a general report written on the plague in O.?
Those who discover a flea on them.
A chapter on poverty.
For

the

sermon:

“Have

you

noticed,

brethren,

how

monotonous Jeremiah is?”
Additional character:

a man exiled from loved ones, an

exile who does everything to get out of the city and cannot.
His official steps: he tries to get a pass on the grounds
“that he doesn’t

belong here.” If he dies, show

that he

8 Stephan figures as a character in the first version of The Plague.

49

NOTEBOOK

IV

suffers first from not having gone back to his beloved, and

from so many things left hanging. That would be the very
essence of the horror of the plague.
Be careful: asthma does not justify such frequent visits.
Introduce the atmosphere of Oran.

Nothing “grimacing,” just what is natural.
Civilian heroism.
Develop the social criticism and the revolt. What they
lack is imagination. They settle down in an epic as in a
picnic. They do not think of the scale of scourges. And the
remedies they imagine are scarcely worthy of a head cold.
They will perish (to be expanded).
A chapter on illness. “They noted once more that physical suffering never came to them in isolation but was always accompanied by moral sufferings (family and loves
frustrated) which deepened their pain. They thus became
aware—contrary to the current opinion—that if one of the
painful privileges of the human lot was to die alone, it was
no less cruel and no less true an image that it was never
possible for man to die truly alone.”
Moral of the plague: it was of no use to anything or
anyone. Only those who were touched by death directly
or in their families learned something. But the truth they
have arrived at concerns only themselves. It has no future.
The events and the chronicles are to give the social meaning of the Plague. The characters give its deeper meaning.
But all this in a general way.
Social criticism. The encounter between the administration, which is an abstract entity, and the plague, which is
the most concrete of all forces, can only produce comic and
scandalous results.
The man who is separated from his beloved escapes
because he cannot wait until she has grown old.
50

January 1942 —September 1945

A chapter on the relatives separated in camps.
End of the first part. The progression in cases of plague
must be based on that of the rats. Broaden. Broaden.
The phony plague?
The first part is devoted to exposition, which ought to
be altogether very rapid—even in the newspapers.
One of the possible themes: battle between medicine
and religion: the powers of the relative (and what a relative!) against those of the absolute. It is the relative that
wins out or rather does not lose.
“Of course, we know that the plague has its good side,
that it opens eyes, that it forces us to think. In this regard
it is like all the evils of this world and the world itself. But
what is true likewise of the evils of this world and of the
world itself is true likewise of the plague. Whatever nobility
individuals derive from it, if we consider the unhappiness
of our brothers,

a man

must be a madman,

a criminal, or

a coward to consent to the plague, and the only possible
stance of a man when faced with it is revolt.”
All seek peace. Bring this out.
?Take Cottard in reverse: describe his behavior and reveal at the end that he was afraid of being arrested.
The newspapers have nothing else to report but stories
of the plague. People say: there’s nothing in the newspaper.
Doctors are brought in from the outside.
What seems to me to characterize that period best is
separation. All were separated from the rest of the world,
from those they loved or from their routine. And in that
withdrawal they were obliged, those who could, to meditate, and the others to live the life of hunted animals. In
short, there was no alternative.
The exile, at the end, infected with the plague, runs to
51

NOTEBOOK

IV

a high place and calls to his wife with great shouts over
the walls of the city, the countryside, three villages, and
a river.

?A preface by the narrator with considerations on objectivity and eyewitness accounts.

At the end of the plague, all the inhabitants look like
immigrants.
Add details of “epidemic.”

;

Tarrou is the man who can understand everything—and
who suffers thereby. He cannot judge anything.
What is the ideal of the man who is a prey to the plague?
I'm certainly going to make you laugh: it’s honesty.

Suppress: “in the beginning’—in fact—in reality—the
first days—about at the same time, etc.

?Show throughout the book that Rieux is the narrator
by a detective’s means. In the beginning: cigarette smell.
At one and the same time shyness and need of warmth.
To reconcile

them:

the movies,

where

one

sits tight to-

gether without knowing one another.
Islands of light in the darkened city toward which

a

horde of shadows are converging like a mass of paramecia
attracted by a heliotropism.

For the exile:

evening in cafés where the lights are

turned on as late as possible to save electricity, where twilight seeps into the room like gray water, the colors of the
sunset being dimly reflected in the windows, the marbletopped tables and the backs of chairs shining feebly: that
is the hour of his surrender.

The people suffering from separation, second part:
“They were struck by the number of little things that
counted greatly for them and had no existence for others.
Thus they discovered personal life.” “They were well aware

that it had to come to an end—or at least that they ought
52

January 1942 -—September 1945

to long for the end—and consequently they longed for it,
but without the original enthusiasm—just with the very
clear reasons they now had. Of the great original enthusiasm they retained only a dull dejection that made them
forget the very cause of that consternation. They had the
external appearance of melancholy and misfortune, but
they had ceased to feel their goad. Basically, that was just
what their misfortune was. Before, they were merely a
prey to despair. Thus it is that many were not faithful.
For from their suffering in love they had kept only a liking
and a need for love and, drifting away from the creature
who had awakened that liking and that need, they had felt

weaker and had eventually yielded to the first promise
of affection. Hence they were unfaithful through love.”
“Seen at a distance, their life now seemed to them to form

a unit. Then it was that they clung to it with new vigor.
Thus the plague restored unity to them. It must be concluded that those men were unable to live with their unity,
whatever it was—or rather that they were capable of living it only when deprived of it.” — “They sometimes perceived that they had stopped at the first phase, when they
planned to display some day a certain thing to a certain

friend who was no longer there. They still had hope. The
second phase really began when they could no longer think
except in terms of the plague.” — “But sometimes in the
middle of the night their wound would open afresh. And,
suddenly awakened, they would finger its painful edges,

they would recover their suffering anew and with it the
stricken face of their love.”
I want to express by means of the plague the stifling air
from which we all suffered and the atmosphere of threat
and exile in which we lived. I want at the same time to
extend that interpretation to the notion of existence in
general. The plague will give the image of those who in
53

NOTEBOOK

IV

this war were limited to reflection, to silence—and to moral

anguish.

Thirst is not known here and that sensation of being
dried out that seizes the whole being after running in the
sun and the dust. The lemonade you swallow: you don’t
feel the liquid going down at all but only the myriad needle
pricks of the carbonation.

Not made for dispersion.

JANUARY

I5

Illness is a cross, but perhaps also a guardrail. The ideal,
however, would be to draw strength from it and to refuse

its weaknesses. Let it be the retreat that makes one stronger
at the proper moment. And if one has to pay in suffering
and renunciation, let’s pay up.

Because the sky is blue, the trees covered with snow on
the edge of the stream which stretch out their white
branches very low above the icy water look like almond
trees in blossom. In this region the eyes are constantly
confused between spring and winter.
I have started an affair with this region, in other words
I have reasons for loving it and reasons for hating it. For

Algeria on the other hand I have unbridled passion and
I surrender to the pleasure of loving. Question: Can one
love a country like a woman?

54

January 1942 —September 1945

Plague—second

version. Separation.

The separated people perceive that in reality they have
never ceased, in the first phase, hoping for something:
that letters would arrive, that the plague would end, that
the absent one would slip into the city. It’s only in the
second phase that they no longer hope. But at that moment
they have happily lost their vital energy (or else life gives
them new subjects of interest). They must die or betray.
Id.:; those moments when they let themselves sink into
the plague and long for the relaxation it provides. Cottard

says: it must be good in prison. And the inhabitants: the
plague perhaps frees from everything.

Kierkegaard’s purity of heart— What verbiage. Is genius
therefore so slow?
“Despair is the frontier on which there come together
in equal powerlessness the outburst of a cowardly timid
selfishness and the temerity of a proudly obdurate mind.”
“When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.”
(Matt. 12:43)
His distinction between men of action and men of suffering.
Id. for Kafka: “Terrestrial hope must be struck dead;
only then can one save oneself through true hope.”
Purity of heart for K. is unity. But it is unity and the
good. There is no purity outside of God. Conclusion: resign

oneself to the impure? I am far from the good and I thirst
for unity. That is irreparable.

Essay on Revolt. After having placed the origin of philosophy in anguish: have it originate in happiness.
55

NOTEBOOK

IV

Id. To regenerate love in the absurd world amounts in
fact to regenerating the most burning and most perishable
of human feelings (Plato: “If we were gods, we should not
know love”). But there is no value judgment to be made
as to lasting love (on this earth) and the love that is not
lasting. A faithful love—if it does not wear out—is a way
for man to maintain as long as possible the best of himself.
This is how fidelity is given a new value. But such a love
lies outside the eternal. It is the most human of feelings
with all the limitation and exaltation that the word involves. This is why man realizes himself only in love because he finds there in a dazzling form the image of his
condition

without

future

(and

not,

as the idealists

say,

because he approaches a certain form of the eternal). The
type: Heathcliff. All this illustrates the fact that absurdity
finds its expression in the opposition between what lasts

and what does not last. Granting that there is but one
way of lasting, which is lasting eternally, and that there

is no middle way. We belong to the world that does not
last. And all that does not last—and nothing but what does
not last—is ours. Thus it is a matter of rescuing love from
eternity or at least from those who dress it up in the image

of eternity. I readily see the objection: obviously you have
never loved. Let’s drop it.

Plague. Second version.

The people who are separated lose all critical sense. The

most intelligent among them can be seen looking in the
newspapers and radio broadcasts for reasons for believing
in a sudden end of the plague, building up unfounded
hopes and feeling gratuitous fears on reading the reflections that a journalist wrote rather at random as he yawned
with boredom.
56

January 1942 —September 1945

The thing that lights up the world and makes it bearable
is the customary feeling we have of our connections with
it—and more particularly of what links us to human beings.
Relations with other people always help us to carry on
because they always suppose developments, a future—
and also because we live as if our only purpose were to
have relations with human beings. But the days when we
become aware that this is not our only purpose, when
we realize that our will alone keeps those human beings
attached to us (stop writing or speaking, isolate yourself,
and you will see them melt around you), that in reality
most of them have their backs turned (not through malice,
but through indifference) and that the remainder always

have the possibility of becoming interested in something
else, when

we

imagine

in this way

the element

of con-

tingency, of play of circumstances, that enters into what
is called a love or a friendship, then the world returns to
its night and we to that great cold whence human affection
drew us for a moment.

EB
RU AR YY) LO

Four months of ascetic and solitary life. The will, the mind
profit from it. But the heart?

The whole problem of the absurd ought to be able to be
centered on a critique of the value judgment and the factual judgment.

Strange text in Genesis (3:22): “And the Lord God said,
Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and
57

NOTEBOOK

IV

evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of
the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.” ...

And the flaming sword driving the man out of Eden
which “turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of
life.” It’s the story of Zeus and Prometheus all over again.
Man had the power of becoming God’s equal, and God

feared him and kept him in bondage. Id. Concerning the
divine responsibility.

What bothers me in the exercise of thought or the discipline necessary to the work of art is imagination. I have

an unbridled imagination, without proportion, somewhat
monstrous. Hard to know the tremendous role it played in
my life. And yet I never noticed that personal peculiarity

until the age of thirty.
Occasionally on a train or a bus the time drags and I
keep myself from getting lost in playing with images or
constructions that seem to me sterile. Tired of having constantly to call my thought to order, to bring it back to what
I need

it to feed on, there comes

a moment

when I let

myself go, flow would be more correct: the hours rush by
and I reach my destination before I am aware.

Perhaps it is my liking for stone that attracts me so
much to sculpture. It restores to the human form the
weight and indifference without which I cannot see any
greatness in it.

Essay: a chapter on the “fecundity of tautologies.”
58

January 1942 —September 1945

A mind somewhat accustomed to the gymnastics of intelligence knows, like Pascal, that all error comes from an

exclusion. On the frontiers of intelligence we know most
certainly that there is truth in any theory and that none of
the great experiences of humanity, even if they are apparently quite opposed, even if they are named Socrates
and Empedocles or Pascal and Sade, is a priori insignificant. But the occasion forces us to a choice. In this way it
seems essential to Nietzsche to attack Socrates and Christianity with forceful arguments. But in this way on the
other hand it is essential for us to defend Socrates today,

or at least what he represents, because the era threatens
to put in their place values that are the negation of all

culture and because Nietzsche might here achieve a victory that he would not want.
This seems to introduce a certain opportunism into the
life of ideas. But it only seems so, for neither Nietzsche
nor we lose sight of the other side of the question and it
is merely a matter of a defense reaction. And finally Nietzsche’s experience added to ours, like Pascal’s added to
Darwin’s,

Callicles’s

added

to Plato’s, restores

the whole

human register and returns us to our native land. (But
all this can be true only with a dozen additional reservations.)
See in any case Nietzsche (Origin of Philosophy—
Bianquis, p. 208°):

“Socrates,

I must

confess, is so close

to me that I am almost constantly fighting him.”

Plague, second version. The people separated from others
have difficulties with the days of the week. Sunday, of
9 See Geneviéve

Bianquis’s

Nietzsche, published in Paris in 1933.

59

NOTEBOOK

IV

course. Saturday afternoon. And certain days formerly
devoted to certain rites.
Id. A chapter on the terror: “People they came after at
Nights
In the chapter on the isolation camps: the relatives are
already separated from the dead—then for sanitary reasons children are separated from their parents and the
men from the women. So that separation becomes general.

All are forced into solitude.
In this way make the theme of separation the big theme
of the novel. “They had asked nothing of the plague. In
the center of an incomprehensible world they had patiently
constructed a universe of their own, very human, in which

affection and habit shared their days. And now probably
it was not enough to be separated from the world itself; the
plague still had to separate them from their modest daily
creations. After having blinded their minds, it tore out
their hearts.” In practice, there are nothing but solitary
people in the novel.

Plague, second

version.

One looks for peace and turns to human beings to get
it from them. But they can give nothing to begin with but
madness and confusion. It must be sought elsewhere, yet
the heavens

are mute. And then, but only then, can one

return to human beings, since, lacking peace, they give
you sleep.

Plague, second version.

It is good that there are terraces above the plague.
They are all right, says Rieux.
Tarrou (or Rieux) forgives the plague.
60

January 1942 —September 1945

Essay on Revolt. The absurd world in the beginning is

not analyzed rigorously. It is evoked and it is imagined.
Hence that world is the product of thought in general, in
other words of precise imagination. It is the application
to the conduct of life and to aesthetics of a certain modern
principle. It is not an analysis.
But

once

that world

is sketched

out,

the first stone

(there is only one) put in place, philosophizing becomes
possible—or rather, if you have fully understood—becomes
necessary. Analysis and rigor are required and brought
back in. Detail and description win out. From “nothing
is interesting but . . .” one extracts “everything is interesting except . . .” Whence a precise and rigorous study—
without conclusions—on revolt.
1) the impulse to revolt and external revolt;
2) the state of revolt;

3) metaphysical revolt.
Impulse to revolt: One’s right—the feeling that it has
gone on too long—that the opponent is overstepping his
right

(one’s

father,

for instance).

“So far, yes, but

no

farther”—continue the analysis.
See notes Origin of Philosophy and Man of Resentment

in Essay.
Essay on Revolt: one of the directions of the absurd
spirit is poverty and destitution.
One way not to let oneself be “possessed” by the absurd
is not to draw any advantage from it. No sexual dispersion
without chastity, etc.
Id. Introduce theme of oscillation.
Id. Contemplation as one of the absurd aims, insofar
as it benefits without taking sides.
1 Vom
in 1933

Umsturz der Werte by Max Scheler was translated into French
as L’Homme

du Ressentiment.

6r

NOTEBOOK

Let’s imagine a thinker who says:

IV

“There, I know that

is true. But in the end I dislike the consequences and I
withdraw. Truth is unacceptable even to the one who finds
it.” This represents the absurd thinker and his constant
discomfort.

This strange wind that always blows on the edge of the
woods. Odd ideal of man:

in the very heart of nature, to

build himself a dwelling.

One must make up one’s mind to introduce into matters
of thought the necessary distinction between a philosophy
of evidence and a philosophy of preference. In other words,

one can end up with a philosophy distasteful to the mind
and the heart but which

commands

respect.

Thus

my

philosophy of evidence is the absurd. But that doesn’t keep
me from having (or more precisely from knowing) a philosophy of preference. Ex.: a fair balance between the mind

and the world, harmony, plenitude, etc. . . . The happy
thinker is the one who follows his inclination;

the exiled

thinker is the one who refuses to do so—out of truth—with
regret but determination .. .
Can one push as far as possible such a separation between the thinker and his system? Isn’t it in fact returning
to an indirect realism?—truth external to the man and
constraining.

Perhaps,

but it would

then

be an unsatis-

factory realism. Not an a priori solution.

The great problem to be solved “practically”:
be happy and solitary?
62

can one

January 1942 —September 1945

Anthology

of insignificance.?

And

first of all, what

is

insignificance? Here the etymology is misleading. It is not
what has no meaning. For then it would have to be said
that the world is insignificant. Senseless and insignificant
are not synonymous. An insignificant character can be
quite reasonable. It is not what is futile either. There are
great deeds, serious and grandiose projects that are insignificant.

This, however,

puts us on the track. For those

deeds do not seem insignificant to whoever undertakes
them with official seriousness. One must consequently add
that they are insignificant for . . . that a character is insignificant in regard to. . . that a thought is insignificant
in relation to . . . In other words, and it applies to every-

thing, there is a relativity of insignificance. Which does
not mean that insignificance is a relative thing. It bears
relation to something that is not insignificance—that has
meaning—a certain importance, that “counts,” that deserves interest, that is worth pausing over, paying attention to, devoting oneself to, that has a place and justly so,
that strikes the mind, that calls attention

to itself, that

is flagrantly obvious, etc. That thing is not yet any easier
to define. Insignificance will be relative only if several
definitions can be given of this standard of significance.
Otherwise it is, like everything else, comparable to something greater, deriving the little meaning it has from a
more general significance. Let us pause over these words.
To a certain degree, with great precaution and calling to
the rescue numerous reservations, it might be said that
an insignificant thing is not necessarily a thing that has
no meaning, but a thing that has not, in itself, a general
significance. In other words, and according to the normal

scale of values, if I get married I perform an act that
2See “De Vinsignificance” by Camus in Cahiers des Saisons
reprinted in the Pléiade volume of Camus, p. 1894.

63

(1959),

NOTEBOOK

IV

takes on a general significance in the order of the species,
another in the order of society, in that of religion, and
perhaps a final one in the metaphysical order. Conclusion:
marriage is not an insignificant act, at least in the order
of commonly

accepted values. For if the significance of

the species, of society, or of religion is taken from it, as it

would be for all who are indifferent to such considerations,

marriage is really an insignificant act. However that may
be, on the basis of that example

it is evident

that insig-

nificance depends on the significance it lacks.
To take a contrary example, if to open a door I turn the
latch toward the right instead of toward the left, I cannot
relate that gesture to any commonly accepted general significance.

Society, religion, the species, and God

himself

don’t give a damn whether I turn the latch to the right or
to the left. Conclusion: my act is insignificant, unless for
me that habit is related for instance to an anxiety to save
my strength, to a liking for efficiency that may reflect a
certain will, a manner of life, etc. In which case it will be

much more important for me to turn my latch in a certain way than to get married. Hence significance always
has its relationship which determines what it is. The general conclusion is that there is uncertainty in the case of
insignificance.

But as I am planning to make an anthology of insignificant acts, I therefore know what an insignificant act
is. Probably. But knowing whether or not an act is insignificant is not in itself knowing what insignificance is.
And, after all, I can for example make that anthology to
get to the bottom of the problem. Meanwhile .. .
Outline.

1) Insignificant acts: the old man

and the cat?—the

3 See The Plague, third chapter of I.

64

January 1942 —September 1945

soldier and the girl* (Note for this one. I hesitated to place
this story in the anthology. Perhaps it has a great significance. But I include it nevertheless to show the great difficulty of my undertaking. In any case, it will be possible
to include it also in an anthology of things that have meaning—in preparation), etc., etc.
2) Insignificant words. “As they say in my region” —
“As Napoleon used to say” — and, in a general way, most
historical remarks. Jarry’s toothpick.®

3) Insignificant thoughts. Several huge volumes will be
needed.

Why such an anthology? It is worth noticing that eventually insignificance is almost always identified with the
mechanical aspect of things and persons—with habit most
often. In other words, everything eventually becoming
habitual, one can be sure that the greatest thoughts and
the greatest deeds eventually become insignificant. Life
has as its predestined aim insignificance. Whence the
interest of the anthology. It describes practically not only
the largest part of existence (that of little acts, tiny
thoughts, and passing moods ) but also our common future.
It has the extremely rare advantage today of being truly
prophetic.

Nietzsche, with the most monotonous external life possible, proves that thought alone, carried on in solitude, is a

frightening adventure.
4 See Notebooks,

1935-1942,

p. 178.

5 For

reference

to Jarry’s

1942,

an

earlier

toothpick,

see

p. 146.

65

Notebooks,

1935-

NOTEBOOK

IV

We endure the fact that Moliére had to die!

March g. The first periwinkles—and
a week ago!

it was

snowing

Nietzsche knows nostalgia also. But he will not ask anything of heaven. His solution: what one cannot ask of God
one asks of man: this is the superman. Amazing that to
avenge such pretension he was not made a God himself.
Perhaps it’s merely a matter of patience. Buddha preaches
a wisdom without gods and a few centuries later he is put
on an altar.

The European who turns courage into a personal pleasure: he admires himself. Repulsive. True courage is pasSive: it is indifference to death. An ideal: pure knowledge
and happiness.

What better can a man wish for than poverty? I didn’t

say destitution nor yet the hopeless labor of the modern
proletariat. But I don’t see what anyone can want more
than poverty with the possibility of activity in leisure.

Value judgments cannot be suppressed absolutely. That
negates the absurd.

The ancient philosophers (quite understandably) meditated more than they read. That is why they clung so closely
66

January 1942—September 1945

to the concrete. Printing changed all that. We read more
than we meditate. We have no philosophies but merely
commentaries. This is what Gilson says, considering that

the age of philosophers concerned with philosophy was
followed by the age of professors of philosophy concerned
with philosophers. Such an attitude shows both modesty
and impotence. And a thinker who began his book with
these words: “Let us take things from the beginning,”
would evoke smiles. It has come to the point where a book

of philosophy appearing today without basing itself on any
authority, quotation, or commentary would not be taken
seriously. And yet...

For The Plague: There are more things in men to admire than to despise.

When one chooses renunciation despite the certainty
that “everything is permitted,” something remains nonetheless—one ceases to judge others.
What attracts many people to the novel is that apparently
its a form without a style. In fact it requires the most
difficult style, one that subjects itself altogether to the object. Hence it is possible to imagine an author writing each
of his novels in a different style.

The sensation of death that is henceforth familiar to
me; it is deprived of the aid of pain. Pain clings to the
present; it calls for a struggle that keeps one busy. But
foreseeing death from the mere sight of a handkerchief
filled with blood is being plunged suddenly and effortlessly
into time in a dizzying way: it is the fear of what’s ahead.
67

NOTEBOOK

The thickness
sun could come

of the clouds decreased.

IV

As soon

as the

out, the ploughed fields began to steam.

Death gives its shape to love as it does to life—transforming it into fate. The one you love died while you loved
her and now it is a love fixed forever—which, without such
an end, would have fallen to pieces. What would the world

be without death—a succession of forms evaporating and
returning, an anguished flight, an unfinishable world. But

fortunately here is death, the stable one. And the lover

weeping over the beloved’s remains, René beside Pauline,
sheds the tears of pure joy—with the feeling that all is
finished—of the man who finally recognizes that his fate
has taken shape.

The odd theory of Mme de La Fayette is that of marriage
considered as the lesser of two evils. It is better to have
made a bad marriage than to suffer from passion. There
can be seen an ethic of Order.
(The French novel is psychological because it is suspicious of metaphysics. It constantly refers to the human
out of prudence.) Only a careless reading of La Princesse
de Cléves could draw from it the image of the classical
novel. It is very poorly composed, on the contrary.

Plague. The separated people: Journal of the Separation?
“The feeling of separation was general and it is possible
to give an idea of it from conversations, confidences, and
the news in the papers.”
Id. The separated people. That evening hour which, for
68

January 1942 —September

1945

believers, is the hour of self-scrutiny, is hard on the prisoner—it is the hour of frustrated love.
Plague. Id. Hunger forces some to meditation and others
to go after supplies. Consequently, not only what brought

misfortune was at the same time a good, but what was a
misfortune for some was a good for others. One couldn't
disentangle it.
?Stephan. Journal of separation.
Three levels in the work: Tarrou who describes in detail;

Stephan who calls forth the general; Rieux who reconciles

them in the higher conversion of the relative diagnosis.

The separated people. Id. At the very end of the time of
the plague, they ceased to imagine that intimacy that
had been theirs and how there could live beside them a
person on whom they could lay their hand at any moment.
Epigraph for The Misunderstanding? “What is born does
not tend to perfection and yet never stops”—Montaigne.®

It is easy to imagine a European converted to Buddhism
—because it assures him of survival—which Buddha considers an incurable misfortune, but which the European
desires with all his strength.

Saint-Etienne and its suburbs. Such a sight is the condemnation of the civilization that produced it. A world in
which there is no more place for the human being, for

joy, for active leisure, is a world that must die. No group
6 When Le Malentendu (earlier referred
lished in 1944, it bore no epigraph.

to as Budejovice)

69

was

pub-

NOTEBOOK

IV

of people can live devoid of beauty. They can go on living
for a time and that’s all. And the Europe that presents
one of its most characteristic faces here is progressively
getting away from beauty. That is why it is going through
convulsions and that’s why it will die if peace does not
signify for it a return to beauty and love’s return to its
rightful place.

Any life directed toward money is a death. Renascence
lies in disinterestedness.

In the mere fact of writing there is evidence of a personal assurance that I am beginning to lack. Assurance
that one has something to say and especially that some-

thing can be said—assurance

that what one feels and

what one is has value as an example—assurance that one
is irreplaceable and not a coward. All that is what I am

losing and I am beginning to imagine the moment when
I shall no longer write.

One must have the strength to choose what one prefers
and to cling to it. Otherwise it’s better to die.

The separated people: “They waited impatiently, in
order to relive their love, for the moment of unmotivated
jealousy.”

Id. They are asked to sign up so as to have a list of
those who are separated. They are amazed
7O

that nothing

January 1942 —September 1945

comes of it. But this is merely a way of knowing the
names of those to inform “in case.” “Well, we'll sign up.”

Id. Third page. “But when they had found each other
again, they still had considerable trouble substituting the
real person for the creation of their imaginations . . . and
it can be said that the plague did not die until the day
when one of them could again look with boredom at the
one facing him.”

Every thought is judged by what it is able to draw from
suffering. Despite my dislike of it, suffering is a fact.

I cannot live without beauty. That's what makes

me

weak in the face of certain people.

When all is finished, step aside

(God or woman).

What most distinguishes man from the animal is imagination. Wherefor our experience of sex cannot be truly
natural, in other words

blind.

The absurd is the tragic man facing a mirror (Caligula). So he is not alone. There is the germ of a satisfaction or of a self-indulgence. Now the mirror must be
suppressed.
7I

NOTEBOOK

IV

Time does not go fast when one observes it. It feels
watched. But it takes advantage of our distractions. Perhaps there are even two times, the one we observe and
the one that transforms us.

Epigraph for The Misunderstanding: “This is why the
poets figure that wretched mother Niobe, having first lost
seven sons and subsequently as many daughters, overwhelmed

a rock

with losses, and being finally transmuted into
... to express that feelingless, mute, and deaf

stupidity that seizes us when accidents beyond our bear-

ing crush us.” —

Montaigne.

Id. “Concerning melancholy”: “I am one of the freest
from that passion and neither having it nor esteeming it,
although the world has begun . . . to honor it with particular
favor.”

Id. (“Concerning liars”): “And there is nothing that
shows the strength of a horse more than coming to a sharp,
clear stop.”

Absurd. Restore ethics by the personal form of address.
I do not believe there is another world in which we shall
have to “render account.” But we already have our account
to render in this world—to all those we love.

Id. On the subject of speech (Parain: the arguments
proving that man could not have invented speech are irrefutable.) Everything, the moment one gets beneath the surface, leads to a metaphysical problem. Consequently, every72

January 1942 —September 1945

where man turns he is isolated on reality as if he were on
an island surrounded by a noisy sea of possibles and interrogations. One cannot draw the conclusion that the world
has meaning. For it would have none if it were just that,

crudely. Happy worlds give rise to no reasons. Hence it is
ridiculous to say: “Is metaphysics possible?” Metaphysics
is.

The consolation of this world is that there are no continuous sufferings. A pain disappears and a joy is reborn.
All balances out. This world is counterbalanced. And if
even our will extracts from the future a privileged suffering
that we raise to the level of a force in order to feel it
constantly, there is in that choice a proof that we consider
such suffering as a good and there, this time, compensation
resides.

Third of Thoughts Out of Season:’ “With a painful look
in his eye, Schopenhauer turned away from the portrait of
Rancé, the founder of the Trappist Order, saying: “This

calls for grace.’”

Regarding M. I don’t refuse a path leading to the
Supreme Being, so long as it doesn’t avoid other beings. To

know if one can find God as the outcome of one’s passions.

Plague: most important. “It is because they gave you the
problem of food supply and the pain of separations that
they had you without revolt.”
7 Camus

read in French

Nietzsche’s

Unzeitgemdsse

73

Betrachtungen.

NOTEBOOK

MAY

IV

20

For the first time: strange feeling of satisfaction and of
fulfillment. Question I asked myself, lying in the grass, facing the heavy, warm evening: “If these days were the last
...” Reply: a calm smile in me. Yet nothing I can be proud
of: nothing is solved; my very conduct is not clearly defined. Is this the hardening

at the end of an experiment,

or the soft influence of the evening, or on the other hand
the beginning of a wisdom that has ceased to negate anything?

JUNE.

LUXEMBOURG

GARDENS

A Sunday morning full of wind and sunlight. Over the large
pool the wind splatters the waters of the fountain; the tiny
sailboats on the windswept water and the swallows around
the huge trees. Two youths discussing: “You who believe
in human dignity.”

Prologue: “Love...”
“Knowledge . . .”
“It’s the same word.”

Although in daylight the flights of birds always seem
aimless, in the evening they always seem to have found a

destination. They are flying toward something. Thus it is
perhaps in the evening of life...
Is there an evening of life?’
8 This sentence was

added in pencil on the manuscript.

74

January 1942 —September 1945

Hotel room in Valence. “I don’t want you to do that. What
would I become with that thought? What shall I become
faced with your mother, your sisters, Marie-Rolande, I had

promised myself not to tell you this, you are well aware. —
I beg you, don’t do it. I had such a need of these two days of
rest. Tl keep you from doing it. I don’t care what I have
to do. I'll marry you if I have to. But I can’t have that on my
conscience. — I had promised myself not to tell you this.
— Those are just words. And acts are what matter to me
. . — People will think of an accident. The train . . . etc.
(She weeps. She shouts: ‘I hate you. I hate you for doing
that to me.’) —

I’m well aware, Rolande, I’m well aware.

But I didn’t want to tell you, etc., etc.” He promises. Time:

an hour and a half. Monotony. Marking time.

Van Gogh struck by a thought of Renan: “Forget oneself;
achieve great things, reach nobility and go beyond the vulgarity in which the existence of most individuals stagnates.”
“If one continues loving sincerely what is truly worthy
of love and does not waste one’s love on insignificant things
and meaningless things and colorless things, gradually one

will get more light and become stronger.”
“If one perfects oneself in a single thing and understands
it fully, one achieves in addition understanding and knowl-

edge of many other things.”
“I am a faithful sort of person in my faithlessness.”
“If I make landscapes, there will always be a hint of
faces in them.”
He quotes Doré’s remark: “I have the patience of an ox.”
See letter 340 on the trip to Zweeloo.

The bad taste of great artists: he equates Millet with
Rembrandt.
75

NOTEBOOK

IV

“I believe more and more that God must not be judged
on the basis of this world; it’s one of his rough sketches.”
“I can readily, in life and in painting too, get along without God, but I cannot, when ill, get along without some-

thing that is greater than I, which is my life, the power of
creation.”
Van Gogh’s long groping until the age of twenty-seven
before finding his way and discovering that he is a painter.

When one has done everything necessary to understand,
accept, and endure poverty, illness and its shortcomings,
there is still a step to be taken.

Plague. Sentimental professor® at the end of the plague
concludes that the only intelligent occupation is to copy a
book backward (develop the text and the meaning).
Tarrou dies in silence (wink, etc.
).

Administrative isolation camp.
Conversation at the end with professor and doctor: they
are together again. But they had not asked for much. I
didn’t have, etc.

The Jewish quarter (the flies). Those who want to keep
up appearances. People are invited for a cup of ersatz
coffee.
Separated people. Second. And what was already so hard
to endure for themselves (old age), they now had to endure for two.
Yet current affairs continue to be taken care of. It was
then, indeed, that people learned the results of an affair
that had aroused in its day the curiosity of those who
9 Stephan,

referred

to earlier

as in the first version.

76

January 1942 —September 1945

go in for such things. A young murderer . . . had been
pardoned. The newspapers thought he would get off with
ten years of good conduct and could then resume his
normal life. It really wasn’t worth while.

Confidence in words is classicism—but to keep its condence it uses them with discretion. Surrealism, which is
suspicious of them, abuses them. Let us go back to classi-

cism, out of modesty.

Those who love truth must look for love in marriage;
in other words, love without illusions.

“What does the inspiration of Occitania consist of?” A
special issue of Cahiers du Sud.* In brief, we were no good
during the Renaissance, the eighteenth century, and the
Revolution. We counted for something only from the tenth
century to the thirteenth and at a time when, it so happens,
it is very hard to speak of us as a nation—when all civilization is international. Hence, of whole centuries of history,
or fame, the hundred or so great names they

misfortune

left us, a tradition, a national life, love—all that is empty

and worthless. And we are the nihilists!

Humanism

doesn’t bore me; it even appeals to me. But

I find it inadequate.
1No.

249

of Cahiers

du

Sud

(August—October

1942),

entitled

“The

Genius of Oc and the Mediterranean Man,” contained a long article by
E. Novis on the inspiration of the region of the langue d’oc, sometimes
known as Occitania.

C7

NOTEBOOK

IV

Briick, a Dominican:? “Those Christian Democrats give
me a pain in the neck.”
“G. has the look of a priest, a sort of episcopal unction.
And I can hardly bear it even in bishops.”

I; “As a young man, I thought all priests were happy.”

Briick: “Fear of losing their faith makes them limit their
sensitivity. It becomes merely a negative vocation. They
don’t face up to life.” (His dream: a great conquering
clergy, but magnificent in its poverty and audacity.)
Conversation on a damned Nietzsche.

Barrés and Gide.* Uprooting is a problem we have gone
beyond. And when problems don’t interest us passionately,

we indulge in less nonsense. After all, we need a native
soil and we need travel.

Misunderstanding. The wife, after the husband’s death:
“How I love him.”

Agrippa d’Aubigné:* There is a man who believes and
who fights because he believes. After all, he is happy. This
can be seen in the satisfaction he takes in his house, in

his life, in his career. When he rages, he does so against
those who are wrong—according to him.
2 Father Raymond M. Bruckberger (1907—
) has long been a figure
in Parisian literary circles. His Image of America was published in English in 1959.
3 Maurice Barrés,

who

extolled

native

roots,

and

André

Gide,

who

praised nomadism, clashed in 1897 in an exchange of articles recorded in
Gide’s

Pretexts

(Meridian

Books,

1959).

4In Camus’s archives there are three pages of notes on this vigorous
Protestant poet of the late sixteenth century.

78

January 1942 —September 1945

What makes a tragedy is that each of the forces in opposition is equally legitimate, has a right to live. Whence a
weak tragedy: which involves illegitimate forces. Whence a
strong tragedy: which legitimizes everything.

On the plateaus of the Mézenc, the wind whistling like
sweeping swords in the air.

Living with one’s passions assumes that one has subjugated them.

Eternal Return assumes indulgence in pain.

Life is cluttered with events that make us long to grow
older.

Do not forget: illness and decrepitude. There’s not a
minute to be wasted—which is perhaps the contrary of
“one must hurry.”

Moral: One can’t live with people when knowing their
ulterior motives.
Resolutely reject any collective judgment. Introduce innocence into the “commentary” aspect of any society.

Heat ripens people like fruit. They are ripe before having lived. They know everything before having learned anything.
79

NOTEBOOK

IV

B.B.: “Nobody realizes that some people expend tremendous energy merely to be normal.”

Plague: If Tarrou’s notebooks play such a part, this is
because he happened to die at the narrator’s (in the beginning ).

“Are you sure that contagion is a fact and that isolation is desirable?” “I am not sure of anything, but I am
sure that dead bodies left abandoned, promiscuity, etc., are
not desirable. Theories may change, but there is something
that is valid always and in all seasons: consistency.”

As a result of their constant battle, the sanitation squads
cease to be interested in news of the plague.
The plague suppresses value judgments. The quality of
clothing, of food, etc., is no longer judged. Everything is
accepted.

The separated man wants to ask the doctor for a certificate to get out (this is how he comes to know him); he tells
of his official steps . . . He comes back regularly.
The trains, the stations, the waiting.

The plague emphasizes separation. But the fact of being
together is merely a chance that is prolonged. The plague
is the rule.

SEPTEMBER

I, 1943

He who despairs of events is a coward, but he who has hope
for the human lot is a fool.
80

January 1942 —September 1945

SEPTEMBER

I5

He drops everything, personal work, business letters, etc.,
to reply to a thirteen-year-old girl who writes him from the
heart!

Inasmuch as the word “existence” applies to something,
which is our nostalgia, but as it cannot keep from extending
to the affirmation of a higher reality, we shall keep it only
in a converted form—we shall say inexistential philosophy,
which does not involve a negation but aims merely to report
on the state of “the man deprived of . . .” Inexistential
philosophy will be the philosophy of exile.

Sade: “People decry the passions without thinking that
it is their flame that lights the flame of philosophy.”

Art has impulses of discretion. It cannot say things directly.

In a revolutionary period it is always the best who die.
The law of sacrifice leaves the last word to the cowards and
the timorous since the others have lost it by giving the best
of themselves. The ability to speak always implies that one
has betrayed.

Artists are the only ones who do any good in the world.
No, says Parain.
81

NOTEBOOK

Plague.

All fight—and

each

in his way.

IV

The

only

cowardice is falling on one’s knees . .. Many new moralists
appeared and their conclusion was always the same: one
must fall on one’s knees. But Rieux replied: one must fight
in such and such a way.
The exile spends hours in railway stations. Revitalize the
dead station.
Rieux: “In any fighting group one needs men who kill
and men who cure. I have chosen to cure. But I know that

I am fighting.”

Plague. There are at this moment
which the water is pink in the sunset.

distant harbors in

“Coming to God because you are detached from the earth
and because pain has separated you from the world is useless. God needs souls attached to the world. It is your joy
that gratifies him.”

Repeating this world is perhaps betraying it more surely
than by transfiguring it. The best of photographs is in itself
a treason.
Against rationalism. If pure determinism has a meaning, a single true affirmation would be enough for us to
arrive, through one conclusion after another, at the whole

truth. But that is not so. Therefore, either we have never

pronounced a single true affirmation—not even the affirmation that everything is determined. Or else we have spoken
the truth but to no effect and determinism is false.
82

January 1942 -—September 1945

For my “creation against God.”
(Stanislas Fumet)

who

It’s a Catholic critic

says that art, whatever

its aim,

always competes guiltily with God. Likewise, Roger Secrétain in Cahiers du Sud, August-September ’43. And also
Péguy: “There is even a poetry that takes its luster from the
absence of God, that counts on no salvation, that depends
on nothing but itself, human effort rewarded here on earth,

to fill the void of spaces.”
There is no middle path between apologetic literature
and competitive literature.

One’s duty is to do what one knows to be fair and good
—“preferable.” That is easy? No, for even what one knows
to be preferable, one does with difficulty.

Absurd. If one kills oneself, the absurd is negated. If
one does not kill oneself, the absurd reveals on application
a principle of satisfaction that negates itself. This does not
mean that the absurd does not exist. It means that the
absurd is truly without logic. This is why one cannot truly
live on it.
PARIS.

NOVEMBER

1943°

Suréna.” In the fourth act, all the doors are guarded. And
Eurydice, who up to now has struck such wonderful notes,
5 See “Revolt and Art” in The Rebel. Fumet and Secrétain were well
known as Catholic writers; so was Charles Péguy, of an older generation.
6 On November 2, 1943, Camus became an editor of Editions Gallimard
in Paris.
7 Produced

in

1674,

Suréna

was

Corneille’s

last play;

it depicts

the

thwarted love of the Parthian general Suréna and the Armenian princess
Eurydice.

83

NOTEBOOK

IV

begins to be silent, to search her heart without being able
to express the word that would deliver her. She will keep
silent until the end—when she dies through not having
spoken. And Suréna:

“Ah! ... the pain oppressing me...
Do not treat it as mere affection.”
The wonderful feat of the classic theater, in which suc-

cessive couples of actors come on to tell events without ever
living them—and yet the anguish and action never cease
growing.

Parain. They all cheated. They never transcended the
despair that engulfed them. And that because of literature.
A Communist for him is someone who has given up language and substituted for it factual revolt. He has chosen
to do what Christ scorned doing: to save the damned—
by damning himself.
There is a stage in suffering, or in any emotion, or passion, when it belongs to what is most personal and inex-

pressible in man and there is a stage when it belongs to
art. But in its first moments art can never do anything
with it. Art is the distance that time gives to suffering.
It is man’s transcendence in relation to himself.
With Sade,* systematic eroticism is one of the directions

of absurd thought.

For Kafka, death is not a deliverance.

His humble

pes-

simism, according to Magny.
8 See “A Man

of Letters,” in The Rebel.

9 Claude-Edmonde Magny is a major French critic of modern literature.

84

January 1942—September 1945

Plague. Love had assumed in them the form of obstinacy.

Add on proofs of Caligula: “Well, the tragedy is over. The
failure is complete. I turn my head and go away. I took
my share in this fight for the impossible. Let us wait for
death, knowing in advance that death liberates from nothing.”?
“Christ died perhaps for someone, but it was not for me.”

Man is guilty, but he is so for not having been able to derive
everything from himself-—this is a mistake that has grown
since the beginning.

On justice—the fellow who ceases to believe in it as soon

as he is put through a rough grilling.
Id. What I blame Christianity for is being a doctrine of
injustice.

Plague. End up with a motionless woman in mourning
announcing in sufferings what men have given in lives and

blood.
Thirty years old

Man’s first faculty is forgetfulness. But it is fair to say
that he forgets even the good he has done.
Plague. Separation is the rule, The rest is chance.
—but people are always brought together.
—there are chances that last a whole lifetime.
1In fact, Camus

did not use these notes for his play.

85

NOTEBOOK

IV

Sea bathing is forbidden. That is an indication. It is forbidden to delight one’s body; to return to the truth of things.
But the plague ends and there will be a truth of things.
Diary of the separated man?

The greatest saving one can make in the order of thought
is to accept the unintelligiblity of the world—and to pay
attention to man.

When,

in old age, one achieves

a wisdom

or an ethic,

one must be embarrassed by regret of all one has done contrary to that ethic and that wisdom. Too much in advance
or too late. There is no middle.

I frequent the X family because they have a better
memory than I. They make our common past richer for me
by bringing back to my mind everything that had left it.

For the work to be a challenge, it must
(this is why one must

say “without

be finished

sequel”).

It is the

opposite of divine creation. It is finished, thoroughly
limited, clear, molded to the human requirement. The unity
is in our hands.

Parain. Can the individual choose the moment
can die for truth?

86

when he

January 1942 —September 1945

In this world, there are witnesses and spoilers. As soon
as a man bears witness and dies, his testimony is messed up
and spoiled by words, preachings, art, etc.

Success can improve the young man, as happiness does
the mature man. Once his effort is recognized, he can add
to it relaxation and unconstraint, royal virtues.

Roger Bacon spends twelve years in prison for having
asserted the primacy of experience in matters of knowledge.

There is a moment when youth is lost. It’s the moment
when one loses human beings. And one must know how
to accept it. But that moment is hard.

Regarding the American novel: it aims at the universal.
Like classicism. But whereas classicism aims at an eternal
universal, contemporary literature, as a result of circumstances (interpenetration of frontiers), aims at a historical universal. It’s not the man of all times, but the man of

all spaces.

Plague. “He liked to wake up at 4 a.m. and imagine her
then. It was the time when he could catch hold of her.
At 4 a.m., people are doing nothing; they are sleeping.”

A theatrical company
Orpheus and Eurydice.*

is still playing:

2 See Rambert in The Plague, 11.
3 See The Plague, first chapter of IV.

87

a play about

NOTEBOOK

IV

The separated people: the world . . . But who am I to
judge them? They all are right. But there is no way out.
Conversation on friendship between Doctor and Tarrou:
“‘T've thought of it. But it’s not possible. The plague leaves
no time.” Suddenly: “At this moment we are all living for

death. That gives you food for thought.”
Id. A fellow who chooses silence.

“Defend yourself,” the judges said.
“No,” the accused said.

“Why?” But you must.”
“Not yet. I want you to take your full responsibility.”

Concerning the natural in art. It is impossible in the
absolute

state. Because

the real is impossible

(bad taste,

vulgarity, inappropriateness to the deeper needs of man).

That is why human creation, starting out from the world,
eventually turns against the world. Lurid novels are bad because for the most part they are true (either because
reality has conformed to them, or because the world is conventional). Art and the artist remake the world, but always

with an ulterior motive of protest.

Portrait of S. by A.: “His grace, his sensitivity, that mixture of nonchalance and firmness, of discretion and daring,

that naiveté that does not keep him from being healthily
on his guard.”

The Greeks would not have understood anything about
Existentialism—although, despite the scandal, they were
88

January 1942-—September 1945

able to become Christian. This is because Existentialism
does not assume a behavior.
Id. There is no knowledge that is absolutely pure, in

other words disinterested. Art is an attempt, through description, at pure knowledge.

Raising the question of the absurd world amounts to asking: “Are we going to accept despair, without doing anything?” I suppose that no one honest can answer yes.

Algeria. I don’t know whether or not I can make myself
understood, but I have the same feeling on returning to
Algeria as I have on looking at the face of a child. And
yet I know that all is not pure.
My work. Finish series of works on the created world:

“Creation corrected.”

If the work, a product of revolt, sums up the totality of
man’s aspirations, it is obligatorily idealistic. (?) Thus the
purest product of rebellious creation is the novel of love
which...

The extraordinary confusion that results in poetry being

presented to us as a Spiritual exercise and the novel as a
personal purgation.

Novel.

In the face of action or death, all the attitudes

of a single man. But each time, as if the attitude were the
proper one.
89

NOTEBOOK

IV

Plague. One cannot enjoy the cry of birds in the coolness
of the evening—in the world as it is. For it is covered
now with a so thick layer of history that its speech must get
through to reach us. It is deformed thereby. Nothing of the
world can be felt for its own sake, because a whole series

of images of death and despair is bound to each of its
moments.

No

more

mornings

without

deaths,

no

more

evenings without imprisonments, and no more noons without dreadful slaughter.

Memoirs

of an

executioner.

“I alternate

kindness

and

violence. Psychologically, it’s a good thing.”

Plague. The fellow who wonders whether he should join
the sanitation squads or save himself for his great love.
Fecundity! Where is it?
Id. After the curfew, the city is all stone.
Id. What bothered them was the insecurity. Every day,
every hour, without respite, hunted down, uncertain.
Id. I try to keep myself in readiness. But there is always

an hour of the day or night when

a man

is cowardly.

That’s the hour I am afraid of.
Id. The isolation camp. “I knew what it was like. I’'d be
forgotten, that was sure. Those who didn’t know me would

forget me because they would be thinking of something
else and those who know me and love me would forget me
because they would exhaust themselves in official steps and
plans for getting me out. In any case, no one would think
of me. No one would imagine me minute by minute, etc.,

eres
(Have Rambert inspect them.)
90

January 1942 —September 1945

Id. The sanitation squads or the men of the redemption.
All the men in the sanitation squads look sad.
Id. “It was on this terrace that Dr. Rieux had the idea of
leaving a chronicle of the event which would clearly bring
out the solidarity he felt with those people. And that testimony which closes here . . . etc.”

Id. During the plague people don’t live by the body; they
lose their flesh.
Id. Beginning: The doctor accompanies his wife to the
station. But he is forced to demand that the city be closed.

Being and Nothingness

(pp. 135-36).*

Strange

error

about our lives because we try to experience our lives from
the outside.

If the body feels its nostalgia for the soul, there is no
reason why in eternity the soul should not suffer painfully
from its separation from the body—and why it should not
then long to return to earth.

One writes in moments of despair. But what is despair?

Nothing can be based on love: it is flight, anguish, wonderful moments or hasty fall. But it is not...

Paris or the very setting of sensitivity.
4This

is of course

the basic

philosophical

treatise

et le Néant, first published in 1943.
OI

of Sartre, L’Etre

NOTEBOOK

IV

Short stories. In the midst of revolution the fellow who
promises safety to his adversaries. Later a tribunal of his
party condemns them to death. He helps them escape.
Id. A priest under torture betrays.°
Id. Cyanide. He doesn’t use it to see if he can stick it out
to the end.
Id. The fellow who suddenly takes a part in civil defense.
He nurses the wounded. But he has kept his arm band. He
is shot.
Id. The coward.

Plague. After the plague he hears the rain on the ground
for the first time.
Id. As he was going to die, it became urgent to consider
that life was stupid. This was what he had thought up to
then; let it at least be of some use in this difficult moment.

After all, just at the moment when he needed any possible
advantage, he wasn’t going to see a smile on the face that
had always been closed to him.
Id. The fellow who was hospitalized through a mistake.
“It’s a mistake,” he said. “What mistake? Don’t be stupid.
There are never mistakes.”
Id. Medicine and religion: two functions that seem compatible. But today, when all is clear, one realizes that they
are irreconcilable, and that one must choose between the
relative and the absolute. “If I believed in God, I should not

treat mankind. If I had an idea that mankind could be
cured, I should not believe in God.”
Justice: the experience of justice through sport.
Plague. The fellow who accepts philosophically the illness of others. But if his best friend is ill, he does all he
5 This

theme

is found

in “The

Renegade”

(Exile

and
92

the Kingdom).

January 1942—September 1945

can. Consequently solidarity in the fight is meaningless;
individual feelings are what win out.
Tarrou’s chronicle: a boxing match—Tarrou finds a boxing pal. Clandestine fights organized—a football—a tribunal.
That happiness in the morning when after a good breakfast one walks through the streets smoking a cigarette.
There were still good moments.
Tarrou: “It’s odd, but you have a sad philosophy and a
happy face.” Then conclude that my philosophy is not sad.
In the middle, all the characters meet in the same sani-

tation squad. A chapter on a big get-together.
The Sunday of a football player who can’t play any more.
Link him

to Tarrou.

Since football games

are forbidden,

Etienne Villaplane is bored on Sunday. What his Sundays
were. What they now are: he wanders through the streets,

kicking stones that he tries to shoot straight into the sewer
holes (“A goal,” he said, adding that life was lousy). He
mingles with the children playing, whenever there’s a ball
involved. He spits out his cigarette butts and boosts them
with a kick (in the beginning, of course; later he kept the
butts).
Rieux and Tarrou.
Rieux: “When a man writes what you write, it seems that
he has nothing to do with the concerns of men.”
“Oh come,” Tarrou said, “it only seems so.”

W. Anything she can define seems contemptible to her.
She says: “It’s nauseating. It’s just the so-called battle of
the sexes.” But the battle of the sexes exists and we can do
nothing about it.
93

NOTEBOOK

IV

A person who insists that the other do everything and
then accepts and lives passively—except for acting, energetically too, to persuade the other to continue giving all

and doing all.
Essay on Revolt: “All rebels act, however, as if they be-

lieved in the completion of history. The contradiction
Sona
Id. Only a few really want liberty. The majority want
justice and the majority even confuse justice and liberty.
But question: is absolute justice the equivalent of absolute
happiness? One comes to the idea that it is essential to
choose between sacrificing liberty to justice or justice to
liberty. For an artist, this amounts in certain circumstances
to choosing between one’s art and the happiness of man-

kind.
Can man alone create his own values? That is the whole
problem.

Are you pertinent? But I never said that man was not
reasonable. What I want is to deprive him of his imaginary
survival and show that with such privation he is at last
clear and coherent.
Id. Sacrifice leading to value. But the suicide is selfish
too: puts forward a value that seems to him more important

than his own life—it’s the feeling of that respectable and
happy life of which he has been deprived.
Look upon heroism and courage as secondary values—
after having given proof of courage.

Novel of the appointed suicide. Set for a year from
now—his formidable superiority from the fact that death is
a matter of indifference to him.
94

January 1942 —September 1945

Link him to novel about love?

Mad

nature of sacrifice:

the fellow who dies for some-

thing he will not see.

I took ten years to win what seems to me priceless: a
heart without bitterness. And as often happens, once I had
gone beyond the bitterness, I incorporated it in one or two

books. Thus I shall be forever judged on that bitterness
which has ceased to mean anything to me. But that is just.
It’s the price one must pay.

The dreadful and consuming selfishness of artists.

A love can be preserved only for reasons

external to

love. Moral reasons, for instance.

Novel. What is love for her? —

that void, that little hol-

low in her since they discovered each other, that call of
lovers toward

each other, shouting each other’s name.

One cannot be capable of commitment on all planes. At
least one can choose to live on the plane on which commitment is possible. Live according to what is honorable in
oneself and only that. In certain cases this may lead to
turning away from human beings even (and above all)
when one has a passion for human beings.
In any case this constitutes a wrench. But what does
95

NOTEBOOK

IV

that prove? It proves that whoever seriously tackles the
moral problem must end in extremes. Whether you are for
(Pascal) or against (Nietzsche), you only have to be so
seriously to see that the moral problem is nothing but
blood, madness, and shouting.

Revolt. Chap. I. Ethics exists. The immoral thing is
Christianity. Definition of an ethics against intellectual
rationalism and divine irrationalism.
Chap. X. Conspiring as a moral value.

Novel
She who ruined everything through absentmindedness:
“And yet, I loved him with all my soul.”
“Well,” said the priest, “it still wasn’t enough.”

SUNDAY,

SEPTEMBER

24, 1944,

LETTER

Novel: “Night of avowals, of tears and kisses. Bed damp
with tears, with sweat, with love. The height of every heart-

rending.”

Novel. A handsome creature. And he gets everything forgiven.

Those who love all women

are those who

are on their

way toward abstraction. They go beyond this world, however it may seem. For they turn away from the particular,
from the individual case. The man who would flee all
thought, all abstraction, the truly desperate one, is the man
96

January 1942 —September 1945

of a single woman. Through persistence in that singular
face which cannot satisfy everything.

December. This heart full of tears and of night.

Plague. Separated, they write each other and he strikes
the right note and keeps her love. Triumph of words and of
style.

Justification of art: the true work of art helps sincerity,
strengthens the complicity of mankind, etc... .

I do not believe in desperate acts. I believe only in
motivated acts. But I believe it takes very little to motivate
an act.

There is no objection to the totalitarian attitude other
than the religious or moral objection. If this world has no
meaning, they are right. I do not accept that they are right.
Henee-...
It is up to us to create God. He is not the creator. That
is the whole history of Christianity. For we have but one

way of creating God, which is to become him.

Novel on Justice.
At the end. In the presence of the poor, sick mother.
“I'm not worried about you, Jean. You are intelligent.”
“No, Mother,

that’s not it. I have often made

97

mistakes

NOTEBOOK

IV

and I haven’t always been a just man. But there is one
thing. a
“Of course.”
“There is one thing, and that is that I have never betrayed you. All my life I have been faithful to you.”
“You are a good son, Jean. I know that you are a very
good son.”
“Thank you, Mother.”
“No, it’s for me to thank you rather. And for you to
continue as you are.”

There is no freedom for man so long as he has not overcome his fear of death. But not through suicide. In order to
overcome, one must not surrender. Be able to die courageously without bitterness.

Heroism and saintliness,
must have stood the test.

secondary

virtues.

But one

Novel on Justice. A rebel who performs an act knowing that it will cause the death of innocent hostages. . .
Then he agrees to sign the pardon of a writer he despises.

Reputation. It is given you by second-rate people and
you share it with second-rate people or rascals.

Grace?
We must serve justice because our condition is unjust,
increase happiness and joy because this universe is un98

January 1942 —September 1945

happy. Likewise, we must not condemn

others to death

because we have been given the death sentence.
The doctor, an enemy of God: he fights against death.

Plague. Rieux said he was the enemy of God because he
was fighting against death and that it was even his function
to be the enemy of God. He also said that by trying to
save Paneloux he was proving to him at the same time that
he was wrong and that by accepting being saved Paneloux
was accepting the possibility of not being right. Paneloux
told him merely that he would end up being right since
beyond a doubt he himself would die, and Rieux replied

that the essential was not to give in and to fight to the bitter
end.

Meaning of my work: So many men are deprived of
grace. How can one live without grace? One has to try it
and do what Christianity never did: be concerned with the
damned.

Classicism is domination of passions. Passions were
individual in the classic age. Today they are collective. Collective passions must be dominated; in other words, given a
form. But at the same time you experience them you are
consumed by them. This is why most works of our period
are reportages and not works of art.
Reply: if you can’t do everything at once, give up everything. What does that mean? It requires more strength

and will than were necessary. We shall succeed. The great
classic of the future is an unequalled conqueror.
99

NOTEBOOK

IV

Novel on Justice. The fellow who rallies revolutionaries
(Comm.). After judgment or suspicion (because unity is
essential), he is at once given a mission in which everyone

knows that death is inevitable. He accepts because this is
in the order of things. He dies on the mission.
Id. The fellow who applies the ethics of sincerity to assert
solidarity. His vast final solitude.

Id. We kill the toughest among them. They have killed
the toughest of us. This leaves the functionaries and the
jackasses. That’s what it is to have ideas.

Plague. A chapter on fatigue.

Revolt. Liberty is the right not to lie. True on the social
plane (subaltern and superior) and on the moral plane.

Creation corrected.® Story of the appointed suicide.

Plague. “The things that moan at being separated.”

He (a railway inspector) lives solely for railways.
The railway employee lives on the thin surface of matter.

M.V.’s cousin. He collects montgolfier balloons (of china,
made into tobacco pipes, paperweights, inkwells, etc.).
6 This title reappears
Notebook V—“Creation

frequently in the Notebooks,
corrected, or The System.”
I0o

and

especially

in

January 1942 —September 1945

Universal novel. The tank that turns over and falls apart
like a centipede.

Bob attacking in the summer meadows. His helmet covered with wallflowers and wild grasses.

Creation corrected
The tank that turns over and struggles like a centipede.
Bob in the summer meadows of Normandy. His helmet
covered with wild grasses and wallflowers.
See report of the English commission on atrocities in
The Times.
Suzy’s Spanish journalist (ask for his text )—children
point out corpses to him as they laugh.
Profound spiritual dejection for an hour.
All day long they talk of having a milk soup at supper
because it makes one piss several times during the night.
That the toilet is a hundred yards from the dormitory, that
it’s cold, etc.

Deported women as they come into Switzerland burst out
laughing on seeing a funeral: “So that’s the way they treat
the dead here.”
Jacqueline.

The two Polish boys of fourteen whose house is burned
down with their parents in it. From fourteen to seventeen,
Buchenwald.
The concierge for the Gestapo occupying two floors of

an apartment house in rue de la Pompe. In the morning,
she does the cleaning surrounded by people who have been
tortured. “I never pay attention to what my tenants are

doing.”
Jacqueline on her way back from Koenigsberg to RavensIOI

NOTEBOOK

IV

bruck—sixty miles on foot. In a large tent divided into
four by a canvas stretcher. So many women that they can't
sleep on the ground without fitting together like pieces of
a puzzle. Dysentery. The toilet a hundred yards away. But
one must climb over and step on bodies. They do it right
there.

Universal aspect in the dialogue of politics and ethics.
Opposite that conglomeration of gigantic forces: Sintés.’
X. a deported woman, liberated with a tattoo on her skin:
Served for a year in the SS camp of...

Demonstration. That abstraction is evil. It causes wars,
violence, etc. Problem: How does the abstract

tortures,

view continue in the face of physical evil, ideology in the

face of the torture inflicted in the name of that ideology?

Christianity. You would certainly be punished if we accepted your postulates. For then your condemnation would
be merciless.

Sade. Autopsy by Gall: “The bare skull resembled all
the skulls of old men. The organs of paternal affection and
the love of children are prominent.”
Sade on Mme de La Fayette: “And as she became more
concise, she became more interesting.”

Sade’s passionate admiration for Rousseau and Richardson, from whom he learned that “it’s not always by making
virtue win out that one interests.”
Id. “One acquires knowledge of man’s heart” only through
misfortunes and travels.
7 The few letters preceding Sintés are illegible.
I02

January 1942 -—September 1945.

Id. The man of the eighteenth century:

“When, like the

Titans, he dares to raise his bold hand against heaven and,

armed with his passions, no longer fears declaring war on
those who struck fear in him.”

Revolt. Eventually politics leads to the parties that contribute to communication (complicity
).°

And creation itself. What to do about it? It’s the rebel
who has the least chance of avoiding accomplices. But they
will be so.

Utter disgust for all society. Temptation to flee and to
accept the decadence of one’s era. Solitude makes me
happy. But feeling too that decadence begins the moment
one accepts. And one stays—so that man will stay on the
heights that belong to him. Exactly, so as not to contribute

to his descent. But disgust, nauseating disgust for such dispersion in others.

Communication. A hindrance for man because he cannot

go beyond the circle of people he knows. Beyond, he makes
an abstraction of them. Man must live in the circle of flesh.

The aging heart. To have loved and yet that nothing can
be saved.
8In the manuscript
communication.

the word

complicité

is written

103

over

the

word

NOTEBOOK

IV

The temptation of menial and daily tasks.

C. and P.G.: the passion for truth. Around them, everyone is crucified.

We French are now in the van of all civilization: we
no longer know how to put to death.
We are the ones who bear witness against God.
JULY

“45

Chateaubriand to Ampére going to Greece in 1841:
“Make my farewell to Mount Hymettus, where I left bees,

to Cape Sounion, where I heard crickets . . . I shall soon
have to forsake everything. I still wander in my memory
amid my recollections; but they will fade away . . . You will
not find a single olive leaf or a grape that I saw in Attica.
I regret even the grass of my time. I didn’t have the strength
to keep a heather alive.”

Revolt.
Finally, I choose liberty. For even if justice is not
realized, liberty maintains the power of protest against injustice and keeps communication open. Justice in a silent
world, the justice of mute men, destroys complicity, negates
revolt,

and

restores

consent,

but in the lowest

possible

form. That’s where one sees the priority gradually go to
the value of liberty. But the difficult thing is never to lose
sight of the fact that liberty must at the same time insist
upon justice, as has been said. Once this is established,
there is a justice likewise, though quite different, in laying
104

January 1942 —September 1945

the foundation of the only constant value in the history of
men, who have never really died except for liberty.
Liberty is the ability to defend what I do not think, even
in a regime or a world that I approve. It is the ability to
admit that the adversary is right.

“The man who repents is tremendous. But who today
would like to be tremendous without being seen?” (Life of
Rancé)°

The man

I should be if I had not been the child I was.

Unpublished writings of Ch.
“I have never been hugged by a woman with that utter
surrender, those double knots, that ardent passion I have

sought and whose charm would be worth a lifetime.”
“There are times when character being devoid of energy,
vices produce only corruption instead of crimes.”
Id. “If there were no passion, there would be no virtue,

and yet this century has reached such a depth of wretchedness that it is without passion and without virtue; it does
good and evil, while remaining passive like matter.”

“When

one

has

a noble mind

and

a mean

heart, one

writes great things and does only small ones.”

Novel
“I gave men their share. In other words, I lied and desired with them. I rushed from person to person; I did what
9 Chateaubriand’s

Vie

de Rancé

(1844)

teenth-century founder of the monastic

tells the story

order of Trappists.

105

of the

seven-

NOTEBOOK

IV

was necessary. Now, that’s enough. I have an account to
settle with this landscape. I want to be alone with it.”

JULY 30, 1945
At the age of thirty, a man ought to have control over
himself, know the exact reckoning of his faults and virtues,
recognize his limit, foresee his weakness—be

what he is.

And above all accept them. We are entering a positive
period. Everything to be done and everything to be forsaken. Settle in to being natural, but with a mask. I have

known enough things to be able to surrender almost everything. There

remains

an amazing

effort, daily, insistent.

The effort of the hidden, without hope or bitterness. No
longer negate anything since everything can be asserted.
Better than heartbreak.

106

VAyaubdgaabagaabdgnadagnadagaalapnal

BAA AAR TBAT USACTRAATSAAT AAMT

OMe
TE BsOn02k

sy

September

1945 — April 1948

PEPPPPPPFFIVFFPFFFFFPFP
FP FF

The only contemporary problem: Can one transform the
world without believing in the absolute power of reason?
Despite

rationalistic,

even

Marxist,

illusions,

the

whole

history of the world is the history of liberty. How could the
paths of liberty be determined? It is doubtless false to say
that what is determined is what has ceased to live. Yet
nothing is determined but what has been lived. God himself, if he existed, could not modify the past. But the future

belongs to him neither more nor less than to man.

Political

antinomies.

We

are in a world in which

we

must choose between being a victim or an executioner—
and nothing else. Such a choice is not easy. It always
seemed

to me

that in fact there were

no executioners—

109

NOTEBOOK

V

only victims. In the last analysis, of course. But this is a
truth that is not widely known.
I have a very keen liking for liberty. And for any intellectual, liberty is eventually confused with freedom of ex-

pression. But I am quite aware that this concern is not the
primary one of a very large number of Europeans because

justice alone can give them the material minimum they
need and rightly or wrongly they would gladly sacrifice
liberty to that elementary justice.
I have known that for a long time. If I found it necsesary
to defend the reconciliation of justice and liberty it is because I thought the last hope of the West lay in such a
reconciliation. But such a reconciliation can be brought
about only in a certain climate which today almost strikes
me as Utopian. One or the other of these values must be
sacrificed? What to think, in that case?

Politics (continued). Everything derives from the fact
that those who have the responsibility of speaking for the
masses don’t have, never have, a real concern for liberty.

When they are sincere, they even boast of the contrary.
But the mere concern would be enough...
Consequently those—and they are few—who live with
this scruple must perish some day or other (there are
several ways of dying in this regard). If they are proud,
they will not do so without having put up a fight. But how
could they fight properly against their brothers and all justice? They will bear witness, that’s all. And after two
millennia we shall see the sacrifice, several times repeated,
of Socrates. Program for tomorrow: solemn and significant
execution of the witnesses of liberty.
IIo

September 1945 — April 1948

Revolt: Create in order to return to mankind? But little
by little creation separates us from everyone and sets us
apart without the shadow of a love.

People always think that a man commits suicide for a
reason.

But he may

very well commit

suicide for two

reasons.
We are not born for liberty. But determinism likewise
is a mistake.

What could be (What is)! immortality for me? Living
until the last man has disappeared from the earth. Nothing more.

X. This odd character talks and says nothing. But she is
the opposite of frivolous. She speaks, and then contradicts
herself or admits without discussion that she is wrong. All
this because she considers it unimportant. She doesn’t really
think of what she is saying, concerned as she is with another wound, infinitely more serious, that she will drag
about with her, unknown, unto death.

Aesthetics of revolt.? If classicism is defined by the
domination of passions, a classical era is one whose art
shapes and codifies the passions of the contemporaries.
Today when collective passions have won

out over indi-

1 The words Qu’est-ce que were penciled on the manuscript.
2 See preface to Chamfort’s Maximes et anecdotes and the last chapter
of The Rebel.
Bathe

NOTEBOOK

V

vidual passions, it is no longer a matter of dominating love
through art, but of dominating politics, in the purest sense.
Man has developed a passion, hopeful or destructive, for his
condition.
But how much

more

difficult the task is (1) because,

if passions must be experienced before being formulated,
the collective passion consumes

all the artist’s time; (2)

because the chances of death are greater, and indeed the
only way of living the collective passion authentically is to
be willing to die for it. In this case then, the greatest
chance of authenticity is also the greatest chance of failure
for art. Wherefor this classicism is perhaps impossible. But
if it were, it is so because truly the history of human revolt
has a meaning, which was to lead to this limit. Hegel
would be right and the end of history would be imaginable,

but only in a failure. And here Hegel would be wrong.
But if, as we seem to believe, this classicism is possible, at

least we see that it can be built up only by a generation—
and not by an individual. In other words, the chances of
failure I mention can be offset only by the chance of numbers—that is, the chance that out of ten authentic artists

one will survive and manage

to find in his life time for

passion and time for creation. The artist can no longer be a
solitary. Or, if he is, then he owes his triumph to a whole
generation.

OCTOBER ‘745
AESTHETICS

OF

REVOLT

Impossibility for man to despair utterly. Conclusion: any
literature of despair represents but an extreme case and

not the most significant. The remarkable thing in man is
not

that he despairs,

but

that he overcomes

or forgets

despair. A literature of despair will never be universal.
II2

September 1945 —April 1948

Universal literature cannot stop at despair (nor at optimism either; just reverse the reasoning); it must merely
take despair into account. To be added: reasons for which
literature is or is not universal.

Aesthetics of revolt. High style and beautiful form, expressions of the loftiest revolt.

Creation corrected
“Men like me are not afraid of death,” he said. “It’s an

accident that proves them right.”

Why am I an artist and not a philosopher? Because I
think according to words and not according to ideas.

Aesthetics of revolt

E. Forster?— “[The work of art] is the only material
object in the universe which may possess internal harmony.
All the others have been pressed into shape from outside,
and when their mould is removed they collapse. The work
of art stands up by itself, and nothing else does. It achieves
something which has often been promised by society, but
always delusively.”

“... It (art) is the one orderly product which our muddling race has produced. It is the cry of a thousand sentinels,

the

lighthouse

echo

from

which

a

cannot

thousand

labyrinths;

be hidden:

it is

the

cest le meilleur

3 Both quotations are from “Art for Art’s Sake,” an address delivered
in New York in 1949, and published in Two Cheers for Democracy, by
E. M. Forster (Harcourt, Brace, 1951), p. 92. The italics in the first are
Camus’s; the French in the second is Forster’s.

113

NOTEBOOK

témoignage
nite.
4

que

nous

puissions

donner

de

V

notre

dig-

9?

Id. Shelley: “Poets are the unacknowledged legislators of
the world.”

Tragedy

C. and L. — “I come to you in this emergency. I am sending you into mortal danger.”

“All of them are right,” a character shouts.
C. — “I am sending you to an almost certain death. But
I insist that you understand me.”
“I cannot understand what is inhuman.”

“So I shall have to give up also being understood by
those I love.”

C. — “I do not believe in liberty. That is my human
suffering. Today’s liberty embarrasses me.”
L. — “Why?”
“It keeps me from establishing justice.”
“My conviction is that they can be reconciled.”
“History shows that your conviction is wrong. I believe
they are not reconciled. That is my human wisdom.”
“Why choose this rather than that?”
“Because I want the largest possible number of men to
be happy. And because liberty is never the concern, the
primary concern, of any but a few.”
“And if you have missed your justice?”
“Then I shall enter a hell that even today you cannot
imagine.”

‘Tm going to tell you what will happen”
Il4

(tableau).

September 1945 —April 1948

“Each man bets on what he believes to be the truth . . .”
“Let me repeat, liberty embarrasses me— We must
suppress the witnesses of liberty.”
C. — “L., your esteem?”
L. — “What does that matter to you?”

C. — “You are right; it’s a weakness that has no meaning
L. — “Yet it is that weakness that makes me maintain
my esteem for you. Farewell, C. .. . Men like me always
look as if they were dying alone. That is what I am going

to do. But in truth I shall have done the necessary to keep
men from being alone.”
L. — “Remaking the world is an insignificant task.”
C. —

“It is not the world that must be remade, but man.”

C. — “There are fools everywhere. But everywhere else
there are fools and cowards.

Among

us, you won't find a

single coward.”
L. — “Heroism is a secondary virtue.”
C. — “You have a right to say so because you are showing your mettle. But what will be the primary virtue then?”
L. — (looking at him) — “Friendship.”
L. —

“If the world is tragic, if we live torn asunder, it

is not so much because of tyrants. You and I know that
there is a liberty, a justice, a deep, shared joy,

a common

fight against the tyrants. When evil dominates, there is no
problem. When the adversary is wrong, those who are fighting him are free and at peace. But the split develops
because men equally eager for the good of mankind either
want it at once or else aim for three generations from now,
and that is enough to divide them forever. When the adII5

NOTEBOOK

V

versaries are both right, then we enter tragedy. And at the
end of tragedy, you know what there is?”
C. —

“Yes, there is death.”

L. — “Yes, there is death. And yet I shall never agree
to kill you.”
C. — “I should consent if it were necessary. That is my
ethic. And it’s the sign for me that you are not in the path
of truth.”
L. — “It’s the sign for me that you are not in the path
of truth.”

C. — “I seem to be winning out because I am alive. But
I am in the same night as you, having no other help than
my human will.”

End. L.’s body is brought back. A partisan treats it
frivolously. Silence. C.: “This man died as a hero for the
cause that was ours. It is up to us to respect him and to
avenge him.”
C. — “Look. Look at this night. It is vast. It revolves
its mute stars above frightful human battles. Through
millennia you have adored this sky though it was obstinately silent, you accepted the fact that your paltry loves,
your desires, and your fears were nothing compared with
the divinity. You believed in your solitude. And today when

you are asked to make the same sacrifice, but to serve
humanity this time, will you refuse?”
C. — “Do not take me for an utterly blind soul.”
L. returns wounded.
C. — “You should have got through anyway.”
4The manuscript is almost illegible at this point.

116

September 1945 —April 1948

L, — “It wasn’t possible.”
C. — “Since you were able to come back, you could have
got through.”
L. — “It wasn’t possible.”
C. — “Why?”
L. — “Because I am going to die.”
X. — “It’s not up to you to go.”
C. —

“I’m the leader here, and I’m the one to decide.”

X. — “It so happens that we need you. We are not here
to perform noble deeds, but to be efficient. A good leader
is the condition of efficiency.”
C. — “You're right, X. But I don’t much like truths that
turn to my advantage. Hence Ill go.”

The F. — “But who is right then?”
The lieutenant — “The one who survives.”
A man comes in: “He too died.”

Oh! no, no! And I know for sure who was right. It was
he, yes, he who called for a reconciliation.

Revolt.
Collective passions win out over individual passions.
Men no longer know how to love. What interests them
today is the human condition and not individual fates.

Liberty is the last of individual passions. That’s why it
is immoral today. Both in society, and in itself, to be sure,

liberty is immoral.
Philosophy is the contemporary form of indecency.
5 These three lines were penciled on the manuscript.

117

NOTEBOOK

At the age of thirty, almost

overnight,

V

I knew

fame.

I don’t regret it. I might have had nightmares about it
later on. Now I know what it is. It’s not much.

Thirty articles.© The reason for the praise is as bad as
the reason for the criticism. Scarcely one or two authentic
voices or voices moved to emotion. Fame! In the best of

cases, a misunderstanding. But I shall not assume the superior look of someone who disdains fame. It too is a mark
of men, neither more nor less important than their indifference, than friendship, than hatred. What does all that
matter to me in the end? This misunderstanding, for anyone who knows how to take it, is a deliverance.

My ambi-

tion, if I have one, is of a different nature.

NOVEMBER

— thirty-two years old

Man’s most natural inclination is to ruin himself and
everyone with him. What exceptional efforts he must make
to be merely normal! And what an even greater effort for
anyone who has an ambition to dominate himself and to
dominate the mind. Man is nothing in himself. He is but
an infinite chance. But he is infinitely responsible for that
chance. By himself, man is inclined to water himself down.
But the moment his will, his conscience, his spirit of
adventure dominates, chance begins to increase. No one

can say that he has reached the limit of man.

The five

years we have just lived through taught me that. From
the animal to the martyr, from the spirit of evil to hopeless sacrifice, every testimony was staggering. Each of us
has the responsibility of exploiting in himself man’s
greatest

chance,

his definitive

6 After the production

virtue.

When

of Caligula.

118

the human

September 1945 —April 1948

limit finally has a meaning, then the problem of God will
arise. But not before then, never before the possibility has
been fully experienced. There is but one possible aim
for great deeds and that is human productiveness. But
first of all make oneself master of oneself.

Tragedy is not a solution.

Parain.

God

did not create

himself.

He

is the son

of

human pride.
To understand is to create.

Revolt. If man fails in reconciling justice and liberty,
then he fails in everything. And religion is right? No, if
he accepts approximation.

It requires bucketsful of blood and centuries of history
to lead to an imperceptible modification in the human condition. Such is the law. For years heads fall like hail,
Terror reigns, Revolution is touted, and one ends up by
substituting constitutional monarchy for legitimate monarchy.

I lived my whole youth with the idea of my innocence,
in other words with no idea at all. Today...

I am not made for politics because I am incapable of
wanting or accepting the death of the adversary.
IIQ

NOTEBOOK

V

Only by a continual effort can I create. My tendency is
to drift toward immobility. My deepest, surest inclination
lies in silence and the daily routine. To escape relaxation,

the fascination of the mechanical, it took years of persever-

ance. But I know that I stand erect through that very effort
and that if I ceased to believe in it for a single moment I
should roll over the precipice. This is how I avoid illness
and renunciation, raising my head with all my strength to
breathe and to conquer. This is my way of despairing and
this is my way of curing myself.

Our task: to create universality or at least universal
values. Win for man his catholicity.

Historical materialism, absolute determinism,

the nega-

tion of all liberty, that frightful world of courage and
silence—these are the most legitimate consequences of a
philosophy without God. This is where Parain is right. If
God does not exist, nothing is permitted. Christianity alone
is strong in this regard. For to the divinization of history
it will always raise the objection of the creation of history;
it will inquire of the existentialist situation whence its
origin, etc. But its replies do not come from reasoning;
they come from mythology that calls for faith.
What to do between the two? Something in me tells me,

convinces me that I cannot detach myself from my era
without cowardice, without accepting slavery, without
denying my mother and my truth. I could not do so, or
accept a commitment that was both sincere and relative,
unless I were a Christian. Not a Christian, I must go on to
the end. But going on to the end means choosing history
I20

September 1945 —April 1948

absolutely, and with it the murder of man if the murder
of man is necessary to history. Otherwise, I am but a witness. That is the question: can I be merely a witness? In
other words: have I the right to be merely an artist? I cannot believe so. If I do not choose both against God and
against history, I am the witness of pure liberty whose fate
in history is to be put to death.” In the present state of
things, my situation lies in silence or death. If I choose
to do violence to myself and to believe in history, my
situation will be falsehood

and murder.

Outside

that, re-

ligion. I understand that a man can hurl himself into religion blindly to escape this madness and this painful (yes,
really painful) laceration. But I cannot do it.

Consequence: Have I the right, as an artist still attached
to liberty, to accept the advantages in money and consideration that are linked to that attitude? The reply for me
would be simple. It is in poverty that I have found and shall
always find the conditions essential to keep my culpability, if it exists, from being shameful at least and to keep it
proud. But must I reduce my children to poverty, refuse
even the very modest comfort I am preparing for them?
And in these conditions, was I wrong to accept the simplest

human tasks and duties, such as having children? In the
end, has

human

one

the right to have

condition* when

children,

to assume

one doesn’t believe in God

the

(add

the intermediary arguments )?
How easy it would be if I yielded to the horror and disgust that this world gives me, if I could still believe that
man’s task is to create happiness! Keep silent at least,
keep silent, keep silent, until I feel I have the right...
7Or

to cheat

by enjoying

artist.

[Author’s

note.]

the material

advantages

of the privileged

8 Moreover, did I really assume it when I felt such hesitation and
still have trouble doing so? Does not this inconstant heart deserve such a
contradiction?

[Author’s note.]
I21I

NOTEBOOK

V

Creation corrected.
Under the Occupation: the gatherers of dung. The suburban gardens.
Saint-Etienne Duniéres: The workmen in the same compartment as German soldiers. A bayonet has disappeared.
The soldiers hold the workmen until Saint-Etienne. The
big fellow who was to get off at Firminy. His rage on the
verge of tears. Added to the face’s fatigue, the even more
cruel fatigue of humiliation.

We are asked to choose between God and history.
Whence this dreadful longing to choose the earth, the
world,

and

trees, if I were

not

absolutely

sure

that

all

mankind does not coincide with history.

All philosophy is a justification of oneself. The only
original philosophy would be the one that would justify
someone else.

Against the literature of commitment. Man is not only
social. His death at least belongs to him. We are made to
live in relation to others. But one dies truly only for oneself.

Aesthetics of revolt. Thibaudet® of Balzac: “The Human

Comedy is the imitation of God the Father.” The theme
of revolt, of the outlaw, in Balzac.
9 Albert Thibaudet (1874-1936)
‘critic of French literature.

was

a vigorous

and

I22

always

original

September 1945 —April 1948

80% of divorces among repatriated prisoners. 80%
human loves do not resist five years of separation.

Thomas:

“Eh .. . what was I saying?

of

Well, itll come

back to me in a moment... In any case, Roupp said to
me: ‘You see, I’m the manager of a boxer. I'd like to manage a painter too. So, if you wish . . .’ I didn’t wish; I like
my freedom. And then, Roupp suggested I set out for Paris.
Of course, I accepted. I eat at his house. He got me a room

in a hotel. He’s paying it all. He is pushing me now to
work.”

X. —

A modest and charitable satanism.

A tragedy on the problem of evil. The best of men must
be damned if he serves only man.

“We love people less for the good they have done us than
for the good we have done them.” No, in the worst of cases,

we love them equally. And it’s not a misfortune. It is
natural that we should be grateful to someone who allows
us at least once to be better than we are. It’s a better conception of man that we revere and acknowledge in this
way.

By what right would a Communist or a Christian (to
take only the respectable forms of modern thought) blame
me for being a pessimist? I didn’t invent human misery
or the terrible formulas of divine malediction. I didn’t say
123

NOTEBOOK

V

that man was incapable of saving himself alone and that
from the depths in which he wallows he had no definitive
hope save in the grace of God. As for the famous Marxist
optimism, allow me to laugh. Few men have carried further distrust of their fellow men. Marxists do not believe in
persuasion or in dialogue. A workman cannot be made out
of a bourgeois, and economic conditions are in their world
more terrible fatalities than divine whims.
As for M. Herriot and the subscribers to Les Annales!
Communists and Christians will tell me that their optimism looks further ahead, that it is superior to all the rest,
and that God or history, according to the case, is the satis-

factory aim of their dialectic. I have the same reasoning
to make. If Christianity is pessimistic as to man, it is optimistic as to human destiny. Marxism, pessimistic as to
destiny, pessimistic as to human nature, is optimistic as
to the progress of history (its contradiction!). I shall say
that, pessimistic as to the human condition, I am optimistic

as to mankind.
How can they fail to see that never has such confidence
in man

been expressed?

I believe in the dialogue, in sin-

cerity. I believe they are the means to an unequaled psychological revolution;

etc., etc. ...

Hegel: “Only the modern city offers the mind the terrain in which it can be conscious of itself.” Significant.
This is the time of big cities. The world has been amputated
of a part of its truth, of what makes its permanence and
its equilibrium: nature, the sea, etc. There is consciousness

only in city streets!

(Cf. Sartre, all the modern philosophies of history, etc.)
1 &douard Herriot

(1872-1957), several times premier of France, spon-

sored the conservative

and popular periodical

of this name.

124

September 1945 —April 1948

Revolt. The human effort toward liberty and its habitual
contradiction: discipline and liberty die at their own hands.
Revolution must accept its own violence or be denied.
Consequently it cannot take place in purity, but only in
blood and selfish motives. My effort: show that the logic
of revolt rejects blood and selfish motives. And that the
dialogue carried to the absurd gives a chance to purity.
— Through compassion? (suffer together)

Plague. “Let’s not exaggerate anything,” Tarrou said.
“The plague exists. We must defend ourselves against it
and that’s what we are doing. Truly it’s a small matter
and in any case it doesn’t prove anything.”
The airfield is too far from town to set up a regular
service. They simply send packages by parachute.
After Tarrou’s death, the telegram is received announcing Mme Rieux’s death.
The plague follows the course of the year. It has its
springtime

when it germinates
and its autumn, etc....

and

flowers,

its summer

To Guilloux:? “The whole misfortune of men comes
from the fact that they don’t use a simple speech. If the
hero of The Misunderstanding had said: ‘Well, here I am

and I am your son,’ the dialogue would have been possible
and not at cross-purposes as in the play. There would have
been no tragedy because the height of all tragedies lies in the
deafness of the protagonists. From this point of view, Socrates is the one who is right, against Jesus and Nietzsche.

Progress and true nobility lie in the dialogue from man
2A

socialist

imbued

with

a deep

love

of humanity,

Louis

Guilloux

(1899) wrote novels dealing with the working class. Camus wrote
the preface for the reprint of one of these, La Maison du peuple, in 1953.

125

NOTEBOOK

V

to man and not in the Gospel, a monologue and dictated
from the top of a solitary mountain. That’s where I stand.
What balances the absurd is the community of men fight-

ing against it. And if we choose to serve that community,
we choose to serve the dialogue carried to the absurd
against any policy of falsehood or of silence. That’s the
way one is free with others.”

The limits. Thus I shall say that there are mysteries it
is suitable to enumerate and to meditate. Nothing more.

Saint-Just: “I think then that we must be impassioned.
This does not exclude common

sense or wisdom.”

For a thought to change the world, it must first change
the life of the man who carries it. It must become an
example.

At the age of twelve she is raped by a coachman. Just
once. Until the age of seventeen, she has the idea of a
sort of defilement.

Creation corrected. The two Jews of Verdelot during
the Occupation. The dreadful obsession of arrest. She becomes mad and goes and denounces him. Then she comes

and warns him. They are found hanged together. The bitch
howling all night long, as in the most ordinary of thrillers.
126

September 1945 —April 1948

Creation corrected: “I had always been told that you had
to seize immediately the first opportunity to escape. Any
risk was better than what would follow. But it is easier
to remain a prisoner and to let yourself drift toward the
horror than to escape. Because in the latter case you have
to take the initiative. In the first, others take it.”

Id. “If you really want to know, I never believed in the
Gestapo. Because you never saw it. To be sure, I took my
precautions, but abstractly in a way. From time to time, a
pal would disappear. Another day, in front of SaintGermain-des-Prés, I saw two big fellows pushing a man
into a taxi while pummeling his face. And no one said anything. A café waiter said to me: ‘Keep quiet. It’s them.’
That gave me a hint that they really existed and that
some day .. . But only a hint. The truth is that I could
never believe in the Gestapo until I got kicked in the belly
myself. That’s the way I am. And that’s why you mustn’t
have too exalted an idea of my courage because I am in
the Resistance, as they say. No, it’s no credit to me because
I have no imagination.”

Politics of revolt. “Thus it is that the pessimistic revolution becomes the revolution of happiness.”

Tragedy. C.L.C. “I am right and that’s what gives me the
right to kill him. I can’t hesitate over that detail. I think
according to the world and history.”
L. —

“When the detail is a human life, for me it is the

whole world and all of history.”
127

NOTEBOOK

V

Origins of the modern madness. It was Christianity that
turned man away from the world. It reduced him to himself and to his history. Communism is a logical successor
to Christianity. It is a history of Christians.
Id. After two thousand years of Christianity, the body’s

revolt. Two thousand years before we could again exhibit
it naked on beaches. Whence excess. And the body found
its place in usage. It remains to give it that place again
in philosophy and metaphysics. This is one of the meanings of the modern convulsion.

Fair criticism of the absurd by Albert Wild: “The feeling
of anguish is irreconcilable with the feeling of liberty.”

The Greeks made allowance for the divine. But the divine

was not everything.

“But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay:
for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.” Matt.

SERIE

Koestler. The extreme doctrine: “Whoever is opposed
to dictatorship must accept civil war as a means. Whoever
baulks at civil war must give up the opposition and accept
the dictatorship.” That is the typical “historical” reasoning.

Id. “It (the Party) denied the free will of the individual
—and at the same time demanded of him a voluntary
abnegation. It denied that he had the possibility of choos128

September 1945 —April 1948

ing between

two solutions

and at the same

time it de-

manded that he constantly choose the right one. It denied
that he had the faculty of distinguishing between good
and evil—and at the same time it spoke emotionally of
guilt and treachery. The individual—a cog in a clockwork
which was wound up for eternity and which nothing could
stop or influence—was dominated by economic fatality and

the Party demanded that the cog should revolt against
the clockwork and change its motion.”
Typical of the “historical” contradiction.

Id. “The greatest temptation for men like us is to renounce violence, to repent, to be at peace with oneself.
God’s temptations have always been more dangerous for

humanity than those of Satan.”

Novel of love: Jessica.

Death of an old actor.

One morning in a snowy, muddy Paris. The oldest and
most melancholy section in town, the one that houses the

Santé, Sainte-Anne, and Cochin.’ Along the dark, icy
streets, the insane, the sick, the poor, and the condemned.

As for Cochin: the barracks of poverty and illness, and its
walls drip with the filthy humidity that belongs to misfortune.
That is where he died. At the end of his life, he was

still playing bit parts (utility men, as theater people call
them), changing his single threadbare suit yellowing with
3 On the Boulevard de Port-Royal, near the Métro station of La Glaciére,

are grouped the Cochin hospital and prisons like La Santé and SainteAnne.

129

NOTEBOOK

V

age for the more or less glittering costumes that have to
be provided, willy-nilly, for the minor roles. He had to give
up his work. He could no longer drink anything but milk,
and besides he had no milk. He was taken to Cochin and
he told his friends that he was going to be operated on
and then it would be all over. (I recall a line from his
part: “When I was a little child,” and as a suggestion was

made to him about its delivery, “Ah!” he said, “I don’t
feel it that way.”) He wasn’t operated on but was sent
away, being told he was cured. He even went back to the
bit part of a ludicrous little man that he was playing at that
time. But he had lost weight. It has always amazed me
to what degree the loss of a certain amount of weight, a
certain manner of having the cheekbones stand out and the
gums shrink, is the obvious sign that it’s all coming to an
end. The one who is losing weight is the only one who
never seems

to “be aware.” Or if he “is aware,” it’s only

intermittently perhaps,

and I, of course, have no way of

knowing. All I can know is what I see and it so happened
that I saw that Liesse was going to die.
He died indeed. He stopped working again. He went back
to Cochin. They still didn’t operate, but he died without
that—one night without a fuss. And in the morning his
wife came to see him as usual. No one informed her at
the office because no one had been informed. Those in
the neighboring beds informed his wife. “You know,” they
said, “it happened last night.”
And this morning there he is, in the little morgue
Opening on to the rue de la Santé. Two or three of his
old associates are there with the widow and the widow’s
daughter, who is not his daughter. When I arrived, the
undertaker (why was he wearing a tricolor sash like a
mayor?) told me he could still be seen. I didn’t want to;
I still had this filthy, clinging morning stuck in my throat.
I30

September 1945 —April 1948

But I went. You could see only his head; what served as a
shroud was pulled up to his chin. He had lost more weight;
I didn’t think anyone in his condition could get still thinner.
Yet he had done so, and one could see the thickness of his

bones and realize that this strong, nobby head was made
to carry a heavy weight of flesh. For lack of flesh, the teeth
jutted out, frighteningly .. . But am I going to describe
that? A dead body is a dead body, as everyone knows, and
the dead must be left to bury the dead. What a pity,
though, what a dreadful pity!
The men who were at his head, their hands on the edge

of the coffin as if they were presenting him to the visitor,
then got under way. Got under way is the word, for those
awkward, stiff automata in their coarse clothing suddenly
hurled themselves upon the shroud, the cover, and a screw-

driver. In a second the top was down and two men were
tightening the screws, weighing heavily on them with a
brutal motion of the forearm. “Ah!” they seemed to say,
“you won't get out now!” Those living men wanted it over
with, that could be seen at once. He was carried out. We

followed him. The widow and the daughter climbed into
the hearse at the same time as the corpse. We piled into a
car that followed. Not a flower, nothing but black everywhere.
We were going to the Thiais Cemetery. The widow
thought it was far, but the office had forced it on her. We
left town by the Porte d’Italie. Never had the sky seemed to
me so low over the suburbs of Paris. Fragments of shanties,

stakes, a black, spotty vegetation emerged from the piles
of snow and mud. Two or three miles of this landscape and
we reached the monumental gates of the most hideous
cemetery in the world. A guard with a red face came out to
stop the procession at the gate and demanded the ticket.
“O.K.,” he said, once he had it in his hands. For some
Igr

ten

NOTEBOOK

V

minutes we navigated amid piles of mud and snow. Then
we stopped behind another funeral. We were separated
from the field of the dead by an embankment of snow.
In the snow two crosses were planted askew; one was for
Liesse, from what I saw, and the other for a little girl
eleven years old. The funeral ahead of us was the little
girl’s. But the family was just getting back into the hearse.
It started off and we were able to advance a few yards.
We got out. Tall fellows in blue wearing boots like sewermen dropped the shovels they were holding as they
watched the scene. They stepped forward and began to
pull the coffin out of the hearse. At that moment,

a sort

of mailman dressed in blue and red, wearing a bashedin military cap, suddenly appeared with an invoice with

carbon paper between the sheets. Then the sewermen read
aloud a number engraved on the coffin: 3237 C. The mailman followed the lines of his invoice with his pencil and
he said “O. K.” as he checked a number. At that moment
they pulled out the coffin. We entered the field. Our feet

sank into an oily and elastic mud. The hole was dug among
four other holes that surrounded it on all sides. The sewermen slipped the box in rather swiftly. But we were all very
far from the hole because the graves kept us from stepping
forward and the narrow passage separating them was
cluttered with tools and with earth. When the coffin
reached the bottom, there was a moment of silence. Everyone looked at one another. There was no priest, no flowers,

and not a word of peace or of regret rose from the group.
And all felt that the moment

should be more solemn, that

it should have been emphasized, and no one knew how.
Then a sewerman said: “If these ladies and gentlemen
want to throw in a little earth.” The widow nodded yes.
He picked up some earth on a shovel, took a trowel out of
his pocket, and picked up some soil on the trowel. The
132

September 1945 —April 1948

widow stretched out her hand above a mound of earth.
She took the trowel and threw the soil in the direction
of the hole, rather wildly. The hollow sound of the box
could be heard. But the daughter missed her shot. The soil
went far beyond the hole. She made a gesture that meant:
“Too bad.”
The bill: “And he was put into the clay soil for an
exorbitant price.”
You know, this is the cemetery of the people put to
death.
Laval is a little farther on.

[The trip to North America
this point.]

(March—May 1946) comes at

133

NOTEBOOK

Novel. When supper was late, it was
was to be an execution in the morning.

V

because

there

V. Ocampo! goes to Buckingham Palace. At the entrance
the guard asks her where she is going. “To see the Queen.”
“Carry on.” The flunky inside likewise. “Carry on.” The
Queen’s apartments. “Take the lift.” Etc. She is received

without any other kind of interrogation.

Nuremberg. 60,000 bodies under the ruins. It is prohibited to drink the water. But one doesn’t feel like washing in
it either. It’s water from the Morgue. Above the decomposition, the trial.
On the lampshades made of human skin can be seen
a very ancient dancer tattooed between the nipples.

Revolt. Beginning: “The only really serious moral problem is murder. The rest comes after. But to find out
whether or not I can kill this person in my presence, or

agree to his being killed, to find that I know
before finding out whether

nothing

or not I can cause death, that

is what must be learned.”

People always want to push us in the direction of their
consequences. If they judge us, they always do so with their
principles in mind. But I don’t care what they think. What
4 Victoria Ocampo, the Argentine writer who
influential review Sur in Buenos Aires.

founded

134

and edited the

September 1945 —April 1948

matters to me is to find out whether or not I can kill.
Because you have reached the frontiers where all thought
stumbles, they begin rubbing their hands. “And now, what
is he going to do?” And they have their truth all ready. But
I think I don’t care if I am in a state of contradiction;
I don’t want to be a philosophical genius. I don’t even
want to be a genius at all, for I have enough trouble just
being a man. I want to find an agreement, and, knowing
that I cannot kill myself, to find out whether I can kill or
let others be killed and, knowing it, to draw all the con-

clusions from it even if that is to leave me in a state of
contradiction.

It seems that I still have to find a humanism. I have
nothing against humanism, of course. I just find it inadequate. And Greek thought, for example, was quite different
from a humanism. It was a thought that had room for
everything.

The Terror! And they are already forgetting.

Novel on Justice.®
1) Poor childhood—injustice is natural.

At the first example of violence (brutal interrogation, injustice, and adolescence in revolt).
2) Native politics. Party (etc.).
3) Revolution in general. Does not think of prin-

ciples. War and Resistance.
4) The purging of the collaborators. Justice cannot be reconciled with violence.
5 Passage reinstated by the French publishers.

135

Loves

NOTEBOOK

V

5) That truth cannot be achieved without a true life.
6) Return to the mother. Priest? “It’s not worthwhile.”

She didn’t say “no.” But that it wasn’t worthwhile. He knew

that she never thought it worthwhile to disturb someone
for her. And even her death...

Revolt and Revolution.
The revolution as myth is the definitive revolution.
Id. Historicity leaves unexplained the phenomenon

of

beauty; in other words, relations with the world (sentiment

of nature) and with persons as individuals (love). What
to think of a supposedly absolute explanation that...

Id. The whole effort of German thought has been to
substitute for the notion of human nature that of human
situation and hence to substitute history for God and
modern tragedy for ancient equilibrium. Modern existentialism carries that effort even further and introduces into
the idea of situation the same uncertainty as in the idea
of nature. Nothing remains but a motion. But like the
Greeks I believe in nature.

Plague. In my whole life, never such a feeling of failure.
I am not even sure of reaching the end. At certain moments, however...

Blow up everything. Give to revolt the form of a tract.
Revolution and those who will never kill. Rebellious preaching. Not a single concession.
136

September 1945
— April 1948

“What a mad, inconceivable thing that a writer cannot
—in any conceivable
readers.” Melville.

circumstance—be

frank

with his

From the point of view of a new classicism, The Plague
ought to be the first attempt at shaping a collective passion.

For The Plague. See Defoe’s preface to the third volume
of Robinson Crusoe (Serious Reflections during the Life
and Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe): “. . . It

is as reasonable to represent one kind of imprisonment by
another, as it is to represent anything that really exists
by that which exists not... . Had the common way of
writing a man’s private history been taken . . . all I could
have said would have yielded no diversion . . .”°

The Plague is a tract.

How can one learn how to die in the desert!

Lourmarin.’ First evening, after so many years. The
first star above the Lubéron, the vast silence, the cypress
with its tip shivering in the depths of my fatigue. Solemn

and

austere

6 Camus
epigraph

used
to La

landscape—despite
the first sentence
Peste

in

1947,

its bewildering

of this quotation

and

many

assumed

A Journal of the Plague Year.
7 Invited by Henri Bosco, Camus

went to Lourmarin

writers.

In late

1958

he bought

a house

Durance

Valley

about

twenty-five

miles

years later he was

known

Defoe

as an

that it came

from

with several other

in that small

from

village

Aix-en-Provence,

buried in the local cemetery,

of the small mountain

from

which

as Le Lubéron.

137

beauty.

in the
and

is within

two

sight

NOTEBOOK

V

Story of the former deportee who encounters German
prisoners in Lourmarin. “The first time he had been struck
was during his interrogation. Normal enough in a way
considering the exceptional circumstance. But in the camp,
when he received two hard slaps for some little mistake
in his service, it all began. For then he realized that in
the eyes of the man who had struck him it was normal,
natural,

customary

. . .” He tries to talk to the German

prisoner to explain what he means. But the other is a
prisoner; one can’t talk to him about that. Eventually the
fellow disappears, without his having talked to him. On

second thought, he feels that no man is ever free enough
to be able to throw light on that. They are all prisoners.

Another

time, in the camp,

the Germans

had

amused

themselves by making them dig their own graves and then
had not executed them. For two full hours they had dug in
the black earth, seen the roots, etc., with new eyes.

“It’s dying without death and accomplishing nothing
To waver thus
In the dark belly of cramped misfortune.”
Agrippa d’Aubigné
Revolt. First chapter on the death penalty.
Id. end. Thus, starting from the absurd, it is not possible

to live revolt without reaching at some point or other an

experience of love that is still undefined.

Novel. Poor childhood. “I was ashamed of my poverty
and of my family. (But they are monsters!) And if I can
speak of it today quite simply this is because I am no
138

September 1945 —April 1948

longer ashamed of that shame and no longer despise myself for having felt it. I came to know such shame only
when I was sent to the lycée. Before then, everyone was
poor like me, and poverty seemed to me the very air
we breathed in this world. At school I came to know the
comparison.
“A child is nothing in himself. His parents represent
him. And one deserves much

maturity, for not knowing

less credit, having reached

such ugly feelings. For then

you are judged for what you are and you even go so far
as to judge your family by what you have become. I now
know it would have required a heart of heroic and exceptional purity not to suffer from those days when I used to
read on the face of a more favored friend the surprise he

couldn’t hide on seeing the house where I lived.
“Yes, I lacked courage, and that is vulgar. And if until
the age of twenty-five I felt rage and shame at the memory
of that lack of courage, this is because I refused to be
vulgar. Whereas I know now that I am and, having ceased
to consider it either good or bad, I am interested in other
things...
“I loved my mother with despair. I have always loved
her with despair.”
Idea of resistance in the metaphysical sense.
Treat of the harm the world does me. It makes me disparaging, whereas I am not . . . That sort of second
state ..

Machado.

“The

sound

of the coffin in the earth is an

utterly serious thing.”
“O Lord, we are alone, my mother

and my heart.”

“When comes the day of my last voyage
139

NOTEBOOK

V

And the ship sails that never returns,
You will find me on board with slim baggage
And almost naked like the sons of the sea.”
Translate the speeches of Juan de Mairena.*
An African romancero?

The only great Christian mind that faced the problem
of evil was St. Augustine. He drew from it the terrible
“Nemo Bonus.” Since then Christianity has striven to give
the problem temporary solutions.
The result is evident. For it is the result. Men took their
time, but today they are poisoned by an intoxication that

has been going on for two thousand years. They are fed
up with evil or resigned, and this comes to the same thing.
At least they can no longer accept lies on the subject.

February 19, 1861. Law suppressing serfdom in Russia.
The first shot (fired by Karakozov) was the 4th of April
1866.
See Whose Fault? a novel by Herzen (1847).
And id. On the Development of Revolutionary Ideas in
Russia.®

I prefer committed men to literatures of commitment.
Courage in one’s life and talent in one’s works—this is
8The

Spanish

poet

Antonio

Machado

(1875-1939),

whom

Camus

quotes in French, attributed his philosophical aphorisms in prose to one
Juan

de Mairena,

a creation

of his own

mind.

9Readings for The Just Assassins and The Rebel. One of the few
Russian liberals in the middle of the nineteenth century, Alexander
Herzen (1812-70) left Russia in 1847 but was bitterly disappointed by
the European

revolutions

of 1848.

140

September 1945 —April 1948

not so bad. And moreover the writer is committed when
he wishes to be. His merit lies in his impulse. But if this
is to become a law, a function, or a terror, just where is

the merit?

It seems that to write a poem about spring today would
be to serve capitalism. I am not a poet, but I should delight
in such

a work

without

mental

reservation,

if it were

beautiful. One serves mankind all together or not at all.
And if man needs bread and justice, and if we must do the

necessary to satisfy that need, he also needs pure beauty,
which is the bread of his heart. The rest is not serious.
Yes, I should like to see them less committed

in their

works and a little more so in their daily life.
Existentialism kept Hegelianism’s basic error, which
consists in reducing man to history. But it did not keep
the consequence, which is to refuse in fact any liberty to
man.

OCTOBER
1946. Thirty-three years old in a month
My memory has been slipping for the last year. Inability
to remember a story told me—to recall whole sections of
the past, which nonetheless were alive. Until it improves
(if it does improve), obviously I must note here more and
more

things, even personal ones—too

bad. For in the end

everything takes its place for me on the same rather foggy
plane, and forgetfulness has also reached my heart. I have
ceased to have any but brief emotions, devoid of the long
echo that memory gives. The sensitivity of dogs is like that.

Plague .. . “And every time I have read a story about
plague, from the bottom of a heart poisoned by its own
I4I

NOTEBOOK

V

rebellions and by the violences of others there rose a clear
cry saying that there were nevertheless in men more things
to admire than things to despise.”
.. . “And that everyone carries the plague in him, because no one, no one in the world, is untouched

by it.

And that one must watch oneself constantly not to be led
in a moment of distraction to breathe in someone else’s
face and to infect him. What is natural is the microbe.
The rest, health, integrity, purity if you wish, is an effect
of the will and of a will that must never relax. The admirable man, who does not infect anyone, is the man who

has the fewest possible moments of distraction.
“Yes, it’s tiring to be a skunk. But it’s even more tiring
not to want to be a skunk. This is why everyone is tired
since everyone is somewhat of a skunk. But this is also
why a few know an extremity of fatigue that nothing will
cure short of death.”

Of course, what interests me is not so much being better
as being accepted. And no one accepts anyone. Did she
accept me? No, it’s quite obvious.

The look of poor animals that people have in a doctor’s
waiting room.

Jacques Rigaut: “Ihe example comes from above. God
created man in his image. What a temptation for man to
live up to that image.”
“The solution,
death sentence.”

the

reply,

the

clue,

the

truth,

1See Tarrou in The Plague, next to last chapter of IV.

142

is the

September 1945 —April 1948

“Presumptuous man, what does he, who is nothing, have
to fear?”
“The greater my disinterestedness, the more authentic
my interest.”
“Either one of two things. Not to speak out, not to keep
silent. Suicide.”
“So long as I have not overcome my inclination for
sensual pleasure, I shall be sensitive to the attraction of
suicide, I am well aware.”

Conversations with Koestler. The end justifies the means
only if the relative order of importance is reasonable—
ex.: I can send Saint-Exupéry on a fatal mission to save
a regiment. But I cannot deport millions of persons and
suppress all liberty for an equivalent quantitative result
and compute for three or four generations previously sacrificed.
Genius. There is no such thing.
When he is recognized as a talent, the creator’s great
suffering begins (I no longer have the courage to publish
my books.).

There are moments when I don’t believe I can endure
the contradiction any longer. When the sky is cold and
nothing supports us in nature .. . Ah! better to die perhaps.

Continuation of the preceding. My anguish at the idea
of doing those articles for Combat.?
2 Probably

“Ni

victimes

and included in Actuelles

ni bourreaux,”

published

I.

143

in November

1946

NOTEBOOK

An essay
pleasure.

on

the

feeling

for nature—and_

V

sensual

Art and revolt. Breton is right. I don’t believe either in
the break between the world and man. There are the moments of harmony with crude nature. But nature is never
crude. But landscapes are fleeting and soon forgotten.
This is why there are painters. And surrealist painting
in its movement is the expression of that revolt of man
against Creation. But its mistake lay in trying to preserve
or imitate only the miraculous side of nature. The true
rebellious artist does not deny miracles; he overcomes them

rather.

Parain.
cantation.

That the essence of modern literature is reThe surrealists becoming Marxists. Rimbaud,

devotion.

Sartre, ethics. And that the great problem of

the moment is the conflict. Human condition. Human nature.
But if there is a human nature, where does it come from?

Obvious that I ought to give up all creative activity so
long as I don’t know. What constituted the success of my
books is what constitutes their falsehood for me. In fact,

I am an average man with an exigency. The values I ought
to defend and illustrate today are average values. This requires a talent so spare and unadorned that I doubt I have
it.

The aim of revolt is the pacification of men. Any revolt
reaches

the ultimate

and reverberates

in the assertion

144

of

September 1945 —April 1948

human limits—and of a community of all men, whoever
they are, within those limits. Humility and genius.

October
I. Between

29. Koestler, Sartre, Malraux, Sperber,
Piero della Francesca and Dubuffet.?

and

K. — Necessity of defining a minimum political code
of ethics. Hence of getting rid first of a certain number of
false scruples, which he calls “fallacies” in English:

(a)

that what you say may serve causes you yourself cannot
serve. (b) Soui-searching. The order of injustices. “When
the interviewer asked me, for example, if I hated Russia,

something came to a stop there in me. And I made an
effort. I said that I hated the Stalin regime as much as I
hated the Hitler regime and for the same reasons. But
something came undone at that point.” “So many years
of struggle. I lied for them . . . and now like that friend
who beat his head against the walls of my room, saying
as he turned his blood-spattered face toward me: “There
is no more hope, there is no more hope.’” Modes of action,
elec:
M. — Momentary impossibility of reaching the proletariat. Is the proletariat the highest historical value?
C. — Utopia. A Utopia today will cost them less than a
war. The opposite of Utopia is war. On the one hand. On
the other: “Don’t you believe that we are all responsible
for the absence of values? And that if all of us who come
from Nietzscheism, from nihilism, or from historical real-

ism said in public that we were wrong and that there are
moral values and that in the future we shall do the neces3 Soon after this meeting

at the home

of André

David Rousset founded

the R.D.R., which became

in French

life.

intellectual

Malraux,

Sartre

and

a subject of controversy

145

NOTEBOOK

sary

to establish‘

and illustrate

them,

V

don’t you believe

this would be the beginning of a hope?”
S. — “I cannot turn my moral values solely against the
U.S.S.R. For it is true that the deporting of several million men is more serious than the lynching of a Negro.
But the lynching of a Negro is the result of a situation that
has been going on for a hundred years and more, and that
represents in the end the suffering of just as many millions
of Negroes over the years as there are millions of Cherkess
deported.”
K. — It must be said that as writers we are guilty of
treason in the eyes of history if we do not denounce what

deserves to be denounced. The conspiracy of silence is our
condemnation in the eyes of those who come after us.
S. —

Yes. Etc., etc.

And during all this time the impossibility of determining
how much fear or truth enters into what each one says.

If one believes in moral value, one believes in all moral-

ity, even and including sexual morality. The reform is total.

Read Owen.

Write the story of a contemporary cured of his heartbreaks solely by long contemplation of a landscape.

Robert, a conscientious objector of Communist sympathies, in °33. Three years in prison. When he gets out,
the Communists are for war and the pacifists are on the
4 The word in the manuscript might be read as garder (“to preserve”).

146

September 1945 —April 1948

side of Hitler. He can’t understand anything in this world
gone mad. He signs up with the Spanish republicans and
goes off to war. He is killed on the Madrid front.

What is a famous man? It’s a man whose given name

doesn’t matter. With all others, the given name has a very
specific meaning.

Why does one drink? Because in drink everything assumes importance, everything takes its place on the highest
plane. Conclusion: one drinks through impotence and

through condemnation.

The universal order cannot be built from above, in other
through an idea; but rather from below, in other

words

words through the common basis which...

Prepare a book of political texts around Brasillach.®

Guilloux. The only reference is pain. So that the guiltiest
of men will maintain a relation with the human.

Met Tar. as I came away from the public statement I
made concerning dialogue. He seems reticent, yet has the
same friendly look in his eyes that he had when I recruited him into the Combat network.
5 A brilliant disciple of Charles Maurras, Robert Brasillach (1910-45)
was executed in February 1945 for collaboration with the Germans

during the Occupation.
habilitate him.

There

has

been

a vigorous

147

campaign

to

re-

NOTEBOOK

V

“Youre a Marxist now?”
PLES.
“Then you'll be a murderer.”
“I’ve already been one.”
“I too. But I don’t want to be any more.”
“You were my sponsor.”
That was true.
“Listen, Tar. This is the real reopiees whatever happens, I shall always defend you against the firing squad.
But you will be obliged to approve my being shot. Think
about that.”
“Tll think about it.”

Unbearable solitude—I cannot believe it or resign myself
to it.

What makes a man feel alone is the cowardice of others.
Must one try to understand that cowardice too? But it’s
beyond my strength. And, on the other hand, I cannot be
a scorner.

If everything can be reduced to man and to history,
I wonder where is the place: of nature—of love—of music
—of art.

Revolt. We don’t want just any hero whatever. The reasons for heroism are more important than the heroism
148

September 1945 — April 1948

itself. The value of consistency therefore precedes the
value of heroism. Nietzscheian liberty is an exaltation.

Creation

corrected.

The

character

of

the _ terrorist

(Ravenel).

Relation of the absurd to revolt.* If the final decision
is to reject suicide in order to maintain the confrontation,
this amounts implicitly to admitting life as the only factual
value, the one

that allows

the confrontation,

that is the

confrontation, “the value without which nothing.” Whence
it is clear that to obey that absolute value, whoever rejects
suicide likewise rejects murder. Ours is the era which,
having carried nihilism to its extreme conclusions, has
accepted suicide. This can be verified in the ease with
which we accept murder, or the justification of murder.
The man who kills himself alone still maintains one value,

which is the life of others. The proof is that he never uses
the freedom and the terrible power granted him by his
decision to die in order to dominate others: every suicide

is illogical in some regard. But the men of the Terror have
carried the values of suicide to their extreme consequence,
which is legitimate murder, in other words collective suicide. Illustration:

the Nazi apocalypse in 1945.

BRIANCON.

JANUARY

747

The evening that flows over these cold mountains eventually freezes the heart. I have never been able to bear this
evening hour except in Provence or on the beaches of the
Mediterranean.
6 Sketch for first chapter of The Rebel as it appears in manuscript.

149

NOTEBOOK

V

G. Orwell, Burmese Days:* “Most people can be at ease
in a foreign country only when they are disparaging the
inhabitants.”
Id. “. . . that inordinate happiness that comes of exhaustion and achievement, and with which nothing else

in life—no joy of either the body or the mind—is

even

able to be compared.”

Read

Georg

Simmel

(Schopenhauer

and

Nietzsche).

Commentary on Nietzsche translated into English by
Berneri (killed by the Communists in Spain when the Anarchists were being liquidated). Develops the longing for
God in Nietzsche. “Though this may seem to us fantastic
and excessive,

it reveals, under

the form

of an extreme

personalism, a feeling which, in another form, is not very

distant from the Christian conception of the inner life.
In Christianity, in fact, as well as our infinite distance
from and smallness before God, there is the idea of be-

coming equal to him. The mystic of every age and every
religion gives rise to this aspiration to become one with
God or, more audaciously, to become God. The scholastics
talk of deification, and for Meister Eckhard man can shed

his human form and become God again, as he is by his
proper and original nature, or, as Angelus Silesius expressed :

I must find my ultimate end and my beginning
I must find God in me and me in God
And become what he is...
7 This quotation is from Chapter X, and the following one from Chapter
XIV, of Burmese Days by George Orwell
in French.

(1903-50), which Camus

I50

quotes

September 1945 —April 1948

This same passion was felt by Spinoza and Nietzsche:
they could not accept not being God.”8

Nietzsche says: “There cannot be a God because, if
there were one, I could not accept not being he.”

There is but one freedom, to put oneself right with death.
After that, everything is possible. I cannot force you to
believe in God. Believing in God amounts to coming to
terms with death. When you have accepted death, the
problem of God will be solved—and not the reverse.

Radici,

a member of the French militia who had volun-

teered for the Waffen SS, tried for having had twenty-eight
prisoners in La Santé shot (he was present as the five
groups were executed), belonged to the Humane Society
for the Protection of Animals.

Rebatet and Morgan. On the right and the left—or universal definition of Fascism: Having no character, they
adopted a doctrine.

Title for the future: System (1,500 pp.)

As human works have gradually come to cover the vast
spaces where the world was asleep, to the point that the
8 The entire passage from Simmel, including the quotation from the
seventeenth-century German poet Silesius, is left in the English in which
Camus reproduced it.

I51

NOTEBOOK

V

very idea of virgin nature now belongs to the myth of Eden
(there

are

no

more

islands),

peopling

the deserts,

sub-

dividing the beaches, and even erasing the sky with flights
of planes, leaving untouched only those regions where it so
happens that man cannot live, likewise, and simultaneously (and for the same reason) the feeling for history has
gradually covered the feeling for nature in the hearts of
men, taking from the creator what had belonged to him and
giving it to the creature. And all this through an impulse
so powerful and irresistible that the day can be foreseen
when silent natural creation will have yielded altogether
to human

creation, hideous and flashing, resounding with

revolutionary and warlike clamors, humming with factories and

trains,

at last definitive

and

triumphant

in the

course of history—having completed its task on this earth,
which was perhaps to prove that everything grandiose and
staggering it could accomplish throughout thousands of
years was not worth the fleeting scent of the wild rose,
the olive grove, the beloved dog.

1947
Like all weak men, his decisions were brutal and unreason-

ably rigid.

Aesthetics of revolt. Painting makes a choice. It “isolates” and this is its way of unifying. The landscape isolates
in space what is normally lost in perspective. The painting
of scenes isolates in time the gesture that is normally lost
in another gesture. Great painters are those who give the
impression that the fixation has just taken place (Piero
I52

September 1945 —April 1948

della Francesca)

as if the projector had just suddenly

stopped.

A play on the government of women.

The men

decide

that they themselves have failed and that they will hand
over the government to the women.
Act I —

the powers.
Act II —
failure.
Act III —

My Socrates arrives and decides to hand over

The women

want

to do as the men

did—

Under the sound advice of Socrates, they rule

as women.
Act IV — Conspiracy.
Act V — They hand it back to the men.
They pretend to declare a war. “Have you realized what
it means to the man who stays behind—and to see going
off to slaughter all those he loves in this world?”
We can go now. We have done all that could be hoped
in this world in the face of human stupidity. And what
is that? A little education.
“As stupid as we but less malicious.”
An experiment for a year.
If all goes well, they will be shown to the door.
All does go well but they are not shown to the door. They
lacked hatred.
“It’s all going to begin over again,” says Socrates. They
are preparing everything. Big ideas and interpretations of
history. In ten years the slaughterhouses.
Listen:
A town crier
Article I — There are no more rich or poor.

Article II
153

NOTEBOOK

V

“Are you going out again?”
“Yes, I have a meeting.”
“I need distraction—keep my house in order.”

1947
Vae mihi qui cogitare ausus sum.°

.

After a week of solitude, again keen awareness of my
inadequacy for the work I have begun with the maddest
of ambitions. Temptation to give it up. This long debate
with a truth that is greater than I called for a more
austere heart, a broader and stronger intelligence. But
what can I do? I should die without that.

Revolt. Freedom
freedom

in regard to death. Considering

of murder,

than freedom

there

is no

freedom

to die; in other words,

possible

suppressing

the
other

fear of

death and giving that accident its place in the natural order
of things. Strive toward this.

Montaigne. Change of tone in Chapter XX of Book One.
On death. Amazing things he says of his fear in the face
of death.

Novel

—

Twinkle.

“When

I arrived,

I was

exhausted

by worry and fever. I went to look at the timetable to find

out at what time she would get in, if by chance she was
not already there. It was 11 p.m. The last train from the
9 Alas, that I ever

dared

to think!

154

September 1945 —April 1948

west would get in at 2 a.m. I was the last to leave. She was
waiting for me at the exit, alone in a group of two or three
persons,

with

an

Alsatian

dog she had

befriended.

She

came toward me. I kissed her awkwardly but I was thoroughly happy. We went

out. The sky of Provence

was

sparkling with stars over the ramparts. She had been there
since 5 p.m. She had come to meet the seven o'clock
train and I wasn’t on it. She was afraid that I would not
come,

for she had given my name

at the hotel and her

identification papers did not correspond. They had refused
to register her and she did not dare go back there. When
we reached the ramparts, she threw herself against me
amid the passing crowd, which turned around to look, and
hugged me with a passion which showed relief and not
love but the hope of love. I was aware of my fever and
should have liked to be strong and handsome. At the hotel,
I told the truth and everything went well. But I wanted
to drink a brandy before going up to our rooms. And
there in the warm bar, where she made me keep drinking,
I felt my confidence return and the tide of relaxation fill
me completely.”
His upper lip was cut lengthwise. His teeth could be
seen up to the gums. So he seemed to be always laughing.
But his eyes were serious.

What is man worth? What is man? All life long, after
what I have seen, I shall have a suspicion and basic worry
about him.
Cf. Marc Klein in Etudes Germaniques:

“Observations

and Reflections on the Nazi Concentration Camps.”
I55

NOTEBOOK

V

Novel—creation corrected. “He had put the spade on
the other man’s neck as soon as he was on the ground.

And, his foot on the spade, with the same motion that
breaks clods of clay he had thrust down.”

Nemesis—the goddess of measure. All those who have
overstepped the limit will be pitilessly destroyed.

Isocrates: There is nothing in the universe more divine,
more august, more noble than beauty.
Aeschylus, of Helen:1! “Soul as serene as the calm of the
seas, beauty that adorned the richest finery, gentle eyes
piercing like an arrow, flower of love fatal to hearts.”
Helen is not guilty but a victim of the gods. After the
catastrophe she resumes the course of her life.

La Patelliére. This moment

(the final canvases) when

the seasons burst forth, when mysterious hands place their

flowers in every corner of the picture. A calm tragedy.

Terrorism
The great purity of the terrorist of the Kaliayev type
is that for him murder coincides with suicide

(cf. Savin-

kov: Recollections of a Terrorist).? A life is paid for by a
life. The reasoning is false, but respectable. (A life taken

is not worth a life given.) Today, murder by proxy. No
one pays.
1See “Helen’s Exile,” in The
(Alfred A. Knopf, 1955).
2 Boris Savinkov (1879-1925)
Duke Sergei in 1905.

Myth

of Sisyphus

organized

the

and

Other

assassination

156

Essays

of Grand

September 1945 —April 1948

1905, Kaliayev: sacrifice of the body. 1930: sacrifice of
the mind.

PANG

LIER,

J UN

£37,

“47

Beautiful day. A frothy light, shining and soft above and
around the huge beeches. It seems secreted by all the
branches. The clusters of leaves stirring slowly in that blue
gold like a thousand mouths with multiple lips salivating
all day long this airy, golden, sweet juice—or else a thousand little contorted green bronze waterspouts ceaselessly
irrigating the sky with a blue and sparkling water—or

else .. . But that’s enough.

How impossible it is to say that anyone is absolutely
guilty, and hence impossible to decree total punishment.

Criticism of the idea of efficacy—a chapter.

German philosophy introduced movement into things
of the reason and of the Universe—whereas the Ancients
saw fixity. German philosophy will not be superseded—
man will not be saved—except by defining what is fixed
and what is mobile (and what we don’t know whether to
class as fixed or mobile).

The end of the absurd, rebellious, etc., movement,

the

end of the contemporary world consequently, is compassion in the original sense; in other words, ultimately love
and poetry. But that calls for an innocence I no longer have.
I57

NOTEBOOK

V

All I can do is to recognize the way leading to it and to be
receptive to the time of the innocents. To see it, at least,
before dying.
Hegel against nature. Cf. Logic, 36-40. Why nature is
abstract. What is concrete is the mind.

It is the great adventure of intelligence—the one that
eventually kills everything.

To put into the archives of The Plague:

1) Anonymous

letters denouncing families. The type

of bureaucratic interrogation;

2) Types of persons arrested.?
Without sequel
First series. Absurd: The Stranger — The Myth of Sisyphus — Caligula and The Misunderstanding.
Second series. Revolt: The Plague (and annexes) —
The Rebel — Kaliayev.
Third Series. Judgment — The First Man.
Fourth series. Love sundered: The Stake — On love —
The Charmer.

Fifth series. Creation corrected or The System:* Big
novel + great meditation + unplayable play.

JUNE

25, 47

Melancholy of success.> Opposition is essential. If everything were harder for me, as it was before, I should have
3 Nothing like this is found either in Camus’s files or in “Les Archives
de la Peste” in Cahiers de la Pléiade, April 1947.

4See p. 151 of this Notebook.
5 Camus received the Prix des Critiques for La Peste.

158

September 1945 —April 1948

much more right to say what I am saying. The fact remains
that I can help many people—in the meantime.

Distrust of formal virtue—there is the explanation of
this world. Those who have felt this distrust in regard to
themselves and extended it to all others derived from it a
regular susceptibility in regard to any declared virtue.
Whence it is easy to come to suspect virtue in action. Hence
they chose to call virtue whatever helps to bring about the
society they desire. The deeper motive (that distrust) is
noble. Whether or not the logic is sound is the question.
I too have an account to settle with that idea. Everything
I have ever thought or written is related to that distrust
(it is the subject of The Stranger). The moment I do not
accept the pure and simple negation (nihilism or historical materialism) of the “virtuous conscience” as Hegel
says, I have a middle term to find. Being in history while
referring to values that go beyond history—is it possible,
legitimate? Does not the value of ignorance itself cover
a convenient refuge? Nothing is pure, nothing is pure—
this is the cry that has poisoned our century.
The temptation to side with those who negate and are
active! There are some who take up falsehood as one takes
up a religious life. And with the same wonderful impulse,
that is certain. But what is an impulse?

By what, whom,

why shall we judge?
If the progress of history is really this, if there is no
liberation but merely unification, am I not among those
who are holding up history? No liberation without unification, they say, and, if that is true, then we are falling be-

hind. But to be out in front one must prefer a barely
probable hypothesis, which has been historically belied in
a terrifying way, to such realities as misfortune, murder,
I59

NOTEBOOK

V

and exile for two or three generations. Hence choice depends on a hypothesis. It is not proven that liberation
first calls for unification. It is not proven either that it can
do without it. But there is no proof that unification must
come about through violence—usually violence brings
lacerating suffering under the guise of unity. It is probable
that unification, liberation are necessary, possible that such

unification has a chance of coming about through knowledge and preaching. Speech would then be an act. At least
one would have to give oneself altogether to that task.
Ah! these are hours of doubt. And who can bear alone
the doubt of a whole world?

I know myself too well to believe in pure virtue.

Play. The Terror. A nihilist. Violence everywhere. Everywhere falsehood.
Destroy, destroy.

A realist. He must get into the Okhrana.
Between the two, Kaliayev. — No, Boris, no.

“I love them.”
“Why do you say that in such a terrible way?”
“Because my love is terrible.”
Id. Yanek and Dora.

Y. gently: “And love?”
D.: “Love, Yanek?

There is no love.”

Y.: “Oh! Dora, how can you say that, you whose heart I
know?”
160

September 1945 — April 1948

“There is too much blood, you see, too much harsh
violence. Those who love justice too much have no right
to love. They are rigid like me, their heads high, their eyes

unswerving. What part could love play in this proud heart?
Love gently bows heads, Yanek, whereas we chop them
off.”
“But we love our people, Dora.”
“Yes, we love them with a great unhappy love. But do
the people love us, and do they know that we love them?
The people remain silent. What silence, what silence... .”
“But that’s just what love is, Dora. To give all and to
sacrifice all without hope of return.”
“Perhaps, Yanek. That’s pure love, eternal love. It’s the
kind that burns me, in fact. But at certain hours I wonder

if love is not something else, if it can cease to be a monologue and if there is not sometimes a response. I imagine
this, you see: heads bow gently, the heart drops its pride,
eyes close and arms open a little. To forget the world’s
painful suffering, Yanek, to let oneself go at last, for an
hour, a mere

little hour of selfishness,

can

you imagine

that?”
“Yes, Dora, that’s called being in love.”

“You sense everything, darling. That’s called being in
love. But are you in love with justice in that way?”
Yanek is silent.
“Do you love your people with that surrender or with the

flame of revenge and revolt?”
Yanek is silent.
“You see. And are you in love with me, Yanek?”

“I love you more than anything in the world.”
“More than justice?”
“I don’t distinguish between you, the Organization, and
justice.”
161

NOTEBOOK

V

“I know. But answer me. Answer me, I beg you. Yanek;

answer me. Are you in love with me in solitude, with possessiveness?”
“Oh! Dora, I am dying to say yes.”
“Say it, darling. Say it if you think so and if it is true.
Say it in the face of the Organization, and justice, and
the world’s suffering, and the enslaved people! Say it, I

beg you, in the face of the death agony of children and the
endless prisons, despite those who are hanged and those
who are beaten to death.”
Yanek blanches.
“Stop, Dora. Stop!”
“Oh, Yanek! You haven't said it yet.”
A silence.
“I can’t say it. And yet my heart is full of you.”
She laughs as if she were weeping.
“That’s all right, darling. You see, it wasn’t reasonable.
I couldn’t have said it either. I love you with the same
rather static love, in justice and the prisons. We are not of

this world, Yanek. Our share is blood and the cold rope.”

Revolt is the barking of a mad dog (Antony and Cleopatra).

I have read over all these notebooks—beginning with
the first. This was obvious to me: landscapes gradually
disappear. The modern cancer is gnawing me too.
The most

serious problem facing minds

today:

con-

formity.

For Lao Tse: the less one acts, the more one dominates.
162

September 1945—April 1948

G. lived with his grandmother, who sold funeral accessories in Saint-Brieuc; he did his lessons on a tombstone!

See Crapouillot: issue on Anarchy. Tailhade:

Recollec-

tions of a prosecutor. Stirner: The Ego and His Own.

G. “Irony does not necessarily come from spitefulness.”
M. “Most certainly, it doesn’t come

from kindness.”

G. “No. But perhaps from suffering, of which we never
think in others.”

In Moscow threatened by the White Army, to Lenin who
decided to mobilize common-law prisoners:
“No—not with them.”
“For them,” Lenin said.

Kaliayev play: Impossible to kill a man in the flesh; one
kills the tyrant. Not the fellow who shaved that morning,
CLC. SCIC:

Scene:

The agent provocateur is executed.

The great problem of life is knowing how to slip between
men.®
X. “I am a man who believes in nothing and loves no
one, at least originally. There is a void, a frightening desert
Tes seat
6 The manuscript

has in parenthesis:

A.F.

163

NOTEBOOK

V

Marc condemned to death in the prison of Loos. Refuses
to have his chains removed during Holy Week, the better to

resemble the Savior. But there was a time when he used

to shoot his revolver at crucifixes along the roads.

Happy Christians. They kept grace for themselves and
left us charity.

Grenier.” Concerning the good use of freedom. “Modern
man has ceased to believe in a God to be obeyed (Hebrew

and Christian), a society to be respected (Hindu and Chinese), a nature to be followed (Greek and Roman).”

Id. “Whoever greatly loves a value is thereby an enemy
of freedom. Whoever loves freedom above all either negates
values or else adopts them only temporarily. (Tolerance
coming from the decay of values.)”
“If we stop (on the path of negation), this is less to spare
others than to spare ourselves.”

(No for oneself, yes for

others!)

Play
D. “The sad thing, Yanek, is that all this ages us. Never
again, never again shall we be children. We can die now;
we have learned all about man. (Murder is the ultimate.)”
“No, Yanek, if the only solution is death, then we are not

on the right path. The right path is the one that leads to
Iie.
“We have taken on ourselves the world’s misfortune; this

is a pride that will be punished.”
7 Jean Grenier,

Camus’s

teacher

of philosophy

in Algiers,

greatly in-

fluenced his thought. The Rebel is dedicated to him, as are other works
by Camus.

164

September 1945 —April 1948

“We have gone from childhood loves to that first and last
mistress:
beings.”

death. We

went

too fast. We

are not human

Misfortune of this age. Not so long ago, bad deeds called
for justification, but today it’s good deeds.

Novel. “If I love her, I want her to know me for what I
was. For she thinks this admirable kindness... But no, she

is exceptional.

Reaction? If it is to take history as far back as possible,
I shall never go so far as they—as far as Pharaoh.

Defoe: “I was born to destroy myself.”
Id.: “I have heard of a man who, disgusted with the
unbearable conversation of some of his acquaintances...
suddenly decided never to speak again... .” (Play)
Marion on Defoe (p. 139). Twenty-nine years of silence.
His wife goes mad. His children leave. His daughter remains. Fever, delirium. He speaks. Subsequently speaks

often, but little with the daughter “and very rarely with
anyone else.”

Psalm gt: “I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and
my fortress . . . Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare
of the fowler, and from the noisome

pestilence . . . Thou

shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow
that flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that walketh in
darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.”
165

NOTEBOOK

V

Utter solitude. In the urinal of a major railway station
atiiea i.

A man (a Frenchman? ), a holy man who has lived his
whole life in sin (never partaking of Communion, not
marrying the woman with whom he lived) because, unable
to endure the idea that a single soul was damned, he wanted

to be damned too.
“It involved the love that is greater than all: the love of
the man who gives his soul for a friend.”

Merleau-Ponty.? Learn how to read. He complains of
having been read carelessly—and misunderstood. I should
have been inclined to this kind of complaint at one time.
Now I know that it is not justified. There is no misunderstanding.
Profligates who are virtuous in their principles. True.
But practically and for the moment I prefer a rake who
kills no one to a puritan who kills everyone. And the thing
that above all I have never been able to accept is a rake
who wants to kill everyone.

M.P. or the typical contemporary man: the one who
keeps score. He explains that no one is ever right and that
it’s not so easy (I hope he’s not going to the trouble of proving this for my sake). But a little further on he exclaims
that Hitler is a criminal and that any resistance to him
will always be right. If no one is right, then one must not
8 This remark was added in longhand to the initial typescript of the
Notebooks.
9 The philosopher had just published Humanisme et terreur, and the
break between Merleau-Ponty and Camus followed that publication. (See
Sartre’s

Merleau-Ponty

vivant,

p. 313.)

166

September 1945 —April 1948

judge. But today one has to be against Hitler. He has kept
score. He continues.

Henceforth, action seems to us justifiable only for limited
objectives. So speaks the contemporary man. There is a
contradiction.

Dwinger!

(in a Siberian

camp):

“If we were

animals,

everything would have been over long ago, but we are
men.”
Id. A lieutenant, a pianist who lives for his art. He constructs a mute piano with boards taken from packing
cases. He plays six to eight hours a day. He hears every
note. In certain passages, his face lights up.

This is what we shall all be doing, at the end.
Id. During the phony war. In a train behind the lines,
D. and a friend enter a compartment where there is a tall
captain with feverish eyes. Opposite him, someone stretched
out on the seat, a form covered with a cloak. Night falls.
The moon lights the compartment. “Open your eyes,
brothers. You will see something as a reward.” He draws
back the cloak slowly: a naked young woman, of great
and conventional beauty . . . “Look,” the officer said. “This
will give you renewed strength. And you will know why we

are fighting. For we are fighting for beauty too, aren’t we?
Except that no one ever says so.”

Concerning Bataille on The Plague.? Sade too called for
abolition of capital punishment, of legitimate murder. Rea1See Edwin Erich
Rouges et les Blancs,

2 The
Nos.

review

13-14

Dwinger,
1931.

of La Peste

(June-July

Mon

Journal

by Georges

de

Bataille

Sibérie

and

appeared

1947).

167

Entre

les

in Critique,

NOTEBOOK

V

son: the murderer has an excuse in the passions of nature;

the law does not.

Study on G.:* G. as a mind opposed to Malraux. And
both of them are aware of the temptation represented by
the other mind. The world today is a dialogue between
M. and G.

Play. Yanek to another who is the Killer.
Yanek: “Perhaps. But that will deprive us of love.”
The Killer: “Who says so?”
Yanek: “Dora.”
The Killer: “Dora is a woman and women don’t know

what love is . . . That terrible explosion in which I am going
to destroy myself is the very bursting of love.”

Days of Our Death. 72 —
U.C. 15 — 66.

Keep the element

125 —

190.4

of breach, of crime

in violence—in

other words, recognize it only when linked to a personal
responsibility. Otherwise,

violence is committed

on order;

it fits the order—either law or metaphysics. Violence ceases
to be a breach. It escapes contradiction and represents
paradoxically a leap into comfort. Violence has been made
comfortable.
3 Probably
4Les

Jean

Grenier.

Jours de notre mort

and L’Univers

concentrationnaire

(here ab-

breviated to U.C.) by David Rousset both deal with life in a concentration camp

(1946).

168

September 1945 — April 1948

M.D.’s friend who goes, as he does every day, to his customary little café in the rue Dauphine and sits at the same
table to watch the same pinochle players. The player behind whom he sits has nothing but spades. “Too bad,”
M.D.’s friend says, “that you're not playing no trumps.”
And he dies suddenly.
Id. The elderly spiritualist who lost her son in the war:
“Wherever I go, I have my son behind me.”
Id. The aged colonial governor, stiff as a poker, who insists on being called “Governor.” He is carrying on research
to establish a table of equivalences with the Gregorian
calendar.

He waxes

enthusiastic

about

only one

subject,

his age: “Eighty! Never an aperitif and just look!” Then
he jumps up and down several times kicking himself in
the behind.

Palante® (S.I.): “Humanism is an invasion of the priestly
mind into the realm of feeling . . . It’s the glacial cold of
the Mind’s reign.”

We

are blamed for making men

abstract. But this is

because the man who serves us as a model is abstract. We
are blamed for not knowing love, but this is because (the
man who serves us as a model) is incapable of love, etc.,
eicns,

Lautréamont:* All the water in the sea would not suffice

to wash out a spot of intellectual blood.
5 The philosopher Georges Palante was Louis Guilloux’s teacher in
Saint-Brieuc and a friend of Camus’s professor Jean Grenier. S.J. stands
for La Sensibilité individualiste, by Palante (1909).
6 Comte de Lautréamont (1846-70) was the pseudonym

poet of the revolutionary

Chants

de Maldoror.

169

of the French

NOTEBOOK

V

Short story or novel on Justice. Tortured, standing up
for five days, without eating or drinking, forbidden to lean
on anything, etc., etc. They come to help him escape. He
refuses: he doesn’t have the strength. Remaining calls for
less effort. He will be tortured again and he will die.

Isle-sur-Sorgue.? Large room open onto autumn. Autumnal itself with its furniture made of twisted tree forms
and the dead leaves of plane trees slipping into the room,
driven by the wind under the windows curtained with
embroidered ferns.

When R.C. leaves the Maquis in May ’44 to go to North

Africa, an airplane leaves the foothills of the Alps and
flies over the Durance at night. And all along the mountains he sees fires lighted by his men as a sign of farewell.
At Calvi he goes to bed (invasion of dreams). In the
morning he awakes and sees a terrace covered with big
butts of American cigarettes. After four years of struggling
and clenching his teeth, tears burst forth, and for a whole

hour he weeps as he looks at the butts.

The old Communist militant who sees what he sees and
can’t become accustomed to it: “I can’t be cured of my
heart.”
7 A town of fewer than 8,000 inhabitants, Isle-sur-Sorgue stands about
fifteen

miles

east

of Avignon,

hence

close

to

Vaucluse and not far from Camus’s Lourmarin.
René

Char

(doubtless

the R.C.

referred

Petrarch’s

Fontaine

de

Camus’s friend, the poet

to later), lived

I70

there.

September 1945 —April 1948

Bayle: Various Thoughts on the Comet.
“One must not judge the life of a man either by what he
believes or by what he publishes in his books.”

The informer who keeps his accounts up to date. Several
colors of ink. Strokes drawn with a ruler. The names written in a round hand.

How to make clear that a poor child may be ashamed
without feeling envious?

The old beggar to Eleanor Clark: “It’s not that you are
a bad man, but you lose the light.”®

Sartre or nostalgia for the universal idyll.

Ravachol

(interrogation):

“Before

those

who

bring

truth, facts, the welfare of humanity, all obstacles must dis-

appear, and if subsequently there remained on earth but a
few men, those at least would be happy.”
Id. (Declaration to the Court): “As to the innocent victims I may have made, I regret it sincerely. I regret it particularly because my life has been full of bitterness.”
Statement of a witness
(Chaumartin): “He didn’t love

women
in it.7

and drank nothing but water, with a little lemon

8 See The Fall (Alfred A. Knopf,
of this remark.

1957), p. 145, for Camus’s

171

utilization

NOTEBOOK

Vigny (correspondence):

V

“The social order is always

bad; from time to time it is merely bearable. From the bad

to the bearable, the dispute is not worth a drop of blood.”
No, the bearable deserves, if not blood, at least the effort of

a whole lifetime.
Misanthropic in the group, the individualist pardons the
individual.

Sainte-Beuve: “I have always thought that if one said
for a single minute what one thinks, society would come
toppling down.”

B. Constant® (a prophet!): “In order to live in peace one
has to take almost as much trouble as one would to govern the world.”

To sacrifice oneself for humanity: according to SainteBeuve, one wants to play a popular role to the very end.

Stendhal:

“I shall not have accomplished anything for

my individual happiness so long as I am not accustomed
to endure being uncomfortable in a soul.”

Palante correctly says that if there is a single, universal
truth, liberty has no justification.
9 Benjamin

Constant

(1767-1830),

the

author

of

Adolphe,

Camus earlier contrasted with La Princesse de Cléves, was
figure in liberal politics during the Restoration.

T72

which

a significant

September

1945 —April 1948

October 14, 47. Time is running out. Alone and every
energy tense in a dry air.

October 17. Beginning.

It is as if for man one had absolutely to choose between
degradation and punishment.

At the Children’s Hospital. Small, low-ceiling ward closed
up and overheated—full of the smell of beef tea and surgical dressings . . . faint.

There are messianic acts and deliberate acts.

Write everything—just as it comes.

We can do everything in the way of betterment, understand everything and then dominate everything. But we
shall never be able to find or to create for ourselves that
strength of love which has been taken from us forever.

Capital punishment. I am made to say that I am against
any violence, whatever it may be. This would be as intel1 See reply to Emmanuel d’Astier de la Vigerie in Actuelles.

173

NOTEBOOK

V

ligent as being against the wind’s always blowing in the
same direction.

But no one is guilty absolutely; hence no one can be condemned absolutely. No one is guilty absolutely (1) in the
eyes of society or (2) in the eyes of the individual. Something in him shares in suffering.
Is death the absolute punishment? Not for Christians.
But this world is not Christian. Is not forced labor worse?
(Paulhan.) I don’t know. But prison leaves a chance of
choosing death (unless out of laziness you prefer the work
to be done by others). Death leaves no chance to choose
prison. Finally Rochefort: “In order to ask for abolition of
the death penalty, one has to be bloodthirsty.”

Generation of old men. “A young man launched into the
world, rich on the outside but poor within, strives in vain

to substitute outer wealth for inner wealth. He wants to receive everything from the outside, like those old men who
try to draw new strength from the breath of young girls.”
(Aphorisms on wisdom in life.)
Socrates kicked. “If a donkey had struck me, would I sue
him?” (Diogenes Laértius, II, 21.)

Heine (1848): “What the world seeks and hopes for now

has become utterly foreign to my heart.”

Courage, according to Schopenhauer, “merely the virtue
of a second lieutenant.”

174

September 1945 —April 1948

In Book IV of Emile, Rousseau advocates murder (21st
note) for reasons of honor.
“A slap and a flat contradiction received and put up with
have civil effects that no wise man can forestall and from
which no tribunal can avenge the insulted. The inadequacy

of our laws gives him his independence in this regard; he
is then the sole magistrate, the sole judge between the insulter and himself; he is the sole interpreter and minister
of the natural law; he owes himself justice and he alone

can give it...I am not saying that he must go out and
fight, this is extravagant; I am saying that he owes himself
justice and that he is the sole dispenser of it. Without so
many empty edicts against duels, if I were the sovereign
I guarantee that there would never be a slap or a flat contradiction given in my states, and I should do this by a very
simple means having no connection with law courts. How-

ever that may be, Emile knows in such a case the justice
he owes to himself and the example he owes to the assurance of men of honor. It is not possible for the staunchest
man to keep from being insulted, but it is possible for him
to keep anyone from boasting long of having insulted him.”

For Schopenhauer, the objective existence of things, their
“representation,” is always pleasing, whereas the subjective
existence, the will, is always painful.

“All things are beautiful to the eye and ugly in their
being, whence

the current

illusion, which

always

strikes

me, of the external unity of the life of others.”

Schopenhauer: “To have fame and youth at once is too
much for a mortal.”
I75

NOTEBOOK

V

Id. “In this world, one can indeed find education, but not

happiness.” Hence, “to limit oneself makes one happy.”

David pursues Jehovah with entreaties when his son is

ill. But as soon as he is dead, he snaps his fingers and thinks
no more of him.

Voltaire: “One can succeed in this world only at the point
of the sword, and one dies with one’s weapon in hand.”

Pecherin, a Russian émigré of the nineteenth century,
who became a monk abroad and exclaimed: “What a delight to hate one’s native land and to long for its collapse.”
The intelligentsia and the totalitarian interpretation of

the world.
The Petrachevsky conspirators:? idyllic. (Emancipation
of the serfs without revolutionary action—influence of
George Sand.) Love of the remote and not of the nearby.
“Not finding anything worthy of attachment for me, either
among men or among women, I am devoting myself to the
service of humanity” (Petrachevsky).

(Except for Sprech-

ner, the model of Stavrogin. )

The individualistic socialism of Belinsky. Against Hegel
for the human person. Cf. the letters to Botkin: “The fate
of the subject, of the individual, of the person, is more im-

portant than the fate of the whole world and the health of
the Emperor

of China,

in other

words

of the Hegelian

Allgemeinheit.”
2 Readings for The Just Assassins.

176

September 1945 — April 1948

Id. “I salute your philosopher’s bonnet (to Hegel). But
with all the respect due your philosophical philistinism, I
have the honor to point out to you that if I ever reached
the highest rung on the ladder of development I should then
insist on an accounting of all the creatures who have been
martyred by the conditions of life and of history, of all the
victims of chance, of superstition, of the Inquisition, of
Philip II, etc. . . . Otherwise I should hurl myself head first
from that height. I do not want the happiness that is alloted

to me unless I am first reassured as to each of my blood
brothers, bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh... .”
“It is said that discord is the condition of harmony; this
may be very profitable and delightful for the music lover,

but certainly much less so for the one to whom is assigned
the role of discord.”

Petrachevsky and the idyllic ones.
Belinsky and individualistic socialism.
Dobrolyubov—ascetic, mystical, and scrupulous.
He loses his faith when faced with evil. (Marcion )
Chernyshevsky: “What to do?”
Pisarev: “A pair of boots is worth more than Shakespeare.”
Herzen — Bakunin — Tolstoy — Dostoevsky.
The feeling of guilt among intellectuals separated from
the masses. The “nobleman who repents” (of social sin).

Nechayev and the revolutionary catechism (centralized
party announces bolshevism).
“The revolutionary is a marked individual. He has no
interests, no business, no personal feelings, no bonds, noth-

ing that is his alone, not even in name. Everything in him
177

NOTEBOOK

V

is swallowed up by a single exclusive interest, a single
thought, a single passion: Revolution.”
Everything that serves the revolution is moral.

Resemblance with Dzerzhinsky, who created the Cheka.
Bakunin: “The passion for destruction is creative.”
Id. Three principles of human development:
physical man
thought
revolt

The seventies. Mikhailovsky, an individualistic socialist.
“If the revolutionary masses burst into my room with
the intention of breaking the bust of Belinsky and destroying my library, I'd fight to the last drop of my blood.”

Problem of transition. Did Russia have to pass through
the stage of bourgeois and capitalist revolution, as the logic
of history decreed? On this point only Tkatchev (with
Nechayev and Bakunin) is the predecessor of Lenin. Marx
and Engels were Mensheviks. The only thing they had in
mind was the bourgeois revolution to come.
The constant discussions of the original Marxists as to
the necessity of a capitalist development in Russia and
their inclination to accept such a development. Tikhomirov,
an old member of the party of the people’s will, accuses

them of making themselves “the champions of the first
capitalizations.”

Lermontov’s prediction :
But

already,

bursting

from

vast

cemeteries,

The Plague comes prowling in fatal markets.
178

September 1945 -—April 1948

Cf. Berdiayev, p. 107.
The spiritual communism of Dostoevsky is: the moral
responsibility of all.

Berdiayev: “There can be no dialectic of matter; dialectic
supposes Logos and Thought; a dialectic is possible only
when of thought and mind. Marx transferred the properties of mind into the realm of matter.”
In the end, it’s the will of the proletariat that transforms
the world. Hence there is truly in Marxism

an existential

philosophy pointing out the falsehood of objectivation and
asserting the triumph of human activity.

In Russian volia means

both will and freedom.

Question to be asked of Marxism:
“Is Marxist ideology the reflection of economic activity

like all other ideologies, or else does it claim to discover absolute truth independent of historical forms of economy
and economic interests?” In other words, is it a pragmatism
or an absolute realism?

Lenin asserts the primacy of politics over economics
(despite Marxism).
Lukacs: The revolutionary sense is the sense of totality.
Conception of the total world in which theory and practice
are identified.
Religious sense, according to Berdiayev.*
3 After

Orthodoxy

being

a

Marxist,

and became

one

Nicolai

Berdiayev

of Russia’s

(1874-1948)

foremost

religious

179

turned

thinkers.

to

NOTEBOOK

V

What exists in Russia is a “total” collective freedom and
not a personal one. But what is a total freedom? One is free
of something—in

relation to. Obviously, the limit is free-

dom in relation to God. You then see clearly that it means

subjection to man.

Berdiayev compares Pobedonostsev

(Chairman of the

Holy Synod who directed the Russian Empire ideologically)
and Lenin. Both nihilists.

Vera Figner:* “Io harmonize

words

and deeds,

to de-

mand of others a harmony between words and deeds... .
this was to be my motto in life.”
Id. “I considered unthinkable the formation of a secret
society within an already secret society.”
The Czar’s budget fed 80 to g0% by the lower classes.

Every member of the “People’s Will” took a solemn vow
to devote his strength to the revolution, to forget for it bonds
of blood, personal likes, love and friendship .

.

Play. Dora: “If you love nothing, this can’t end well.”

How numerous were the members of the “People’s Will”?
Five hundred. The Russian Empire? More than a hundred
million.
4 Here

and

elsewhere,

Camus

is doubtless

referring

Revolutionist by Vera Nicolaevna Figner.

180

to Memoirs

of a

September 1945—April 1948

Sofia Perovskaya, climbing the scaffold with her fellow
fighters, kisses three of them

(Jeliabov, Kilbatchiche,

and

Mikhailov) but not the fourth, Ryssakov, who had fought
valiantly nevertheless,

but who, to save his life, had re-

vealed an address and caused the loss of three other com-

rades. Ryssakov is hanged and dies in solitude.
It was Ryssakov who threw the bomb at Alexander II.
Unscathed,

the Czar said:

“Thank

God, all is well.” “We

shall see if all is well,’ Ryssakov replied. And a second
bomb, Grinevitsky’s, strikes down the Emperor.

Cf. Vera Figner, p. 190, on the denunciation.
Id. Maria Kolougnaya. Liberated, she is accused of having betrayed. In order to clear herself, she shoots at a police
officer. Condemned to prison. She commits suicide at Kara
to protest with two comrades against the corporal punishment inflicted on a third (p. 239).

To remind Christians. “Christian Fraternity.” An appeal
to “all those who venerated the holy teaching of Christ.”
“The present government, all the laws founded on lies, oppression and prohibition of the free pursuit of truth, were
to be considered as illegitimate, contrary to the divine will
and to the Christian spirit.”

Vera Figner: “I had to live, live to be judged. For the trial
crowns the revolutionary’s activity.”

A man condemned to death: “During my whole brief life,
I have never seen anything but evil . . . In such conditions
181

NOTEBOOK

V

and with such a life, can one love anything whatever, even
what is good?”

In the eighties, a soldier who has killed a non-commissioned officer is executed. But first, turning in each direction, he exclaims:

“Farewell,

North.

Farewell, South...

East, West.”

No one, so much as I, was so sure of conquering the world
by straight means. And now . . . Where was the slip then,
what weakened suddenly and determined the rest? ...

Small fact: people often think they “have met me somewhere.”

Paris—Algiers. The airplane as one of the elements of
modern negation and abstraction. There is no more nature;

the deep gorge, true relief, the impassable mountain stream,
everything disappears. There remains a diagram—a map.
Man, in short, looks through the eyes of God. And he

perceives then that God can have but an abstract view. This
is not a good thing.

Polemics—as an element of abstraction. Every time you
have decided to consider a man as an enemy, you make
him abstract. You set him at a distance; you don’t want to

know that he has a hearty laugh. He has become a silhouette.
Etc., etc.
182

September 1945 — April 1948

If, to outgrow nihilism, one must return to Christianity,
one may well follow the impulse and outgrow Christianity
in Hellenism.

Plato goes from nonsense to reason and from reason to
myth. He contains all.

Glorious morning over the harbor of Algiers. The landscape,

ultramarine,

takes

the

windows

by

storm

and

spreads throughout the bedroom.

Socrates: “I have no liking for you.” On his return from
the camp.
End of II. He shows his marks:
“What's that?”
“Those are the marks.”
“What marks?”
“The marks of men’s love.”

The complaints because my books do not bring out the
political aspect. Translation: they want me to feature
parties. But I feature only individuals, opposed to the State

machine, because I know what I am saying.

The world will be more just insofar as it is more chaste
(G. Sorel).5
5 The

social philosopher

(1874-1922)
Violence.

influenced

of revolutionary
thinkers

chiefly

syndicalism,
through

183

his

Georges

Sorel

Reflections

on

NOTEBOOK

V

In the theater: necessity, for the sake of variety, to
change syntactical constructions.

Play. Dora or another woman: “Condemned, condemned
to be heroes and saints. Forced to be heroes. Because they
don’t interest us, you understand, they don’t interest us at
all, the filthy affairs of this poisoned, stupid world that
clings to us like glue. Admit, admit it, that what interests
you are human beings, and their faces. And that, claiming

to seek a truth, you are really waiting only for love.”

“Don’t weep. This is the day of justification. Something
is emerging at this moment which is the testimony of us
rebels.”

Novel. The man who is caught by the political police
because he was too lazy to take care of the passport. He
knew it. He didn’t do it, etc....

“I had every luxury. And here I am a slave forever...
etc.”

Rousset.* What silences me is that I was not deported.
But I know what a cry I stifle as I say this.

It is Christianity that explains bolshevism.
the balance in order not to become
6 David

Rousset’s

L’Univers

Let’s keep

murderers.

concentrationnaire

(1946)

horror of life in a concentration camp in Germany.

184

depicts

the

September 1945 —April 1948

Contemporary literature. Easier to shock than to convince.

R.C. In a train during the Occupation, at daybreak. Germans. A woman drops a gold piece. C. covers it with his
foot and gives it back to her. The woman: thank you. She
passes him a cigarette. He accepts. She passes them to the
Germans.

R.C.:

“On second

thought, Madame,

I am

giv-

ing you back your cigarette.” A German stares at him. Tunnel. A hand squeezes his. “I am a Pole.” Out of the tunnel,
R.C. looks at the German. His eyes are full of tears. In the
station the German, as he leaves, turns to him and winks.

C. does likewise and smiles. “Swine!” says a Frenchman
who took in the scene.

Form and revolt. To give a form to what has none is the
purpose of any work. Hence there is not only creation, but
correction (see above). Whence importance of the form.

Whence necessity of a style for each subject, not altogether
different because the author’s special language belongs
to him. But it so happens that it will bring out, not the
unity of this or that book, but the unity of the entire work.

There is no justice; there are only limits.

The

Tolstoyan

anarchist

during

the Occupation.

He

wrote on his door: “Wherever you come from, you are wel-

come.” And it was the militia that came.
185

NOTEBOOK

V

Dictionary. Umanity:7 written with an h and generally
executed with an axe. But here we are against . . . Derivations:

pretext.

Synonyms:

Straw

mattress

—

stepping

stone — gargle — terminus.
Palinode: Exercise of lofty literature that consists in raising the flag after having spit on it, in returning to morality
by way of the orgy, and in putting slippers on former pirates. One begins by playing the part of safe-cracker and
ends up with the Legion of Honor. Hist.: 80% of the writers
of the twentieth century, if only they could avoid signing,
would write and honor the name of God. Natural Sciences:
Process of transformation by which the striped insubordinate becomes the common variety of headwaiter.

Tragedy. He is suspected of treason. This suspicion is

enough to force him to get killed. It’s the only possible
proof.

Leysin.* Snow and clouds in the valley up to the peaks.
Over that motionless

sea of cotton batting, the jackdaws

like black gulls fly in a flock, their wings powdered with
spray from the snow.

Tolstoy: “A strong west wind swept up the dust of roads
and fields in columns, bent the crests of the lofty lindens
and birches of the garden, and carried afar the falling yellow leaves” (Childhood).

Id. “If it were granted me in the painful hours of life to
7It is unusual for Camus

to indulge in such wordplay, largely lost in

translation. The word for “axe” (hache) and the letter h are pronounced
alike, as are the meaningless métre d’autel (“altar meter”) and maitre

@hétel.
8 Leysin is southeast

of the Lake

of Geneva

in Switzerland.

186

September 1945 —April 1948

see again that smile (his mother’s) but for a moment, I
should not know pain.”

I withdrew from the world not because I had enemies,
but because I had friends. Not because they did me an ill
turn as is customary, but because they thought me better
than I am. It was a lie I could not endure.

An extreme virtue that consists in killing one’s passions.
A deeper virtue that consists in balancing them.

Everything worthwhile today in the contemporary spirit
is located in the irrational. And yet everything that prevails
in politics professes, kills, and dominates in the name of
Reason.

Peace would consist of loving in silence. But there is conscience, and the person;
comes hell.

one must

speak out. Loving be-

The actor P.B., who is lazy and devout, listens to mass

on the radio from his bed. He doesn’t have to get up. He has
done his duty.

Ludmilla

Pitoéff:°

“The

audience

bothers

me,

rather.

When there is none, everything is perfect.” Speaking of
G.P.: “He has never ceased to surprise me.”
9The

wife

(1886-1939),

great actresses

of the Russian-born
here referred

actor

and

director,

to as G.P., Ludmilla

of the twenties

Georges

Pitoéff was

and thirties.

187

one

Pitoéff
of the

NOTEBOOK

V

According to the Egyptians, the just man must be able to
say after his death: “I have not caused suffering to anyone.”
Otherwise, he is punished.

The conclusion is that history can achieve its ends only
by means of stamping out spiritual conquests. We are reduced to this...

For Christians, Revelation stands at the beginning of
history. For Marxists, it stands at the end. Two religions.

Little bay before Tenés, at the foot of the chains of
mountains. Perfect half-circle. As evening falls, a ripeness
full of anguish hangs over the silent waters. Then one
realizes that if the Greeks formed the idea of despair and
tragedy they always did so through beauty and its oppressive quality. It’s a tragedy that culminates. Whereas the
modern mind based its despair on ugliness and mediocrity.
What Char means probably. For the Greeks, beauty is
a point of departure. For a European, it is an end, rarely
achieved. I am not modern.

Truth of this age: As a result of living through great
experiences, one becomes a liar. Be done with all the rest
and state what I most deeply feel.

188

alot

LUN
U
TUN

JBAAIJAAA, JAAAT SAMA SBAATBAA BAA

NTUN

Ooi hebtO*OrKk

g

:

hs
)

¥

‘

*

2

v ",

’

Wve VG

wi
-

=

“ee

~*~

Irs

‘

.

i

i

4

at

“3

at

on
aes

’

ia!

Ret

pir
ny

&

+

i

ee

ks | re

HEE ts

S

vue :kien.

rote

[2a
abt

eof

Lt
wun)

i owe fe

ee

Siam,

al feacts
Aiew os,

54

) Lee rei

i> of ns ear
hapetunepe. eed
2, iach wat, Be
-

io.

wt

ord

tea

“d's ae
BaD

<a

wt

x mn
iu

t

a

i

i

a

7

-

1

iene

a

ve

~

Pir!

7

®

‘

(ea

eerie
-

:

a

HAN

ic

>

eid yn an

y

Sal

j

oie

April 1948 — March 1951

RPP

PPP

PPP

PF

FPF

At the end

of the nineteenth

century,

F993

Antoine

Orly, a

notary in Périgueux, suddenly left his home town to go

to Patagonia, where he settled. He managed to become
popular with the Indians of the country and through that
popularity got himself named, after a few years, Emperor
of Araucania. He had coins struck, issued postage stamps,
and exercised all the prerogatives of a legitimate sovereign.
So that the government of Chile, to which those distant
lands belonged, brought him before a court of justice,
which condemned him to death. His sentence was commuted to ten years in prison.

Liberated after ten years, he returned to Patagonia,
where his subjects received him again as their emperor and
he again consented to accept the title. But feeling himself
aging, he thought of a successor and bequeathed the throne
of Araucania

to his son Louis Orly, who would become
IQI

NOTEBOOK

VI

emperor under the name of Louis I. But Louis Orly refused. Antoine then abdicated in favor of his nephew
Achille Orly of Périgueux, and died honored by his subjects.

But Achille I had no thought of going to his subjects. He
set himself up in Paris, assumed a position in society, and
led an expensive life there as an emperor. His resources
came from his distribution, for a fee, of posts as consul
of Araucania. His needs having increased, he also organized
collections to extend the Christian religion through the
construction of churches and cathedrals. Thus he received
a great amount of money, to such a degree that the Company of Jesus became concerned and appealed to the
Pope. Then it was seen that no church was under construction in Patagonia, and Achille I appeared before tribunals,
which condemned him. Ruined, the Emperor finished out

his life in Montparnasse,

always frequenting the same

café, where it is believed that Queen Ranavalo paid him a

visit.

Any sacrifice is messianic. Prove that sacrifice can be
imagined through serious thought (in other words, not
messianic). The tragedy of equilibrium.

Modern art. They return to the object because they don’t
know nature. They remake nature, and this is essential be-

cause they have forgotten it. When this work is completed,
the great years will begin.

“Without an unlimited freedom of the press, without an
absolute freedom

of association,

the domination

I92

of large

April 1948
— March 1951

popular masses is inconceivable.” (Rosa Luxemburg: The
Russian Revolution)

Salvador de Madariaga: “Europe will return to its senses
only when the word ‘revolution’ evokes shame and not
pride. A country that boasts of its glorious revolution is as
vain and absurd as a man boasting of his glorious appendicitis.”

True in a sense. But subject to discussion.

Stendhal

(Letter to Di Fiore, 34): “But my particular

soul is a fire that suffers when it is not flaming.”

Id. “Every novelist must try to make us believe in a consuming passion but never name it; this offends a sense
of decency.” (Letter to Mme Gauthier, 34).

Id. Against Goethe. “Goethe gave the devil as a friend to
Doctor Faust and with such a powerful aid Faust does what
we all did at the age of twenty: he seduces a shopgirl.”
London. I recall London as a city of gardens where the
birds used to wake me in the morning. London is the opposite, and yet my memory is correct. The flower carts in
the streets. The docks, amazing.
National Gallery. Marvelous Piero and Velasquez.
Oxford. The well-kept stud-farms. The silence of Oxford.
What would the world come here for?

Early morning on the coast of Scotland. Edinburgh:
swans on the canals. The city around a false acropolis, mys193

NOTEBOOK

VI

terious and fogbound. The Athens of the North has no
north. Chinese and Malays in Princess Street. It’s a port
town.

According to Simone Weil, thoughts relating to the
spirituality of labor, or to a presentiment of this, which
are scattered in Rousseau, Sand, Tolstoy, Marx, Proudhon,

are the only original thoughts of our time, the only ones
we have not borrowed from the Greeks.

Germany: Misfortune that has bit too deep calls forth a
disposition toward misfortune which forces one to push
oneself and others into it.

According to Richelieu, and all else being equal, rebels
are always less strong by half than the defenders of the
official system. Because of a bad conscience.

Father de Foucauld, the witness of Christ among the
Tuaregs, considered it natural to provide French Military
Intelligence with information as to the state of mind of
those same Tuaregs.

S.W. Contradiction between science and humanism. No:
between the so-called modern scientific spirit and humanism. For determinism and force negate man.
1 Camus

was

one

of the discoverers

her ardent spiritual humanitarianism,
fessorship to become a laborer.

of Simone

which

Weil

made

194

(1909-43)

and

her give up a pro-

April 1948 — March 1951

“If justice cannot be obliterated from the hearts of men,
it has a reality in this world. Then it is science that is
wrong.”

S.W. The Romans are the ones who degraded stoicism
by substituting pride for virile love.

G. Greene:? “In a happy life the final disillusionment
with human nature coincided with death. Nowadays they

seemed to have a whole lifetime to get through somehow
after it.” . . . “You learned too much in these days before
you came of age.”
Id. Self-sacrifice . . . “—-what a world to let such qualities
go to waste!”
Id. “He (the secret agent) promised rashly, as if in a
violent world you could promise anything at all, beyond
the moment of speaking.”
Id. “But he hadn’t that particular faith. Unless people
received their deserts, the world to him was chaos; he was

faced with despair.”

The writer condemned to understanding. He cannot be a
killer.

Liking for prison among those who struggle. To be freed
of their loyalties.
2 These passages, quoted in French, come from
The Confidential Agent by Graham Greene.

the first two parts of

I95

NOTEBOOK

VI

Epigraph for “Le Bacher!”*
“Men afflicted with a deep-rooted sorrow betray themselves when they are happy; they have a way of seizing
happiness as if they wanted to hug and stifle it through
jealousy ...”

JULY

’48-COMO

“What is a heaven devoid of our love?
We are alone with the horror of our life.”

Play. Pride. Pride is born inland.

Funereal Provence.

Responsibility toward history does without responsibility
toward human beings. That is its comfort.

The stars twinkle in the same rhythm as the cicadas
drum. Music of the spheres.

C.’s friend: “We die at the age of forty from a bullet that
we shot into our heart at twenty.”

We live too long.
3 Camus planned to write a short story under this title (“The Stake”).

196

April 1948
— March 1951

In the Crito the dialogue between Socrates and the laws
of Athens has a bearing on the Moscow trials.

Rock-colored butterflies.
The wind whistling through the dell makes a sound like
rushing waters.
The Sorgue adorned with flowered dragnets.

Mania for virtue that shakes this age. Turning its back
on skepticism which is in part humility, humanity strives
to find a truth. It will relax when society has found an
error that is livable.

Artists

want

to be saints

and

not

artists.

I am

not a

saint. We want universal consent and we'll not get it. So
what?

Title for play: The Inquisition in Cadiz. Epigraph: “The
Inquisition and Society are the two scourges of truth.”
Pascal.

Anguish at having increased injustice while thinking you
are serving justice. Admit it at least and then discover
that anguish to be greater: admit that total justice does not
exist. At the end of the most terrible revolt, admit that you

are nothing. That is true suffering.

The luck of my life is that I never met, loved (and dis-

appointed) any but exceptional creatures. I have known
I97

NOTEBOOK

VI

virtue, dignity, simplicity, nobility, in others. Wonderful
sight—and painful.

Gobineau. We are not descended from the monkey, but
we are returning to him in great haste.

It’s pleasure in living that disperses, suppresses concentration, cuts short any impulse toward greatness. But
without pleasure in living . . . No, there is no solution. Unless it is to root oneself in a great love and to find in it the
source of life without being punished with dispersion.

SEPTEMBER

1, 1948

“I am close to having completed the series of works I had
planned to write ten years ago. They have brought me to the
point of knowing my job. Now that I know my hand will
not tremble, I shall be able to give my folly free rein.” So
spoke the man who knew what he was doing. At the end of
it all, the stake.

Can a conscious man, Dostoevsky asks, respect himself
at all?

D.: “And then if it occurs that the human advantage at
times, not only may, but even must consist in desiring a

detriment rather than an advantage.”

“We truly live but a few hours of our lives. . .”
198

April 1948 — March 1951

Night on the top of the Vaucluse. The milky way comes
down into the clusters of lights in the valley. Everything
is mixed up. There are villages in the sky and constellations
in the mountainside.

One must encounter love before having encountered
ethics. Or else one is torn.

There is not a single thing one does (one really does)
for a human being that does not negate another human
being. And when one cannot make up one’s mind to negat-

ing human beings, this law sterilizes forever. In the final
analysis, loving a human being amounts to killing all
others.

I chose creation to escape crime. And
There’s a misunderstanding.

their respect!

X.: “Do you drink coffee at night?”
“In general, never.”

“Ten doses of sulphamides a day.”
“Ten? Isn’t that a lot?”
“You can take it or leave it.”

André B. and his aunt who gave him a scarf, too heavy
and too showy. As she checks every morning whether or
not he is wearing it to go out, he goes and says goodbye to
199

NOTEBOOK

VI

her in his shirt-sleeves and then quickly slips into his coat
and overcoat in the vestibule before going out.

You begin by creating in solitude and think it’s hard.
Later on, you write and create surrounded by others. You

then know that the undertaking is mad and that happiness
was at the beginning.

End of the novel. —

“Man is a religious animal,” he

said. And on the cruel earth an inexorable rain fell.

Creation corrected: He is the only representative of this
religion as old as man and everywhere he is hunted down.

I have tried with all my strength, knowing my weaknesses, to be

a man

of morality. Morality kills.

Hell is a special favor reserved for those who have asked
for it insistently.

A man must not be judged either on what he says or on

what he writes, according to Bayle. I add: or on what he
does.

Bad reputations are easier to bear than good ones, for
the good ones are heavy to drag along; one has to prove
200

April 1948
— March 1951

oneself always up to it and any lapse is looked upon as a
crime. With bad reputations, a lapse is to your credit.

Gide dinner. Letters from young writers who ask if they
should go on. Gide replies: “What? You can keep yourself
from writing and you hesitate to do so?”

You begin by loving no one. Then you love all men as a
group. Later on you love only a few, then a single woman,
and finally one man alone.

Algiers after ten years. The faces which I recognize, after
a hesitation, and which have aged. It’s the gathering at the
Guermantes house.* But on the scale of a city in which I
get lost. There is no going backward. I am with this vast
crowd steadily walking toward a hole in which all will fall
on top of one another, pushed by a new crowd behind them,
which itself...

From the airplane at night, the lights of the Balearics
like flowers in the sea.

M.: “When I look happy, they are disappointed. They
question me; they would like to get an admission that it is
false, draw me

to them, bring me

back into their world.

They feel betrayed.”
= 7
4 Toward

the end

of Proust’s

Remembrance

of Things

Past,

the nar-

rator, returning to Parisian society after years of absence, finds his
former friends almost unrecognizable when he encounters them again
at a Guermantes reception.
201

NOTEBOOK

VI

To live is to verify.

Grenier. Not doing is acceptance of the future—but
with grief in regard to the past. It’s a dead man’s philosophy.

Speech on Don Juan or The Charterhouse of Parma. And

the constant insistence of French literature on preserving
the elasticity and resistance of the individual mind.

Alexander Blok:®
“O, if you knew children

The dark and the cold of days to come.”

and again:
“How painful it is to walk among men,

Pretend to go on existing.”
and again:
“We are all unhappy. Our country has paved the way for
our angers and quarrels. Each of us lives behind an impenetrable wall, despising all others. Our only real enemies
are the priests, vodka, the crown, the police, hiding their

faces and exciting us one against another. I shall strive to
forget . . . all this mire to become a man and not a machine
for hatching hatred...
“, .. The only things I love are art, children, and death.”
5 An idealistic Russian poet who became
Alexander Blok
Revolution.

(1880-1921)

voiced

many

a herald of the Revolution,
of

the

ideals

202

of

the

1905

April 1948 — March 1951

Id. Faced with the ignorance and exhaustion of the poor:
“My blood is congealed with shame and despair. All is
but

emptiness,

spitefulness,

blindness,

poverty.

Only

a

total compassion can bring about a change . . . I react
like this because my conscience is not at rest... I know
what I must do: give away all my money, beg pardon of

everyone, distribute my possessions, my clothing . . . But
Icannot...I cannot ...”
“O my dear, my beloved rabble!”
“What is on the confines of art cannot be loved” and yet:
“We shall all die, but art remains.”

Prokosch. The Seven Who Fled.° “Everyone hated him,
but they all coveted his sparkling smile, and he more than

suspected that all that most people really long for in their
heart of hearts, is the unattainable and fleeting glow of
personal beauty.”
“Watchers; the rocks; below them the enormous plateau,

and above them the stars. Nothing if not strong, and what
they refused to condone in this place, so assiduously observant, was weakness; that is, impurity and frailty of
spirit.”

“,. . those who have lost, somewhere amongst the ardors
of childhood and youth, all power to love.”
Wonderful p. 106.
6 The following six quotations come from pp. 31, 69, 99, 195, 285, and
390 of the novel by Frederic Prokosch (Harper & Brothers, 1937), which
Camus read in the 1948 translation by Rose Celli and Joan Smith. The

“wonderful p. 106” in the French edition deals with the magical power
of love and the longing for death.

203

NOTEBOOK

VI

“,.. his mother—the only creature for whom he had ever
felt what might be called, not love, perhaps, but a certain

loyalty of heart.”
“The world, the world! They talk of war and money and

starvation and injustice and all the rest. But the reality is
much bigger, more profound, more terrible than these by
far. Do you want to know what it is? It’s this. The love for
death.”
“I foretell a great fire . . . All will be consumed. All.
Except those who have been purged and made eternal by
the fire of the spirit. By love.”
“What sort of love?”
“By the love that destroys. Love without appeasement or

end!”
A short story that will take place on a day of yellow
fog.
It’s by rejecting a part of this world that the world is
livable? Against Amor fati, man is the only animal that
refuses to be what he is.

“Ah! I should indeed kill myself if I did not know that
death itself is not a rest and that in the grave likewise a
terrible anguish awaits us.”

The judge enters the cell of the condemned man. The
latter is young. He is smiling. He is asked if he wants to
204

April 1948 — March 1951

write anything. “Yes,” he says. And he writes: “day of
victory!” He is still smiling. The judge asks him if he wants
anything. “Yes,” the young man says. And he slaps the
judge vigorously. People rush forward. The judge hesitates. A hatred as old as the world wells up. But he is

motionless, an idea rising slowly in him. Nothing can be
done to him. The other smiles and looks at him. “No,” he

says joyfully, “nothing can be done.”
The judge at home with his wife.
“But,” she says, “what did you do? Didn’t you...”
“What?”
“That's right. Nothing can be done.”
From trial to trial, the judge follows the line with hatred
in his heart. With each accused, he awaits the moment

of

sagging and giving in. But it never happens. They are in
agreement.

Then he judges with too much hatred. He deviates. He
becomes heretical. He is condemned. Then a wave sweeps
over him. This is freedom. He will slap the judge. Same
scene. But he is not smiling and the other’s face is before
him. “Don’t you want.. .”
He stares at the judge. “No,” he says. “Let’s go.”
The limit of rebellious reasoning: to accept killing
oneself in order to reject complicity with murder in general.
The duties of friendship help to endure the pleasures
of society.

“Le Bacher.” “What struck me in that second period was
the degree to which she had remained unknown to me in
205

NOTEBOOK

VI

the first one, although she had filled and colored my life
forever.”

Id. “I imagined her. I knew those mornings when the
image of the person met the day before and the rather
hazy delights we enjoyed in the first effusions suddenly
become clear and the rather haggard intoxication of the
day before becomes a solar joy, the joy of the purest conquests.”

Char. Calm block here below fallen from a dim disaster.’

I have two or three passions that may be judged guilty,
that I consider such, and from which I am trying to cure
myself through willpower. I succeed sometimes.

Max Jacob:® “One constructs an early experience with a
powerful memory.” Cultivate one’s memory, dropping all
else.
“Brevity and harshness are results of laziness.”
“Do not scorn either insignificant people, or important
people” (for me).

Novel. Back from the concentration camp. He arrives;
he has recovered somewhat; he is out of breath, but precise.

“Once and for all, I shall satisfy your curiosity. But after7 Calme bloc ici-bas chu d’un désastre obscur, a line from Mallarmé’s
homage to Edgar Allan Poe, applies to any poet who appears suddenly
like a meteor.
8 The French poet Max Jacob (1876-1944), a cubist and precursor of
Surrealism, was converted from Judaism to a strict Catholicism. He died

in a concentration

camp.

206

April 1948 — March 1951

ward I don’t want anyone to question me.” There follows
a flat account.
Ex. “I got away.”
The words came out harsh, without afterthoughts.
There were no overtones.
“Td like to smoke.”
First drag. He turns around and smiles.
“Excuse me,” he said in the same calm, inscrutable

way.
After that, he never again talks of it. He lives in the most
ordinary way. Just one thing: he has no more relations
with his wife. Until the crisis and the explanation: “Everything human strikes me with horror.”

Program, February—June.
1) The Rope.®
2 5 LueRebel.

Finish up the three volumes of essays:
1) Literary essays. Preface — The Minotaur+ Prometheus in Hades+Helen’s Exile+Algerian Cities+ ...
2) Critical essays. Preface — Chamfort
+ Intelligence
and the Scaffold+ Agrippa d’Aubigné
+ Preface to Italian
Chronicles +Commentaries on Don Juan+ Jean Grenier.
3) Political essays. Preface — Ten editorials
+ Intelli-

gence and Courage-+ Neither Victims nor Executioners+
Replies to D’Astier
+ Why Spain? + The Artist and Liberty.
February 18-28: Finish The Rope, first version.
March-April: Finish The Rebel, first version.
May: Essays.
June: Go over versions The Rope and The Rebel.
Rise early. Shower before breakfast.
9 Original title for The Just Assassins.

207

NOTEBOOK

VI

No cigarettes before noon.
Keeping stubbornly at work. It overcomes lapses.

Portraits. From

under her veil, she looks out with her

beautiful eyes. Calm beauty, rather a milkmaid’s. She suddenly speaks and her mouth screws.up into a parallelogram. She is ugly. Society woman.

You speak to him. He speaks. Suddenly, while continuing
his sentence, his eyes are elsewhere, still on you by necessity but already wandering. Lady-killer.

Last words

of Karl Gerhard,

Himmler’s

former

doctor

(and knowing about Dachau):
“I regret that there is still injustice in this world.”

To give oneself has no meaning unless one possesses
oneself. — Or else, one gives oneself to escape one’s own
poverty. You can give only what you have. To be your own
master before disarming.

X.: “It was the year of my peritonitis.”
“It was just after my perforated intestine” . . . etc.
Visceral calendar.

Trial — When one thinks of the irreplaceable quality of
a great heart’s experience, the sum of knowledge it implies, the number of great battles fought and won against
208

April 1948 — March 1951

oneself and the harshness of fate, and yet three flunkies of
the law courts are enough...

In a world that has ceased to believe in sin, the artist

is responsible for the preaching. But if the priest’s words
carried, this is because they were fed by example. Hence
the artist strives to become an example. This is why he is
shot or deported, to his great distress. Besides, virtue is not

learned so rapidly as the handling of a submachine gun.
The fight is unequal.

After the assassination

of Alexander II, address of the

Executive Committee to Alexander III:
“, . . Better than anyone, we understand how sad is the
loss of such talents, of so much energy in the work of
destruction.”
“.. .A peaceable battle of ideas will come to take the
place of the violence that is more distasteful to us than to
your servants and that we practice only by virtue of a sad
necessity.”

See strange deposition of Ryssakov, ready to serve as an

informer in order to have his life spared. But he provides
himself with reasons (p. 137 of “Famous Russian Trials”).

Lieutenant Schmidt: “My death will crown all and, with
torture added to it, my cause will be irreproachable and
perfect.”
209

NOTEBOOK

VI

G. That mouth scoured by the filthy erosion of sensual
pleasure.

Revolt. Chapter on appearing (to oneself and to others).
Dandyism,

the motive for so many

forms

of action, even

the revolutionary form.

So long as man has not dominated desire, he has dominated nothing. And he almost never dominates it.

Vinaver.' The writer is finally responsible toward society
for what he does. But he must accept (and this is where
he must be very modest, not at all demanding ) not knowing
his responsibility in advance, being ignorant so long as he is
writing of the conditions of his commitment, taking a risk.

Essay. Introduction.

Why refuse denunciation,

police,

etc... .if we are neither Christians nor Marxists? We have
no value for that. Until we have found a basis for those
values, we are condemned to choose the good (when we

do choose it) in an unjustifiable way. Virtue will always be
illegitimate until that time.

First Cycle. From my first books (Noces) to La Corde
and The Rebel, my whole effort has been in reality to depersonalize myself (each time, in a different tone). Later on,

I shall be able to speak in my own name.
1 Michel

Vinaver,

the

author

of

Latauwme

(1950)

(1951).
210

and

L’Objecteur

April 1948 — March 1951

Great souls interest me—and
a great soul.

they alone. But I am not

Preface to collection of articles.? “One of my regrets is
having sacrificed too much to objectivity. Objectivity at
times is a self-indulgence. Today things are clear and what
belongs to the concentration camp, even socialism, must be

called a concentration camp. In a sense, I shall never again
be polite.”
I strove toward objectivity, contrary to my nature. This
is because I distrusted freedom.

Jeliabov, who organized the assassination of Alexander
II, arrested forty-eight hours before the drama, asked to be

executed at the same time as Ryssakov, who threw the
bomb.
“Nothing but cowardice on the part of the government
could explain not erecting one scaffold instead of two.”

Zybin, the unbeatable decoder on the Okhrana, is kept
in his post by the G.P.U. Id. Kommissarov, an organizer
of pogroms on behalf of the Okhrana, goes over to the
Cheka. “Go underground” (illegality).
“The acts of terrorism must be carefully organized. The
party will assume the moral responsibility. That will assure
the heroic fighters the necessary peace of mind.”
Azev—grave number 1,466 in the cemetery of a Berlin
suburb.
Several

days

before

the

attempt

on

Plehve’s

life, he

warned “in general” Lopoukhin of the Okhrana and asked
2 Draft of a preface for Actuelles.
2II

NOTEBOOK

VI

for a raise. He denounced the terrorists of the South to
let the terrorists of Petersburg have a free hand. Plehve
was killed; what Azev had said: “It’s not from that direction

(Guerchoum)

Zoubatov

that you have anything to fear.”

the director. Defended

the accused before a

false committee of inquiry. And he made of him an informer.
Nine times out of ten the revolutionary developed a passion for his job as an informer.

The revolution of 1905 began with the strike of a Moscow printing plant where the workers were asking that
periods and commas be counted as characters in evaluating
piecework.

The St. Petersburg Soviet in 1905 called the strike with
shouts of Down with capital punishment.

During the Moscow

Commune,

in Trubnaia

Square, in

front of a building destroyed by the canons, a plate containing a piece of human flesh was exposed with a poster

saying: “Give your mite for the victims.”

Provocation.

The

Malinovsky

proved

that Eugene

case.* Cf. Laporte,

pp.

175-76.
3In

r908

it was

Azef,

the head

of the terrorist

organization who had plotted various assassinations, was also in the
pay of the secret police. Vyacheslav Plehve, the reactionary Minister
of the Interior under

Nicholas

II, was

assassinated

by terrorists

in July

1904.
4Roman Malinovsky, the leader of the Bolshevik Party in the Duma,
was likewise shown to be a police agent.
212

April 1948 — March 1951
Interview Bourtzev—Azev

in Frankfort—after

the con-

demnation. Cf. Laporte, p. 221.

To Dimitri Bogrov, the assassin of Stolypin, is granted
the favor of being hanged in white tie and tails.

End

the first of June. Then

travels.

Intimate

Journal.

Force of life. Never get bogged down.

An essay on the alibi.

The whole history of Russian terrorism can be looked
upon as a struggle between the intellectuals and absolutism, in the presence of the silent masses.

Novel. In the endless suffering of the camp, an instant
of indescribable happiness.
In short, the Gospel is realistic, whereas people think
it impossible to put into practice. It knows that man cannot
be pure. But he can make the effort of recognizing his
impurity; in other words, of pardoning. Criminals are
always judges .. . The only ones who can condemn absolutely are those who are absolutely innocent . . . This is
why God must be absolutely innocent.

Putting a person to death is suppressing his chance of
perfection.
213

NOTEBOOK

VI

How to live without a few good reasons for despairing!

Preface. — Calling oneself a revolutionary and rejecting
on the other hand the death penalty’ (quote Tolstoy preface—that preface by Tolstoy, which I am now old enough
to read with veneration,

is not well enough known),

the

limiting of liberties, and wars, amounts to saying nothing.
Hence one must declare that one is not a revolutionary—
but more modestly a reformer. An uncompromising theory
of reform.

Finally, and taking everything into considera-

tion, one may call oneself a rebel.

(You will lose your credit, I am told. “I hope so, if that’s
what it’s made of.”)

Tchaikovsky had the habit of eating papers (even quite
important ones, at the Ministry of Justice, for instance)
out of absentmindedness.
“In him there rose so violent a desire to create that
only his tremendous ability to work was able to satisfy
it.” (N. Berberova)

“If that emotion of the artist that is called inspiration
were never interrupted, it would be impossible to live.”
(Tchaikovsky)

“In moments of idleness, I am seized with the thought of
never being capable of achieving perfection, with a dis-

satisfaction, a self-hatred. The thought that I am good for
nothing, that only my great activity mitigates my faults
and raises me to the rank of man, in the deeper sense of the
5 See Actuelles.

214

April 1948 — March 1951

word, worries and torments me. Work is what saves me.”

(Tchaikovsky )
And yet his music, most often, is mediocre.

Recruiting. Most would-be writers go toward Communism. It’s the one position that allows them to look down
on artists. From this point of view, it’s the party of
thwarted vocations. Heavy recruiting, you may imagine.

May 4g. And now, forsake “the human” as they say.

I used to give myself subjects as pretexts to force myself to speak out.

Preface book of political essays. From this point of view,

the last essay expresses rather well what I think, simply
that modern man is obliged to be concerned with politics.
I am

concerned

through

my

with it, in spite of myself and because,

defects rather

than

through

my virtues, I

have never been able to refuse any of the obligations I encountered.

One cannot believe in kindness, in morality, and in dis-

interestedness because of psychology. But one cannot believe in evil, etc., because of history.

Novel.® The lovers in stone. And he knew now what he
had suffered as long as that love lasted, which could not
6 Passage reinstated

by the French

publishers.

215

NOTEBOOK

VI

have been resolved unless . . . at the precise moment . .
some heaven-sent wind had petrified them in the very
enthusiasm of their love and they were henceforth forever
fixed face to face, finally torn away from this cruel earth,
knowing nothing of the desires whirling around them and
turned toward each other as if toward the resplendent face
of the complementary love.

One never says a quarter of what one knows. Otherwise,

all would collapse. How little one says, and they are already
screaming.

When you have once seen the glow of happiness on the
face of a beloved person, you know that a man can have no
other vocation than to awaken that light on the faces surrounding him . . . and you are torn by the thought of the
unhappiness and night you cast, by the mere fact of living, in the hearts you encounter.

When the barbarians from the north had destroyed the
sweet kingdom of Provence and made of us Frenchmen .

Mounier advises me in Esprit to give up politics since
I have no head for it (this indeed is obvious) and to be
satisfied with the quite noble role, which would be so
charmingly appropriate to me, of sounding the alarm. But

what is a political mind? Reading Esprit doesn’t tell me.
As to the “noble” role of sounding the alarm, it would require a spotless conscience. And the only vocation I feel in
216

April 1948 — March 1951

myself is telling consciences that they are not spotless and
reasons why they lack something.

JeU LY

«AG

See South American Journal, June to August 1949.

SEPTEMBER

’49

To finish up, give a new value to murder in order to oppose it to anonymous and cold and abstract destruction.
The apology of murder from man to man is one of the
stages on the path of revolt.

The sole effort of my life, the rest having been given
me,

and

abundantly

(except

for fortune,

which

means

nothing to me): to live the life of a normal man. I didn’t
want to be a man of the abyss. The tremendous effort did
no good. Little by little, instead of succeeding ever better
in my undertaking, I see the abyss coming closer.

Gheorghiu points out correctly that Christ’s condemnation

(and torture)

was

confused

with

that of the two

thieves. The technique of the amalgam was already practiced in the year zero.
The only progress, according to G.: today ten thousand
innocent men

are set between

two guilty men.

... the village facades erected by Potémkin along the
roads used by Catherine the Great as she inspected her
empire.
217

NOTEBOOK

VI

Czapski (Inhuman Land) tells how Russian children
would pour water over the bodies of German soldiers found

in the snow and the next morning would use the frozen
bodies as toboggans.

One must love life before loving its meaning, Dostoevsky
says. Yes, and when the love of life disappears, no meaning
consoles us for it.

The great Imam Ali: “The world is a decaying carcass.
Whoever desires a piece of this world will live with dogs.”

Stendhal: “Difference between Germans and other nations: they get excited through meditation instead of calming down. Second distinction: they long desperately to
have character.”

Sperber: “May God punish the devout who instead of
going to church enter a revolutionary party in order to
make a church of it.”
Communism, skeptical fanaticism.
Speaking of a master (Grenier?): “Meeting that man
has brought great happiness. Following him would have
been bad; never forsaking him will be good.”

Id. The death of Rosa Luxemburg: “For the others, she
had been dead for twelve years. For them, she had been
dying for twelve years.”
218

April 1948 — March 1951

“There are no isolated sacrifices. Behind each individual
who sacrifices himself stand others whom he sacrifices
with him without asking their opinion.
They want the good of the masses, but they don’t love
the masses. They love no one, not even themselves.
OCTOBER
Novel.

’49

“Somewhere,

in a remote

region

of his soul, he

loved them. They were really loved, but at such a distance
that the word love took on a new meaning.”
“He longed for two things, the first of which was absolute possession. The second was the absolute memory he
wanted to leave her. Men are so well aware that love is
destined for death that they work on the memory of that
love as long as they live. He wanted to leave her a great idea
of himself so that their love would be great, definitively.
But he now

knew

that he was

not great, that she would

know it some day, sooner or later, and that, instead of the

absolute memory, for him at least it would be absolute
death. The victory, the only victory would be to realize
that the love can be great even when the lover is not
great. But he was not yet ready for such terrible modesty.”

“He carried with him, deeply burned into him, the
memory of her face tortured by suffering . . . It was at

about that time that he lost his self-respect, which until
then had always upheld him . . . She was right; he was
inferior to love.”
“One can love in chains, through stone walls several
yards thick, etc... . But let a tiny part of the heart be
subject to duty, and true love is impossible.”
219

NOTEBOOK

VI

“He imagined a future of solitude and suffering. And he
took a difficult pleasure in such imaginings. But this is
because he fancied the suffering noble and harmonious.
And in reality he thus imagined a future without suffering.
But the moment pain was there, no further life was possible.”
“He told her that the love of men

was like this, a will

and not a grace, and that he had to conquer himself. She
insisted to him that this was not love.”

“He had lost everything, even solitude.”
“He shouted to her that this meant death for him and

she did not consider herself touched. For with her lofty
standards she considered it natural that he should die because he had failed.”

“Everything is to be forgiven, and first of all existing.
Existence always winds up by being a bad deed.”
“It was that day that he lost her. The misfortune came

only later, apparently. But he knew that it was that day.
In order to keep her he ought never to have failed. Her
standards were such that he could not commit a single
mistake, reveal a single weakness. From anyone else she
would have accepted it, she had accepted it and would ac-

cept it in the future. Not from him. Such are the privileges
of love.”

“There is an honor in love. When it is lost, love is noth-

ing.”
220

April 1948
— March 1951

“I was petty before loving, just because I was sometimes
tempted to consider myself great.” (Stendhal,

Concerning

Love )

Keen in mind and paltry in heart. Or else his virtues
were those of the mind, not of the heart. What he liked in

her was the outer life, the romantic element, the playacting.

Despair consists in not knowing one’s reasons for fighting and even whether or not one must fight.
Walking in Paris: this memory: fires in the Brazilian
countryside and the aromatic scent of coffee and spices.
Cruel and sad evenings descending on that limitless land.

Revolt. The absurd implies an absence of choice. Living
is choosing. Choosing is killing. The objection to the absurd
is murder.

Guilloux. The artist’s misfortune is that he is neither
altogether a monk nor altogether a layman—and that he
has both sorts of temptations.

The real problem of the moment:

punishment.

Who can tell the anguish of the man who sided with the
creature against the creator and who, losing the idea of his
221

NOTEBOOK

VI

own innocence, and that of others, judges the creature, and
himself, to be as criminal as the creator.

Monnerot. “The fecundity of a producer of ideas (he is
speaking of Hegel) is proven by the multiplicity of possible
translations

(interpretations ).”*

Of course not. That is true of an artist, absolutely false
of a thinker.

Novel. Condemned to death. But the cyanide is got
through to him... And there, in the solitude of his cell, he
began to laugh. A vast feeling of well-being filled him. He
was no longer walking into a wall. He had the whole night
ahead of him. He was going to be able to choose .. . Tell
himself:

“Come

on

now,”

and

then:

“No,

one

moment

more,” and relish that moment . . . What a revenge! What
a contradiction!

Lacking love, one can try to have honor. Sorry honor.

F.: Folly of basing anything on love, folly of breaking
anything for love.

It’s because God was jealous of our suffering that he
came to die on the Cross. That strange look in the eyes
which did not yet belong to him. .
7 Probably from Sociologie du communisme

(1949)
222

by Jules Monnerot.

April 1948 — March 1951

LATE

OCTOBER

’qg. Relapse

An invalid must be clean to make people forget him, forgive him. And even then. Even his cleanliness is unusual.
It is suspect—like those excessively large rosettes that

crooks wear on their lapels.

After such a long certainty of being cured, this backsliding ought to crush me. It does indeed crush me. But
following on an unbroken succession of crushings, it rather
makes me laugh. In the end, I am liberated. Madness too
is a liberation.

“So sensitive that he could have touched pain with his
hands.” (Amy Lowell speaking of Keats.)
Keats again: “There is no greater Sin after the seven
deadly than to flatter oneself into an idea of being a great
Poet [. . .| — how comfortable a feel it is to feel that such

a Crime must bring its heavy Penalty.”®

“Get thee to a nunnery!” Yes indeed, for there is no

other way of possessing her than to keep anyone from possessing her. Except for God, whose advantages one can
readily endure:
8 Camus
in The

quotes

Letters

they don’t concern the body.
Keats

of John

in French.
Keats

The first quotation

may

be found

(edited by M. B. Forman),

Vol.

I, p. 32,

and the second one, about the grave, in what

is thought to be his last

letter

that

to Fanny

Brawne

(Vol.

II, p. 349).

In

same

letter

(1820),

Keats writes: “Hamlet’s heart was full of such Misery as mine is when
he said to Ophelia ‘Go to a Nunnery, go, gol’”

223

NOTEBOOK

If there is a soul, it is a mistake

to believe

VI

that it is

given us fully created. It is created here, throughout

a

whole life. And living is nothing else but that long and
painful bringing forth. When the soul is ready, created by
us and suffering, death comes along.

“I am glad there is such a thing as the grave.” (Keats)

Chesterton. Justice is a mystery, not an illusion.

Apropos of Browning: the average man—just as he concerns me.

Kleist who burns his manuscripts twice . . . Piero della
Francesca, blind at the end of his life . . . Ibsen at the end

suffering from amnesia and relearning the alphabet. . .
Courage! Courage!

Beauty, which helps in living, helps likewise in dying.

For millennia the world was like those Italian paintings
of the Renaissance showing men being tortured on a cold
marble floor while others were looking elsewhere with utter
abstraction. The number of uninterested persons was staggering in comparison with the interested persons. What
characterized history was the great number of people not
interested in the suffering of others. Sometimes the unin224

April 1948 — March 1951

terested ones had their turn. But they were surrounded by
a general abstraction and this made up for that. Today
everyone pretends to be interested. In law courts, witnesses
suddenly turn around toward the one who was flagellated.

Peer Gynt tells his fellow citizens that the devil promised
the crowd to imitate perfectly a pig’s grunts. He appears
and performs. But after the performance the criticisms
were dogmatic. Some considered the voice too high and
others too artful. All regretted that the effect was exaggerated. And yet the sounds heard came from a piglet that
the devil was carrying under his cloak and pinching.

The end of Don Giovanni: the voices of damnation, silent

until then, suddenly fill the stage of the universe. They
were there, a secret crowd, more numerous than the living.

Rajk trial:° The idea of the objective criminal who
brings about the explosion between two aspects of man is
an idea of current procedure, but exaggerated.

Marxism is a philosophy based on procedure, but without jurisprudence.

Worth noting: during the whole trial, Rajk leaned his
head to the right, as he never did before.
9 The

trial of Rajk took place in September

1949.

225

NOTEBOOK

VI

Id. Those condemned to death in reality not executed,
who live through another life in Siberia or elsewhere
(hero of a novel).

Against capital punishment. Fichte. “System of Natural
Law.”
Novel
devour

(end).

He recalled

the biographies

the pages to the moment
know

the time when

of famous

men,

he used

rushing

to

through

of their death. He wanted

to

at that time what genius, greatness, sensitivity can

use against death. But he knew now that such an intense
curiosity was useless and that great lives carried no lessons
for him. Genius does not know how to die. The poor woman
does know.

Greatness consists in trying to be great. There is no
other way. (This is why M. is a great woman.)

Wherever

one wants to have slaves, one must have the

most music possible. At least this is the idea of a German
prince, as reported by Tolstoy.

“Obey,” said Frederick of Prussia. But, as he was dying:

“I am tired of ruling over slaves.”

Novel. “I was looking for a way of not dying of his
liberty. If I had found

it then, I’'d have

given him

that liberty.”
226

back

April 1948 — March 1951

Gorky speaking of Tolstoy: “He is a man seeking God,
not for himself but for others, so that God will leave him

in peace in the desert he has chosen for himself.”
Id. “I am not an orphan on earth so long as that man
exists.”

When John Huss was burned, a gentle little old woman
was seen bringing her faggot to contribute to the fire.

Those moments when one yields to anguish as one does
to physical pain: lying down, motionless, devoid of will
and of future, listening only to the long twinges of pain.

To overcome? But anguish is just that, the thing to
which one is never superior.

Novel. “When she was here and we used to tear each
other apart, my anguish, my tears had a meaning. She
could see them. With her gone, that anguish was empty,
without a future. And true anguish is empty anguish.
Suffering in her presence was a delightful happiness. But
solitary, unrecognized anguish is the cup that is constantly
offered us, from which we turn away obstinately, but from

which we shall have to drink someday, more terrible than
the day of death.”

Nights of anguish leave a hangover—like other nights.
227

NOTEBOOK

VI

Novel. “One final word. The question is not to carry on a
delightful, bitter dialogue with a beautiful image that has
disappeared. The question is to destroy it in me scrupulously, implacably, to disfigure that face in order to spare
my heart the desperate shock caused by memory .. .”
“Kill that love, O my love.”

Id. “For ten years he had not been able to enter
theater ox..,

a

Essay on the Sea.
The desperate man has no native land. I knew that the
sea existed and that is why I lived in the midst of this
mortal time.
Thus people who love each other and are separated can
live in pain. But whatever they say, they do not live in
despair: they know that love exists.

People insist on confusing marriage and love on the
one hand, happiness and love on the other. But there is
nothing in common. This is why it happens, the lack of love
being more frequent than love, that some marriages are

happy.
Involuntary commitment.

Physical jealousy is in great part a judgment on oneself.

Because one knows what one is capable of thinking, one
fancies that the other is thinking in the same way.
1See “La Mer au plus prés,” in L’Eté.

228

April 1948 — March 1951

Days at sea, that life “rebellious to forgetting, rebellious

to remembering,” according to Stevenson.

Lambert.? “At present, I am saving all my pity for myself.”

Guilloux: “In the end, one doesn’t write to say something, but not to say something.”

Novel. “At the end of those exhausting sufferings, I
turned toward that part of me that loves no one and sought
refuge there. There I caught my breath. Then I returned,
with head lowered, into the thickets and the thorns.”

Virtue

is meritorious

today.

Great

sacrifices

are not

backed up. Martyrs are forgotten. They rise up and all eyes
are on them. Once they have fallen, the newspapers go on.

Merle, a blackmailing journalist, got nothing from X.,
whom he libeled from one year to the other in his paper.
Merle, changing tactics, praised outrageously his victim,
who paid up at once.

Tolstoy in the Chibunin affair pleaded in court for the
defendant, guilty of having struck his captain; made an
appeal for him after the death sentence; wrote to his aunt
to ask her to influence the Minister of War. The latter
2E.

Lambert,

a friend of Jean

Grenier.

229

NOTEBOOK

VI

pointed out only that Tolstoy had forgotten to give the address of the regiment, and this kept him from intervening.
The day after Tolstoy received the letter asking him to fill
in that omission, Chibunin was executed through Tolstoy's
fault.

The last work of Tolstoy, which was found unfinished on
his worktable: “In the world, there are no guilty.”
He was born in 1828. He wrote War and Peace between

1863 and 1869. Between the ages of thirty-five and fortyone.
Life is too long, according to Greene.’ “Couldn’t we have
committed our first major sin at seven, have ruined our-

selves for love or hate at ten, have clutched at redemption
on a fifteen-year-old death-bed?”

Scobie, an adulterer. “Virtue, the good life, tempted him

in the dark like a sin.”
Id. “In human love there is never such a thing as victory:
only a few minor tactical successes before the final defeat
of death or indifference.”
Id. “Love was the wish to understand, and presently

with constant failure the wish died too perhaps or changed
into this painful affection, loyalty, pity... .”
Marie Dorval* to Vigny: “You don’t know me! You don’t
know me!”
3 This

second

group

of passages

from

Graham

Greene,

French, comes from The Heart of the Matter (1948).
4The actress Marie Dorval (1798-1849), who played
ines of French Romantic drama, had a long liaison with

de Vigny.

230

quoted

in

the great herothe poet Alfred

April 1948 — March 1951

After so much absence, no longer recognizing herself:
“Is it true, tell me, that physical pleasure can make me cry
out?”
Her passport delivered by Toulouse: “Figure misshapen,
hair thin, glorious bearing.”
“I did not separate from M. de Vigny, but tore myself
away!”

Christ agonizes now in law courts. The knout in his
hand, he holds sway in the teller’s cages of banks.

Strepto—4o grams from November 6 to December 5, ’49.
P.A.S.—360 grams from November 6 to December 5,49.

+20 grams Strepto from November 13 to January 2.°

Novel. “As a result of questioning him as to his love, as
a result especially of the anguish she put into that interrogation, he felt doubts coming into being. And as the
doubts gradually increased, his will to love hardened.
Hence, the more she appealed to his heart, the more abstract his love became.”

Any murder to be justified must be balanced with love.
For the terrorists the scaffold was the final proof of love.

In

1843,

the

Americans

liberate

Hawaii,

which

the

English had had granted to them through force. Melville
5 Streptomycin and Para-Aminosalicylic Acid (or familiarly P.A.S.)
are two medicaments used in the modern treatment of tuberculosis.
Camus took the customary doses.

231

NOTEBOOK

VI

present. The king invites his subjects “to celebrate their happiness by ceasing to observe any moral, legal, or religious
restraint for ten consecutive days”; during that period, he
solemnly declared, all the laws of the territory were suspended.®

Mistakes are joyful, truth infernal.

That sacred uncertainty, of which Melville speaks, which

always keeps men and nations in suspense.

Melville’s note on the margins of Shelley’s Essays: “Milton’s Satan is morally very superior to his God, as whoever perseveres despite adversity and torture is superior
to whoever, in the cold assurance of an unquestioned triumph, takes the most horrible revenge on his enemies.”

Bitter are the waters of death...

Melville at the age of thirty-five: I have given my consent
to annihilation.

Hawthorne speaking of Melville: “He can neither believe
nor be comforted in his unbelief.”
6Camus

had

obviously

been

reading

Herman

Melville

by

Pierre

Frédérix (Gallimard, 1950), which records (pp. 122-3) this incident
as related in a postscript to Typee. The other references to Melville

derive from the same reading.

232

April 1948 — March 1951

L.G.

—

rather

beautiful,

but who,

as Stendhal

says,

leaves something to be desired for ideas.

The day he separated from his wife, he had a great longing for chocolate and succumbed to it.

The story of M. de Bocquandé’s grandfather. At school
he is accused of an impropriety. He denies it. Locked up for
three days. He denies it. “I cannot confess a wrong I didn’t
do.” The father is informed. He gives his son three days to
confess. Otherwise he will be a cabin boy (the family is
rich). Locked up for three days. He comes out. “I cannot
confess what I haven’t done.” The father, inflexible, sends

him to sea as a cabin boy. The child grows up, spends his
life at sea, becomes

a captain. The father dies. He grows

old. And on his death bed: “It was not I.”

During the Liberation of Paris, bullets whistle. “Ah!
Ah!” Gaston Gallimard exclaims. Robert Gallimard rushes
toward him, frantic. But Gaston merely sneezes.

She gave him pleasures of vanity. And this is why he was
faithful to her.

F.: “I am a twisted person. The only way I can know my
capacity for love is from my capacity for anguish. Before
suffering, I don’t know.”
233

NOTEBOOK

VI

Preface to L’Envers et lendroit.”
“There are in me artistic vetoes, as in others there are

moral or religious vetoes. The forbidden, the idea that a
certain thing “isn’t done,” which is foreign to me as a
child of a free nature, belongs to me as a slave (and an
admiring slave) of a rigorous artistic tradition. (I overcame such taboos only in State of Siege, and this explains

the affection I feel for that work, generally scorned.)
“. . . Perhaps also that distrust is aimed at my basic
anarchy and thereby is useful. I know my disorder, the
violence of certain instincts, the graceless surrender into
which I can fall. The work of art to be erected (I am speak-

ing in the future) must use those incalculable forces of
man. But not without surrounding them with barriers. My
barriers even today are too strong. But what they had to
contain was strong too. On the day when balance is established, I shall try to write the work of which I am
dreaming. It will be like L’Envers et Vendroit; in other
words, a certain form of love will be my guiding support.
“It seems to me that I can do it. The breadth of my
experiences, my professional knowledge, my violence and
my submission

. . . I shall set in the center,

as here, a

mother’s wonderful silence, a man’s quest to recover a love

resembling that silence, finding it at last, losing it, and
returning through wars, the folly of justice, pain, toward
the solitary and calm, the death of which is a happy silence.
I shall set...”
Maritain. Rebellious atheism (absolute atheism) puts
history in the place of God and substitutes for revolt an
absolute submission. “Duty and virtue are for it but a total
7 Written in 1935-36 and originally published in Algiers in 1937,
Camus’s first book, L’Envers et l’endroit, was finally reissued in Paris

with

a long preface in 1958.

234

April 1948 — March 1951

submission and a total immolation of itself to the sacred
voracity of growth.”
“Sanctity likewise is a revolt: it is refusing things as they
are. It is taking on oneself the world’s misfortune.”

Publicity blurb for The Just Assassins: Terror and justice.

Novel. “She had a way of repeating three times ‘I love
you’ in a whispered, breathless voice, like a rather subversive credo...”

“My chief occupation despite appearances

has always

been love (its pleasures for a long time and, finally, its

most painful transports). I have a romantic soul and have
always had considerable trouble interesting it in something
else.”

In the spring when

all is over write everything I feel.

Little things at random.

Novel. “With most women, he had been able to pretend,

victoriously. With her, never. A sort of intuition like genius
made her aware of what was going through his heart,
looked through him.”

Criticism of The Just Assassins:
were

so unfortunate

“No idea of love.” If I

as not to know

love and wanted

235

to

NOTEBOOK

VI

put myself in the ridiculous position of learning about it,
I'd not turn to Paris or the gazettes to study it.

The end of a cold day, twilights of shadows and ice...
more than I can bear.

Preface to Political Essays: “Upon the fall of Napoleon
the author of the following pages, who considered it a deception to spend his youth in political hatreds, began to
travel.” (Stendhal, Life of Rossini)

Id. Stendhal

(Concerning Love):

“Man is not free not

to do what causes him more pleasure than all other possible
acts.”

Id. “Exceptionally beautiful women astonish less the
second day. This is a great misfortune . . . etc.”

The Duke of Policastro, who “every six months traveled
a hundred leagues to see for a quarter of an hour in Lecca
an adored mistress, who was guarded by a jealous husband.” Cf. Story of Dona Diana. End of scene theater
(Garnier, p. 108).

When all is over: write a hodgepodge. Everything that
goes through my head.
236

April 1948 — March 1951

Revolt: the end of revolt without God is philanthropy.
The end of philanthrophy is trials. Chap. The Philanthropists.

An atheist when he was a model husband, he was converted when he became an adulterer.

Poor and free rather than rich and enslaved. Of course,
men want to be both rich and free, and this is what leads

them at times to be poor and enslaved.

Delacroix. “The illusions I create with my painting are

the most real thing in me. The rest is shifting sand.”

Mogador.

Delacroix: “What makes men of genius. . . is not new
ideas; it is that dominant

idea that what has been said

has not yet been said enough.”

Id. “The appearance of that region (Morocco) will always remain in my eyes. The men of that strong race will

always, so long as I live, be active in my memory. It was
in them that I truly encountered the beauty of the ancients.”

Id. “. . . They are closer to nature in a thousand ways:

their clothing, the form of their shoes. Consequently beauty
237

NOTEBOOK

VI

is joined to everything they do. We in our corsets, our narrow shoes, our ridiculous sheathes, are an object of pity.

Grace takes revenge on our learning.”

Vol. I, pp. 212-13 (Plon), wonderful pages on talent.

He classifies Goethe (with reasonable justification for
his judgment) “among petty minds tainted with affectation.”

“That man who always sees himself doing. . .”

JANUARY

I0, 1950

I have never seen very clearly into myself in the final
analysis. But I have always instinctively followed an invisible star...
There is in me an anarchy, a frightful disorder. Creating
costs me a thousand deaths, for it involves an order and my
whole being rebels against order. But without it I should
die scattered.

In the afternoon, the sun and light flood my room,

the

blue and veiled sky, sounds of children rising from the
village, the song of the fountain in the garden .. . and
hours in Algiers come back to me. Twenty years ago...

L. speaking of mother: “It’s bread, and what bread!”
Bespaloff:*

“From

revolt

to revolt, from

revolution

to

8Rachel Bespaloff is a French critic of penetrating and original mind.

238

April 1948 — March 1951

revolution, people thought they were increasing freedom
and they landed in the Empire.”

Revolt. Achilles
Patroclus.

defying creation

after the death

of

Chap. We Nietzscheans.

Henry Miller: “I am dazzled by the glorious collapse of
the world.”® But there is a kind of mind that is not dazzled
by that collapse. More sordid than grandiose.

To dominate the work without forgetting boldness. To
create.

Couvreux. Arrives, asks one to be kind enough to turn
on the radio to the news broadcast of the BBC which in his
opinion is always interesting, sits down, and falls asleep.

Family. “You shouldn’t have disturbed yourself.”
“You are going out of your way.”
“He comes from inland.”

Themes.

Provincial hotel. Attraction

of creatures.

9“Third or Fourth Day of Spring” in Black Spring.

239

NOTEBOOK

VI

Sea. Injustice of the climate. Trees in blossom at SaintEtienne. Even more frightful. In the end, I should have
wanted an absolutely black face. Thus the nations of the
North...
FEBRUARY

1950

Disciplined work until April. Then work enthusiastically.
Be silent. Listen. Let it overflow.

The notion (and the reality) of the intellectual dates
from the eighteenth century.

Later write essay, without hesitation

or reservation,

on

what I know to be true. (Do what one doesn’t want, want
what one doesn’t do.)

The original night.
I am reading the life of Rachel.1 Always the same disappointment in the face of history. All those words uttered

by her, among friends for instance, which go back to the
staggering host of lost words that no one will ever know.
Compared with that host, what history records is a drop
of water lost in the sea.

In Delacroix’s diary, one remark (at second hand) on
critics who indulge in creating: “One can’t at one and the
same time hold the stirrups and show one’s rear.”
1 Mlle

Rachel

distinguished

(1820-58),

as

the

great

French

herself in the roles of classical

actress

tragedy.

240

was

called,

April 1948 — March 1951

Delacroix—on distances in London.
“One must count in leagues: that disproportion alone
between the vastness of the place inhabited by Londoners
and the natural limitation of human proportions makes me
declare them enemies of true civilization which brings together the men of the civilization of Attica who constructed
the Parthenon as big as one of our houses and enclosed so
much

intelligence, life, strength, grandeur in the narrow

limits of frontiers that raise a smile in our barbarism, so
cramped in its vast states.”

Delacroix:
the moment

“In music as probably in all the other arts
that

style, character,

seriousness

in brief,

comes to state itself, the rest disappears.”

Id. What revolutions have destroyed in the realm of
monuments and works of art—when itemized, Delacroix
says, it is frightening.

Against progress. Vol. I, p. 428: “We owe to antiquity the
little we are worth.”

Delacroix.
The great artist must learn to avoid what must not be
attempted. “Only fools and the impotent torture themselves
over the impossible. And yet one must be very daring.”
Id. “It requires great daring to dare to be oneself.”
Id. “To work is not solely to produce; it is to give value
to time.”
Id. “The satisfaction of the man who has worked and
suitably employed his day is tremendous. When I am in
241

NOTEBOOK

VI

that state I enjoy delightfully the slightest distractions. I
can even, without the least regret, find myself surrounded

by the most boring people.”
Id. “.. . not so much cling to the pursuit of things which
are empty wind but enjoy work itself and the delightful
hours that follow it...”
Id. “How happy I am no longer to be obliged to be happy
in the old way (the passions
).”
The great Italian schools “in which naiveté is joined to

the greatest learning.”
Id. Speaking of Millet: “He belongs indeed to the squad
of bearded artists who brought about the revolution of ’48
or applauded it, apparently thinking there would be equality in talents together with equality in fortunes.”
Id. Against progress, the whole of p. 200: “.. . What a
noble sight in the best of centuries, this human livestock
fattened by the philosophes.”

Id. Russian novels “have an amazing smell of reality.”
P. 341: .

. umpertect Creation =...

Original talent “shyness and dryness in the beginning,
breadth and neglect of details in the end.”

The peasant who had remained indifferent during a
prayer that had drawn tears from everyone. He told the
people who criticized his coldness that he didn’t belong to
the parish.
FEBRUARY

’50

Memory slipping more and more. Ought to make up my
mind to keep a diary. Delacroix is right: all these days that
are not noted down are like days that didn’t exist. Perhaps
in April, when I shall recover my freedom.
242

April 1948 — March 1951

Volume:
aesthetics.

questions of art—in which I shall sum up my

Literary society. One imagines black intrigues, vast ambitious schemings. There are nothing but vanities, satisfied
with small rewards.

A little pride helps to maintain one’s distance. Do not
forget it despite everything.

The pleasure that winds up in gratitude: crown of days.
But at the other extremity: bitter pleasure.

The mistral has scraped the sky down to a new skin,
blue and shiny like the sea. From everywhere birds burst
into song, with an exuberance, a jubilation, a joyful discord, an infinite delight. The day brims over and is aglow.

Not morality but fulfillment. And there is no other fulfillment than that of love, in other words of yielding to
oneself and dying to the world. Go all the way. Disappear.
Dissolve in love. Then the force of love will create without
me. Be swallowed up. Break up. Vanish in fulfillment and
the passion of truth.

Epigraph:

“Nothing

avails against humble,

ignorant,

headstrong life” (L’Echange
).?
2 Both this and the following quotation
early play, L’Echange.

are from Act III of Claudel’s

243

NOTEBOOK

VI

Id. “There was a way of loving you and I did not love
you that way.”

Adolphe. Rereading. Same feeling of ardent desiccation.
“She was examined (E) with interest and curiosity like
a beautiful storm.”
“That heart (A) foreign to every interest in the world.”

“The moment I saw on her face an expression of pain,
her will became mine: I was at my ease only when she was
satisfied with me.”

«

‘. . . Those two wretched creatures who were known

solely to each other on earth, who were the only ones
capable of doing each other justice, of understanding and
consoling each other, seemed

two irreconcilable

enemies,

bent on tearing each other apart.”

Wagner, music of slaves.

Novel. “He was quite willing that she should
but far from him. He was a coward.”

suffer,

Constant: “One must study men’s woes but count among
those woes the ideas they have of the means of combatting
them.”
8 E stands for Ellénore, the heroine,

and A for Adolphe,

244

the hero.

April 1948 — March 1951

Id. “Frightful danger: that the American politics of business and the flabby civilization of the intellectuals should
join forces.”

Title for solar essays: Summer. Noon. Holiday.

FEBRUARY

‘50

Mastery: Not to talk.
Worth noting: experience is a memory, but the reverse
is true.
Return now to the detail. Prefer truth to everything.

Nietzsche: I was ashamed of that deceptive modesty.

The rosemary is in blossom. At the base of the olive
trees, crowns of violets.

MARCH

’50

Philanthropic Calvinists negate whatever is not reason
because reason, to their way of thinking, can make them
masters of all, even of nature. Of all except Beauty. Beauty
eludes such a scheme. This is why it is so hard for an artist
to be a revolutionary, even though he is a rebel as an artist.
This is why it is impossible for him to be a killer.
4 The

changed

manuscript

on

(Summer),

the
Camus

reads

first

“Mediterranean

typescript.

continues

Although

Essays,’

the

which

final

to use La Féte (Holiday)

245

title

the

author

was

L’Eté

in the Notebooks.

NOTEBOOK

VI

Wait, wait until are snuffed out one by one the days still

ahead of me in a lighted garland. The last is finally snuffed
out and it’s utter blackness.

MARCH

I

A month of absolute mastery—on every plane. Begin again
anew— (but without sacrificing the truth, the reality of the

prior experiences, and accepting all the consequences with
the decision to dominate them and to transfigure them in
the ultimate, but experienced, attitude of the creator. Re-

ject nothing).

(Be able to say: it was hard. I didn’t succeed the first
time and I struggled at great length. But in the end I won
out. And such great exhaustion makes the success more
lucid, more

humble,

but also more

determined.)

Revolt. After having written it all up, rethink the whole
thing starting with the documents and ideas put in this
order.

In art, the absolute realist would be the absolute divinity.

This is why attempts to deify man aim to perfect realism.

The sea: I didn’t lose myself in it; I found myself in it.

Vivet’s friend, who had given up smoking, goes back
to smoking on learning that the H-bomb has just been
discovered.
246

April 1948
— March 1951

Family.

It was the carters who made Algeria.
Michel. Eighty years old. Erect and strong.
X., his daughter. Left them at the age of eighteen to
“make her own life.” Returned at twenty-one full of money
and, selling her jewels, rebuilt her father’s stables, wiped
out by an epidemic.

Gurdjieff’s “astute man.” Concentration. Recall of oneself (see oneself through the eyes of another).

Jacob Genns, the dictator of the Vilna ghetto, accepted
that police job in order to limit the damage. Little by little,
three quarters of the ghetto (48,000) are exterminated.

Finally he is shot himself. Shot for nothing—dishonored
for nothing.

Title: The Shrewd Genius.

She had to die. Then an atrocious happiness would begin. But that’s just what anguish is: “they” don’t die at the
right moment.

According to the Chinese, empires on the point of collapse have very many laws.

Radiant light. It seems to me that I am emerging from
a ten-year sleep—still entangled in the wrappings of mis-

247

NOTEBOOK

VI

fortune and of false ethics—but again naked and attracted
toward the sun. Strength brilliant and measured—and intelligence frugal, sharpened. I am being reborn as a body
LOO aera:

Comedy. A man who is rewarded officially for a virtue
he has been practicing instinctively. From that moment on,
he practices it consciously: catastrophes.

The

style of the

Nietzsche:

seventeenth

century

according

to

clean, precise, and free.

Modern art: the art of tyrannizing.

After a certain age, quarrels between individuals are aggravated by a race against time. Insoluble then.

As if at the first warmth of love the snows accumulated
in her melted gradually to give way to the irresistible, gushing waters of joy.

MARCH

4, 1950

And openly I pledged my heart to the grave and suffering
earth, and often in the sacred night I promised to love it
faithfully

unto

death, without

fear, with

its heavy load

of fatality, and to despise none of its enigmas. Thus I
bound myself to it with a mortal bond. (Hélderlin’s Empedocles )
248

April 1948 — March 1951

It is only too late that one has the courage of one’s
knowledge.

Artists and thoughts without sunlight.

“Misunderstanding about affection,” Nietzsche says. “A
servile affection that submits and grovels, that idealizes
and makes mistakes—but a divine affection that scorns
and loves, that transforms and uplifts what it loves.”

The world in which I am most at ease: the Greek myth.

The heart is not all. It must be, for without it... But

it must be mastered and transfigured.

My whole work is ironic.

My most constant temptation, the one against which I
have never ceased fighting to the point of exhaustion:
cynicism.

Paganism for oneself, Christianity for others is the instinctive desire of each person.

Not difficulty, but impossibility of being.

249

NOTEBOOK

VI

Love is injustice, but justice is not enough.
There is always in man an element that rejects love.
It’s the element that wants to die. It’s what asks to be forgiven.

Title for “Le Bucher”:

Deianira.

Deianira. “I should have liked to catch her in time, on

that already remote day in the Tuileries when she came
toward me in her black skirt, with her white blouse rolled
up on her tanned arms, her hair loose, her narrow foot, and

her face like the prow of a ship.”

“What I had long been thinking of asking her I did ask
on that final evening: the oath that she would never belong
to any other man. What religion can allow—I did not want
to go on living if human love was incapable of the same
thing. She then made me that promise without asking me
to commit myself. But in the terrible joy and the pride of
my love I promised it to her, joyfully. It was a matter of
killing her, and killing myself, in a certain way.”

Where love is a luxury, how can freedom fail to be a
luxury? One more reason, to be sure, for not yielding to
those who make a double woe of love and of freedom.

Voltaire suspected almost everything.
very few things, yet thoroughly.
250

He settled but

April 1948 — March 1951

Novel.

Male

characters:

Pierre

G., Maurice

Adrey,

Nicholas Lazarevitch, Robert Chatté, M.D.B., Jean Grenier,
Pascal Pia, Ravanel, Herrand, Oettly.
Female characters: Renée Audibert, Simone C., Suzanne
O., Christiane Galindo, Blanche Balain, Lucette, Marcelle
Rouchon, Simone M. B., Yvonne, Carmen, Marcelle, Charlotte, Laure, Madeleine Blanchoud, Janine, Jacqueline, Vic-

toria, Violante, Frangoise 1 and 2, Vauquelin, Leibowitz,
Michéle, André Clément.
Lorette, Patricia Blake, M.
Thérése,
Gisele
Lazare,
Renée
Thomasset,
Evelyne,
Mamaine, Odile, Wanda, Nicole Algan, Odette Campana,

Yvette Petitjean, Suzanne Agnély, Vivette, Nathalie, Virginie, Catherine, Mette, Anne.

“The sea and the sky attract to the marble terraces the
crowd of young, hardy roses.” A. Rimbaud.

Those who write obscurely have great luck: they will
have commentators. The others will have only readers, and
this, it seems, is worthy of scorn.

Gide comes to the U.S.S.R. because he thinks of joy.

Gide: Atheism alone can pacify the world today (!).

Dialogue between Lenin and an inmate of a Russian
concentration camp.
251

NOTEBOOK

VI

Paris begins by serving a work of art and pushes it.
But once it is established, then the fun begins. It is essential to destroy it. Thus

there are in Paris as in certain

streams in Brazil thousands of little fish whose job this is.°
They are tiny, but innumerable. Their whole head, if I may

say so, is in their teeth. And they completely remove the
flesh from a man in five minutes, leaving nothing but the
bare bones. Then they go away, sleep a little, and begin
again.

From Bossuet:

“The only character that most men

are

capable of is to object if that character is refused them.”
He had even lost that character.

Like those elderly people who, in a big house that once
was full of life and voices, withdraw to a single floor, then
to a single room,

and

then

to the smallest

room

of all,

where they bring together every aspect of life—cloistered
and ready for the narrow hole in the ground, even more
restricted.

APRIL

’50. Cabris again.®

After all, one gets there. It’s hard, but one eventually gets

there. Ah! they’re not much to see. But one forgives them.
As to the two or three persons I love, they are better than
I. How can I accept that? Come now, let’s skip it.
5 The same image is found in The Fall (Alfred A. Knopf, 1957), p. 7.
6 Cabris, where Camus went to rest, is a mile or two from Grasse in

the Alpes-Maritimes.

252

April 1948 — March 1951

Foggy, warm night. In the distance, the lights along the
coast. In the valley, a vast concert of toads, whose voice,

at first melodious, seems to grow hoarse. Those villages of
light, houses . . . “You are a poet and I am on the path of
death.”

A.’s suicide. Completely upset because I liked him
greatly, to be sure, but also because I suddenly realized
that I had a longing to do as he did.

Women at least do not have, as we do, the obligation of
nobility. For men, even faith, even humility are a test of

nobility. Deadly.

There always comes a moment when people give up
struggling and tearing each other apart, willing at last to
like each other for what they are. It’s the kingdom of
heaven.

Enough of guilt—of repentance.

Claudel. That greedy old man flinging himself at the
Communion table to gobble up honors . . . Alas!

Short story. A good day. The middle-aged lady who arrives alone. Cannes.
253

NOTEBOOK

VI

In big novel. Lazarevitch. Adrey. Chatté (and his pretences with strangers).

To grow old is to move from passion to compassion.

The lady who takes calcium phosphate. At the table.
“This poor dog (a beautiful flame-colored spaniel), after
all the brave deeds he performed in Indochina, do you think
he was decorated? Not at all; it seems that in France dogs
are not decorated. But in England they are decorated when
they have a war record. But here! It didn’t matter that he
pointed out all the ambushes of those Chinese; he didn’t
get a thing. Poor dog!”

The tart who frequents bars. “Mail? Not on your life!
I don’t like problems.”

The nineteenth century is the century of revolt. Why?
Because it was born of a thwarted revolution in which
nothing but the divine principle received a fatal blow.

MAY

27, 1950

Solitary. And the fires of love set the world on fire. That is
worth the pain of being born and growing up. But must
one go on living, afterward? Then any life would be justified. But any afterlife?

After The Rebel, free creation.

254

April 1948 — March 1951

How many nights in a life where one has ceased to be!

My work during these first two cycles: persons without
lies, hence not real. They are not of this world. This is
probably why up to now I am not a novelist in the usual
sense. But rather an artist who creates myths to fit his
passion and his anguish. This is also why the persons
who have meant much to me in this world are always
those who had the force and exclusiveness of those myths.

The mad thing about love is that one wants to hurry
and lose the interim. In this way one wants to get closer to
the end. In this way love in one of its aspects coincides
with death.

Camp. An ignorant guard who takes it out on an intellectual. “Take that for your books! So you are intelligent

. .” etc. In the end the intellectual begs to be forgiven.

Men have the difficult face of their knowledge

(those

faces one occasionally encounters, which know). But at

times under the scars there still appears the face of the
adolescent, which gives thanks to life.

In their company

it is not poverty, or destitution, or

humiliation that I felt. Why not say it? I felt and I still
feel my nobility. In the presence of my mother, I feel that

I belong to a noble race: the one that envies nothing.
255

NOTEBOOK

VI

I lived, without restraint, on beauty: eternal bread.

For most men, war is the end of solitude. For me it is
the definitive solitude.

Swift as lightning, a single, dazzling dagger thrust, the
bull’s copulation is chaste. It’s the copulation of a god.
Not enjoyment,
nihilation.

but

a burning

flame

and

sacred

an-

Vosges.” Thanks to the red sandstone, the churches and
calvaries are the color of dried blood. All the blood of conquests and of power flowed over this land and dried on its
sanctuaries.

Useless ethics: life is ethical. Whoever does not give
all does not obtain all.

When one has the luck to live in the universe of the
intelligence, what a folly to long for the terrible world
of violence and passion.

I love all or I love nothing. Hence it is that I love nothing.

End of Deianira. He kills her carefully and gradually
(she was gradually disappearing before his eyes and he
7 Camus
the summer

continued his convalescence in the Vosges Mountains
of 1950.

256

during

April 1948 — March 1951

watched her features dry up, with a frightful hope and
a painful sob of love). She dies. He recovers the other
woman, again young and beautiful. A delightful love rose
again in his heart. “I love you,” he told her.

Spiritual exercises
nolence in prayer.

of St. Ignatius—to

forestall som-

All the power of knowledge today aims at strengthening
the State. Not a single scholar has thought of applying
his research to the defense of the individual. Yet that is
where a freemasonry would have a meaning.

If our era were merely tragic! But it is revolting. This
is why it must be brought to trial—and forgiven.
I. The Myth of Sisyphus (absurd) — II. The Myth of
Prometheus (revolt) — HI. The Myth of Nemesis.

J. de Maistre: “I don’t know what the soul of a scoundrel
is like, but I think I know what the soul of a respectable
man is like, and it’s enough to make one shudder.”

Throw open the prisons or prove your virtue.

Maistre: “Woe to the generations that speak to the
epochs of the world.” Like that Chinese sage who, when
he wished someone ill, expressed the wish that he would
live in an “interesting” epoch.
257

NOTEBOOK

VI

Baudelaire. The world has acquired such a thick veneer
of vulgarity that it confers on the spiritual man’s scorn
the violence’ of a passion.

Unterlinden. “All my life I have dreamed of the peace
of the cloister.” (And probably I could not have put up with
it more than a month. )

Europe of the shopkeeper. Heartbreaking.
Commitment. I have the loftiest idea, and the most passionate one, of art. Much too lofty to agree to subject it
to anything. Much too passionate to want to divorce it
from anything.
“For him love was impossible. He was entitled only to
lies and adultery.”
Claudel. Vulgar mind.
SAVOIE.

SEPTEMBER

’50

People who, like M., are eternal emigrants seeking a home
eventually find it, but only in suffering.

Suffering and its often ugly face. But one must live in
it and off it in order to pay the price. Destroy oneself in

suffering because
8 The word
(“nobility”).

of having dared

in the manuscript

might

destroy others.

be either

violence

258

or noblesse

April 1948 — March 1951

Novel. “He recalled that one day, in one of those painful
scenes, while the feeling of a frightful future was growing
in him, she told him

she had

sworn

never

to belong

to

anyone else, and that, with him gone, there would never be

anyone else. And just as she thought she was sealing their
love in the most irremediable way, as she was doing so
indeed, just as she thought she was binding him and fusing
him with her, the thought came to him on the other hand
that he was

liberated, that it was

time to flee and leave

her, sure of her absolute fidelity and sterility. But he remained that day—as he was accustomed.”

PARIS.

SEPTEMBER

’50

What I have to say is more important that what I am.
Step aside and push aside.

Progress: to avoid telling a beloved person of the anguish
he brings us.

The fear of suffering.

Faulkner. To the question: What do you think of the
young generation of writers, he replies: It will leave
nothing behind. It has nothing more to say. In order to
write, one must have the basic truths deeply rooted in
one and have centered one’s work on one of them or all at
once. Those who don’t know how to speak of pride, of
honor, of suffering are inconsequential and their work will
die with them or before they die. Goethe and Shakespeare
resisted everything because they believed in the human
259

NOTEBOOK

VI

heart. Balzac and Flaubert likewise. They are eternal.
“What is the reason for the nihilism that has invaded
writing?”
“Fear. The moment men cease being afraid, they will
begin again writing masterpieces, in other words lasting
works.”

Sorel: “Disciples call upon their master to close the
epoch of doubts by contributing definitive solutions.”

There

is no doubt

that every ethic requires a little

cynicism. Where is the limit?

Pascal: “I spent a great part of my life in the belief that
there was a justice; and in this I was not wrong; for there

is one insofar as God has been willing to reveal it to us.
But this is not the way I thought of it and this is where
I was wrong; for I believed that our justice was basically
just and that I was capable of knowing and judging it.”

N. (The Hellenes.) “Daring of noble races, mad, absurd,

spontaneous daring . . . their indifference and their scorn
for every security of the body, for life and comfort.”

Novel. “Love is fulfilled or it degrades. The more it is
thwarted, the greater is the mutilation it eventually leaves.
If love is not creative, it prevents any true creation forever.

It is

a

tyrant

and

a

petty

tyrant.

Consequently

P.

suffered from having become involved in loving without
260

April 1948 — March 1951

being able to give all to that love. In that mad waste of
time and of soul, he recognized a sort of justice which in
the end was the only one he had ever really encountered on
this earth. But to recognize that justice was also to recognize a duty: the duty of raising that love, and themselves,
above the petty, of accepting the most terrible but the
frankest anguish, the kind that had always made him
withdraw with pounding heart, filled with cowardice. He
could do no more nor be otherwise, and the only love that
would have saved all was a love that would have accepted
him for what he was. But love cannot accept what is.
That’s not the reason it cries out everywhere on earth. It
cries

out

to refuse

kindness,

compassion,

intelligence,

everything that leads to compromise. It cries out toward
the impossible, the absolute, the sky on fire, inexhaustible
springtime, life after death, and death itself transfigured in
eternal life. How could he have been accepted in love, he
who was only misery in a certain way, and awareness of
that misery? He alone could accept himself—by accepting
the long, interminable, and painful suffering of losing love
and knowing that he had lost it through his own fault. That
was

his freedom,

bathed

in a terrible blood, to be sure.

But it was also the condition for something at least to be
created within the limits that belonged to him, in the consecration of his own misery and of the misery of any life,
but also in the effort toward nobility that alone justified it.
“Short

of that torture,

any weakness

makes

love look

childish and stupid, makes of it that empty, pale restraint
at which even a slightly exacting heart eventually baulks.
Yes, this is what should be said: ‘I love you—but I am
nothing, or very little, and you cannot really accept me
despite all your love, for basically, deep within you, you

demand all and I neither have nor am all; forgive me for
having less soul than love, less luck than desire, and for
261

NOTEBOOK

VI

loving beyond my reach. Forgive me and cease humiliating
me. When you are no longer capable of love for me, you
will be capable of justice. Then you will measure my hell
and you will love me above ourselves with a love that will
never be able to suffice me either but which I shall none-

theless attribute to life, to accept it once more, in anguish.’
Yes, this was right, but then the hardest began. With her
absent, the days cried out, every night was a wound.”

The strongest passion of the twentieth century: slavery.

At Brou, the reclining statues of Marguerite of Austria
and Philibert of Savoie, instead of facing the sky, are facing

each other eternally.®

Whoever has not insisted upon absolute virginity in people and the world, and screamed with nostalgia and impotence at the impossibility of achieving it, whoever has
not been destroyed through trying to love, as second best,

a face that cannot invent love and merely repeats it, cannot understand the reality of revolt and its rage to destroy.

Action Frangaise. Mentality of history’s outcasts:
sentment. Race theory of the political ghetto.

I don’t like others’ secrets. But I am
confessions.

interested in their

9The ornate late-Gothic church of Brou at Bourg-en-Bresse with
elaborate tomb is a memorial to Marguerite’s love for her husband.
1 See The Rebel

re-

(Alfred A. Knopf, 1954), p. 230.

262

its

April 1948
— March 1951

Play: A man without personality. And he changes according to the image others offer him of himself. Poor
dishrag with his wife. Intelligent and courageous with the
woman he loves, etc. . . . Finally one day the two images
conflict. In the end:
The maid: “Monsieur is very good.”
He:

“Here, Marie, this is for you.”

Few people capable of understanding art.

In the time of Rembrandt, the commercial artists paint
battle scenes.

Paris. The wind and rain have hurled the autumn leaves
onto the pavement. You walk on a damp, tawny fur.

A Negro taxi driver, exceptionally courteous for the
Paris of 1950, says to me as we pass in front of the
Comédie-Frangaise surrounded by cars: “The House of
Moliére is full tonight.”

For the past two thousand years the Greek value has
been constantly and persistently slandered. In this regard
Marxism took over from Christianity. And for two thousand years the Greek value has resisted to such a degree
that, under its ideologies, the twentieth century is more
Greek and pagan than Christian and Russian.
263

NOTEBOOK

VI

Intellectuals make the theory and the masses make the
economy. In the end the intellectuals make use of the
masses and through them the theory makes use of
the economy. This is why they must maintain the state of
siege and the economic enslavement—so that the masses
will remain manual laborers. It is quite true that economics
make up the matter of history. Ideas are satisfied with
directing it.

Henceforth I knew the truth about myself and about
others. But I could not accept it. I writhed under it, burned
red-hot.

The creators. They will have to fight at first, when the
catastrophe comes. If the result is defeat, the survivors will
go to lands where it will be possible to assemble culture
again: Chile, Mexico, etc. If it’s victory: the greatest danger.

Eighteenth century: To conclude that man is perfectible
is itself debatable. But to conclude, after having lived, that

man is good...

Yes, I have a native land: the French language.

Novel

1) Capture of Weimar, or the equivalent, by those who
have been struck off the list.?
2) In the camp a proud intellectual is subjected to the
2 Probably those deported to concentration

camps.

264

April 1948—March

1951

spitting cell.? His whole life from that moment on: to survive in order to be able to kill.

Dissolution of the group.* Lazarevitch: “We love one
another, that’s true. Incapable of raising a finger for what
we love. No, we are not powerless. But we refuse to do even

the little we could do. A meeting is a nuisance, if it’s raining, if we have had trouble at home, etc., etc... .”

Dishonesty of the artist when he pretends to believe in
the democracy of principles. For then he negates the most
basic thing in his experience, which is the great lesson of
art: hierarchy and order. The fact that such dishonesty is
sentimental doesn’t help. It leads to the slavery of factories
and concentration camps.

S. Weil is right; it’s not the human being that must be
protected, but the possibilities within him.

Moreover,

she

says, “one doesn’t enter truth without having passed
through one’s own annihilation, without having lived at

length in a state of total and extreme humiliation.” The
misfortune

(a chance can wipe me out) is that state of

humiliation, not anguish. And again: “The spirit of justice
and the spirit of truth are one.”

The revolutionary spirit rejects original sin. By so doing,
it sinks into it. The Greek spirit doesn’t think of it. By so
doing, it escapes it.
3 See The Fall (Alfred A. Knopf, 1957), pp. 10-11, where the spitting

cell is described.
4 The group of Liaisons Internationales founded
of any totalitarian regime.

to succor the victims

265

NOTEBOOK

VI

Madmen in concentration camps. At liberty, the butt
of cruel jokes.

During the flogging, at Buchenwald, an opera singer is

forced to sing his great arias.

Id. Jehovah’s witnesses, at Buchenwald, refused to take

part in the collection of woolens for the German army.

At Hinzert, the French prisoners wore two capital letters
on their clothing: H N for Hunde-Nation: nation of dogs.

It’s because France is a military nation that Communism
has a chance there.

Play.

“That’s honesty for you. It does harm while thinking
it’s doing good.”

“Yes, but it’s distinguishing.”
The principle of law is that of the State. Roman principle
that 1789 reintroduced into the world through force and
against the right. We must return to the Greek principle,
which is autonomy.

Text on the sea. The waves, saliva of the gods. The sea
monster, the sea to be overcome, etc. My excessive liking

for pleasure.
266

April 1948—March

1951

Alexandre Jacob: “A mother, you see, is humanity.”

Leibniz: “I despise almost nothing.”
JANUARY

23,

51

—

I had shouted,

demanded,

Valence
exulted, despaired. But at the

age of thirty-seven, one day I made the acquaintance of
misfortune and found out what, despite appearances, I had
not known until then. Around the middle of my life I had
to learn all over again painfully how to live alone.

Novel. “I who had lived so long, bewailing, in the world
of the flesh, admired those like S.W. who seemed to escape
it. As far as I was concerned, I could not imagine a love
without possession, hence without the humiliating anguish
that belongs to those who live according to the flesh. I went
so far as to prefer that a person who loved me should
preserve physical fidelity rather than that of the soul and
the heart. I was well enough aware that for a woman the
latter fidelity conditions the former and I used to insist on
it then, but merely as the condition of that exclusive possession that mattered more to me than all the rest. It was
my personal salvation, for being deprived of it was an endless source of torture. My paradise lay in the virginity of
others.”
Grasse, the capital of hairdressers’ assistants.
Go back to the passage from Hellenism to Christianity,
the true and only turning point in history. Essay on fate
(Nemesis?).
267

NOTEBOOK

VI

Collection philosophical essays. Philosophy of expression+commentary first book of Ethics+reflections on

Hegel (lectures on philosophy of history) + Grenier essay+
commentary Apology of Socrates.

“Liberty is a gift of the sea.” Proudhon.

What I have so long sought becomes apparent at last.
Dying becomes a consent.

February 5. To die without having settled anything.
But who dies having settled everything, except... ? To
settle at least the peace of those one has loved . . . To oneself nothing is due, not even (especially not) death in
peace.

February

1951.5 The Rebel. I wanted

to tell the truth

without ceasing to be generous. That’s my justification.

Work, etc. 1) Essay on the sea. Put together book of
essays: The Holiday. 2) Preface to American edition of
Plays. 3) Preface to American edition of essays.® 4) Translation Timon of Athens. 5) Love of the remote. 6) The
eternal voice.
5 The manuscript reads 1950, but this is presumably an error.
6 Camus did indeed write brief but significant prefaces for the Alfred
A. Knopf editions of The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays (1955)
and Caligula and Three Other Plays (1958). Apparently he never trans-

lated the Shakespeare play.

268

April 1948—March

Ignatius Loyola:
ordered.”

“Conversation

1951

is a sin if it is dis-

After The Rebel. Aggressive, obstinate rejection of the
system. The aphorism henceforth.

Loyola. The human race: “Those men in a body moving
toward hell.”

Short story. The anguish of death. And he commits
suicide.

Petty breed of Parisian writers who cultivate what they
believe to be insolence. Servants who at one and the same
time ape the great and mock them in the pantry.

I used to long at times for a violent death—as a death
which excuses one from crying out at the tearing away of
the soul. At other times I would dream of a protracted and
constantly lucid end so that it could not be said at least that

I had been taken by surprise—in my absence—to find out,
in short .. . But one stifles, in the earth.

MARCH

I, ‘51

It’s by delaying his conclusions, even when they seem to
him evident, that a philosopher progresses.
269

NOTEBOOK

VI

A spectacular virtue that leads to denying one’s passions.
A higher virtue that leads to balancing them.

My powerful native tendency for forgetting.

If I were to die unknown to the world, in the depths of
a cold prison, at the last moment the sea would fill my
cell, would come

and raise me

above myself and help me

to die without hate.”

MARCH

7,

I95I1

Finished the first writing of The Rebel. With this book the
first two cycles come

to an end. Thirty-seven years old.

And now, can creation be free?

Any fulfillment is a bondage. It obliges one to a higher
fulfillment.
7 See “La Mer au plus prés” in L’Eté.

270

BIOGRAPHICAL

NOTE

The dates spanned by Volume Two of the Notebooks include
the second half of the war and the adjustment of the succeeding years. At the beginning of this period, Albert Camus was a
young journalist living on a mountain farm in central France.
His tubercular condition, diagnosed as early as 1930, had kept

him from active service in the war. Yet he had gone from his
native Algeria to Paris in March 1940 as managing editor of
the daily Paris-Soir, after the closing of the Algerian paper
where he had begun his journalistic career. Then had come the
exodus from Paris, during which he and his paper had moved
to Clermont-Ferrand in the so-called “Free Zone.” In January
1941 he had returned

to Algeria, then a part of Metropolitan

France, with his young wife, whom he had married in Lyons a
month earlier, to teach in a private school in Oran. There he
had finished his essay The Myth of Sisyphus, as he had earlier

finished his novel The Stranger, during the exodus.
When he returned to the mainland of France in the summer
of 1941, without his wife and without a specific plan, he was
moved chiefly by considerations of health. To return to that
war-torn, enemy-patrolled country when all who could were
leaving it required courage. Plans for the publication of his two
books in Paris in 1942 were already simmering, but his was not
simply the classic case of the sensitive youth blossoming in his
remote province and then being drawn inevitably to the capital.
Nor was he yet a member of the Resistance with a precise role
to play; he tells us himself that only the execution of the former
Deputy Gabriel Péri in December

1941 caused him to see the

need for a civilian Resistance.
Soon after settling in the spring of 1942 in the mountains
near Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, from where he could reach the
a77

BIOGRAPHICAL

NOTE

city of Saint-Etienne for regular treatments, he began meeting
other scattered writers such as Francis Ponge and the young

poet René Leynaud, who was later caught and executed as an
underground leader. The Allied landing in North Africa on the
eleventh

of November

1942

prevented

him

returning

from

home. He did not see his wife or his mother for the duration
of the hostilities.
In November 1943 Camus, now the author of two much
discussed books published in 1942 in Paris (L’Etranger and
Le Mythe de Sisyphe), moved to Paris, where a position as

editor in the Gallimard publishing house provided a raison
d’étre. He joined Pascal Pia, with whom he had already worked
on Alger-Républicain and Paris-Soir, in editing the clandestine

paper Combat. Then it was that he began to occupy André
Gide’s apartment at 1 bis rue Vaneau, vacated by its owner,
who had gone to safer regions.
From late 1943 until the Germans were driven out of France,

Albert Camus played an ever more important and increasingly
dangerous role as a highly articulate spokesman for the intellectual underground and as a member of an intelligence network. Even though many of his friends and associates were
arrested, often tortured

and executed,

he carried

on with his

stirring editorials and his day-to-day clandestine activities. The
public read his anonymous writings with the same avidity and
the same sense of danger with which they listened to the verboten news broadcast by the BBC. Foreseeing the Liberation,
Camus planned long in advance and then at the strategic moment took over by force the printing plant of a big collaborationist newspaper so that his own Combat could appear openly
in a suitable format while the last enemy pockets were being
wiped out.
Throughout 1942 and 1943, while reading widely in all
literatures, Camus was already writing his novel La Peste (The
Plague) and his second play, Le Malentendu (The Misunderstanding),

under

the unlikely title of Budejovice.

The

same

passion for the theater which had made him start his own
acting company at the age of twenty-three and direct plays in
Algerian cities led him to rewrite his first play, Caligula, the
first draft of which was done largely in 1938. Yet clandestine

272

Biographical Note

journalism still occupied much of his time. The first of his
stirring Lettres a un ami allemand (included in Resistance,
Rebellion, and Death) appeared in the underground Revue
Libre in 1943. In November

of that year, Camus

reached the

age of thirty.
August 1944 marked the Liberation of Paris and the end of

the shameful Occupation. But before then Camus had met
Sartre and had seen the joint publication of his own two plays
in May and the presentation of the new one, Le Malentendu,
at the Mathurins Theater with Maria Casarés and Marcel Herrand in the chief roles. He was deeply moved by the execution
of his friend René Leynaud in June and had assumed the
editorship of Combat even before it could be published openly
in August. Meanwhile he continued writing La Peste and began
L’Homme révolté (The Rebel).

In 1945 the first fragment of L’Homme révolté was published
in a collection of contemporary metaphysical writings entitled
L’Existence. In October Caligula was finally staged at the Hébertot Theater with the young Gérard Philipe in the title role.
That fall Camus revisited the village of Lourmarin, near Aix-enProvence,

where

in 1958,

after he won

the Nobel

Prize, he

bought a house, and where he is now buried.
From March

to May 1946, Albert Camus

traveled in North

America; he had given up the editorship of Combat, although he
continued to write for it sporadically. The periodical L’Arche
published “The Minotaur or the Stop in Oran,” which was in-

cluded in his book L’Eté (Summer). Late in the year he held
dialogues in Paris with Malraux,

Sartre, and others about the

role of the intellectual in politics.
In early 1947 he again assumed the editorship of Combat,
but he soon handed it over to Claude Bourdet. In June, Galli-

mard published La Peste, which won the Prix des Critiques.
That summer the posthumous poems of René Leynaud also
appeared, with a preface by Camus. Again, for reasons of
health, he returned to Panelier near Le Chambon-sur-Lignon.
Except for a trip to Algeria in February, 1948 was devoted
to writing the play Les Justes (The Just Assassins) and work-

ing on the long essay L’Homme révolté. Late in the year, at the
Marigny

Theater,

Jean-Louis

Barrault

presented
273

L’Etat

de

BIOGRAPHICAL

NOTE

siége (State of Siege), the play on which he had been such a
help to Camus.
In December 1949 Les Justes was presented at the Hébertot
Theater, with Serge Reggiani and Maria Casarés.
Les Justes and Actuelles I, a collection of Camus’s earlier
political articles (see Resistance, Rebellion, and Death), were

both published in 1950. During that year Camus spent much
time in convalescence at Cabris near the South Coast of France
and in the Vosges Mountains. In Paris he settled into an apartment on the rue Madame.
When this volume of Notebooks ends, Camus had just

finished L’Homme
1951

révolté. Its publication later that year of

stirred up a storm

of controversy.

In November

Camus became thirty-eight.
Justin O’Brien

274

1951

—_

-

1

:

——

* pant
——

‘

=“
=

od

Cone

:

as

‘a-D-

ies é&

te SS
Be Se
i

a
e
a
e
‘

adie

'

sib

>

aur’

amr

phe pace

‘=

me ch

a
ee
han at oat Shcomes
g AA &
en
a
og
oe
eer
is

.

aoaie

AS

: .

oe

—

,

bee

A Note on the Type
THE TEXT of this book was set on the Linotype in a new face called PRIMER, designed
by Rudolph Ruzicka, earlier responsible for
the design of Fairfield and Fairfield Medium, Linotype faces whose virtues have
for some time now been accorded wide
recognition.
The complete range of sizes of Primer
was first made available in 1954, although
the pilot size of 12 point was ready as
early as 1951. The design of the face
makes general reference to Linotype Century (long a serviceable type, totally lacking in manner or frills of any kind) but
brilliantly corrects the characterless quality
of that face.
Composed, printed, and bound by
The Haddon Craftsmen, Inc., Scranton, Pa.
Typography and binding design by
GEORGE
SALTER

iat

—
%
a

.

mts

=

i

hs

+

:
i
Cr

-

>?

a>

‘Spa
>

=

we

a

ss

q

eG

/

oo
=

7

=e.

2

su

a,”
Ve

=»

my

Ga

=

7G

7

7

*

dt By tan So:

oeee

=

o,
- Bses
~
7

“=<

ah

bir

‘

=

let "

i

“2
=~

led =

i

x

y
on

ou

a

=

pa

tess
=

are

ALBERT

CAMUS

was born in Mondovi,

Algeria, in 1913. In 1942, while France

was still under the Occupation, he published his first novel, The Stranger, and

the essay The Myth of Sisyphus. Other
major works published during the period
covered by these Notebooks include The
Plague, The Rebel, and all of his important plays. The Fall appeared in 1956 and
Exile and the Kingdom in 1957, the same
year that Camus was awarded the Nobel
Prize for Literature. On January 4, 1960,

he was killed in an automobile accident.
Justin O’Brien has included with this
volume a complete biographical record of
the years 1942-51.

Alfred:A:Knopf, Publisher
NEW

YORK

ws

PRINTED
U.S.A.
IN

=

HA ONY

'V GATT

fe
fetter
aise

+ LIGRHD

3

