at (ao mbat

WRITING 1944-1947
nee

Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi
he:

a

With a foreword by David Carroll
= ay

80
ONE WEEK LOAN
Renew Books on PHONE-it: 01443 654456
Help Desk: 01443 482625
Media Services Reception: 01443 482610
Books are to be returned on or before the last date below

Treforest Learning Resources Centre
University of Glamorgan CF37 1DL

CAMUS at Combat

CAMUS

at Combat

Writing 1944-1947
EDITED AND ANNOTATED BY
JACQUELINE LEVI-VALENSI

FOREWORD

BY DAVID CARROLL

TRANSLATED BY ARTHUR GOLDHAMMER

PRINCETON

UNIVERSITY

PRINCETON

AND

OXFORD

PRESS

wo &

z9

ets

‘a

yA ee

agoano”

pak Resources
ventre

12960217
Copyright © 2006 by Princeton University Press
French edition © Editions Gallimard, Paris, 2002

Camus 4 Combat: Editoriaux et articles (1944-1947)
Edition de Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 3 Market Place, Woodstock,

Oxfordshire OX20 1SY
All Rights Reserved

Second printing, and first paperback printing, 2007
Paperback ISBN: 978-0-691-13376-8

The Library of Congress has cataloged the cloth edition of this book as follows
Camus, Albert, 1913-1960.

[Camus 4 Combat. English]

Camus at Combat : writing 1944-1947 / edited and annotated by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi;
foreword by David Carroll ; translated by Arthur Goldhammer.
» cm:
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-691-12004-1
ISBN-10: 0-691-12004-8
1. World War, 1939-1945—Underground literature—France.

2. World War, 1939-1945—

Underground movements—France.
3. Politics and literature—France—History—20th
century. 4. Combat (Paris, France: 1940) 5. Camus, Albert, 1913-1960.
6. France—
History— German occupation, 1940-1945.
I. Lévi-Valensi, Jacqueline. II. Goldhammer,
Arthur.
III. Title.
D802.F8C34413 2006

844'914—de22

2005040564

This work is published with the support of the French Ministry of Culrure—
Centre Nationale du Livre
Ouvrage publié avec le concours du Ministére francais chargé de la culture—
Centre nationale du livre
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Adobe Garamond and Helvetica Neue

Printed on acid-free paper. 00

press.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
LO

DS Sie

GPS

mes ee

CONTENTS

Foreword by David Carroll
Preface

Acknowledgments
Introduction by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi

Thematic Classification
CHAPTER 1

Combat Underground: March—July 1944

CHAPTER 2 August 21, 1944—November 15, 1945

CHAPTER 3 November 19-30, 1946
CHAPTER 4

March 17-June 3, 1947

CHAPTER5

1948-1949

Chronology of Principal Events,

Partial Bibliography

1944-1948

FOREWORD

Albert Camus—Political Journalist: Democracy
in an Age of Terror
Our twentieth century is the century of fear... . We live in terror.
—ALBERT CAMUS,

“The Century of Fear” (Combat, November 19, 1946)

I have always believed that if people who placed their hopes in the human
condition were mad, those who despaired of events were cowards. Hence-

forth there will be only one honorable choice: to wager everything on the
belief that in the end words will prove stronger than bullets.
—ALBERT CAMUS,

“Toward Dialogue” (Combat, November 30, 1946)

In the fall of 1943, at the age of thirty and having recently recovered from a recur-

rence of tuberculosis, Albert Camus joined the Resistance and began writing articles for the clandestine Resistance newspaper Combat. Generally unknown
outside of Algeria before he published The Stranger and The Myth of Sisyphus in
occupied Paris in 1942, Camus began work as a reader for the Editions Gallimard
in November 1943 and at approximately the same time became editor in chief of
Combat, a newspaper that represented various Resistance groups and that had
been published irregularly since December 1941. The texts included in the present collection and admirably translated by Arthur Goldhammer comprise the
editorials and articles written by Camus for Combat from 1944 to 1947, along

with four short articles he published in 1948 and 1949.
Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi, the noted Camus scholar who has both edited and
provided indispensable historical notes for this collection, has indicated that
Camus published a total of 165 entries in Combat between August 21, 1944, and

June 3, 1947: 138 editorials and 27 articles, with his most productive period
between August 21 and November 30, 1944, when he contributed 70 editorials
and 7 articles.' The present volume includes the articles signed by Camus, a

1 These figures are given by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi in one of the two introductions she wrote for the
original French edition of this collection. She acknowledges that of the seventy editorials attributed to

Vill

FOREWORD

number of others he did not sign but for which there is strong supporting
evidence that he was the author, and those whose style and mode of argumentation suggest that they were also written by him.”
What is the relevance of this collection of editorials and articles today? First of
all, it is of obvious historical interest, since Camus’ editorials vividly describe the
most important events of the immediate postwar period and analyze the major
political issues faced by France from the liberation of Paris through the early
years of the Cold War. It would be difficult to imagine’a livelier “historian of the
moment” (which is Camus’ expression for journalists), and at the same time a
more reflective, critical guide to these chaotic times than Albert Camus. It certainly does not detract from the interest of these essays that their author was a
recognized novelist, playwright, and essayist who would win the Nobel Prize
in 1957 and who for the time he was editor in chief of Combat
was also writing
The Plague (1947), and allegorical account of the Resistance that presents in a

fictional context the most important moral and political issues originally
addressed in his editorials.
But if Camus’ editorials for Combat have both an obvious historical and literary interest, their primary interest is above all political. For along with his
Resistance comrades at Combat, Camus was fully engaged not only as a journalist in reporting the news but also in the daily political struggles for freedom, first
in occupied and later in liberated France. In addition, in his most important editorials, he contributed to the debates concerning the restoration of democracy in

France and analyzed the larger political issues that would shape the postwar
period and in fact the rest of the twentieth century—issues that continue to concern us today.

From Enthusiasm to Terror

Along with his comrades at Combat, Camus enthusiastically supported the idea
of a “liberal revolution” that would result in the formation of a social democracy
in France. His support of “revolution” might surprise some readers, given that
Camus would publish an extremely harsh critique of revolution in L’'Homme
Camus during this period, nine would have to be considered only “probable” in terms of Camus’s author-

ship (“Un écrivain face 4 lhistoire,” Camus 2 Combat, Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi, ed. [Paris: Gallimard,

2002}, 70). From the time Camus joined the editorial staff of Combat in September 1944 until the end
of 1945, Lévi-Valensi calculates that he wrote “133 editorials—of which 92 were signed or authenticated—
and 16 articles, one of which is only probable” (72). After September 1945, Camus no longer regularly

contributed editorials to the journal.

? During its clandestine period, the editors of Combat naturally could not publish their names in the
paper. After the liberation of Paris, on August 27 and 28, 1944, the editors are for the first time listed in
the following way: “Albert Camus, Henri Frédéric, Marcel Gimont, Albert Olivier and Pascal Pia currently
edit Combat after having edited it underground.” On November 3, 1944, another formula is used and
will continued to be used until October 1945: “Editorial Committee: Pascal Pia, Director; Albert Camus,
editor in chief; Marcel Gimont and Albert Ollivier” (Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi, “Un journal dans histoire,”
in Camus 4 Combat, 46).

FOREWORD

ix

révolté (The Rebel) in 1951.° But after the rout of the French army at the beginning of the war, the destruction of the Third Republic by the parliamentary vote
that granted Maréchal Pétain “full powers” and thus absolute authority, followed
by four years of German Occupation and Vichy rule, it is not difficult to imagine the reasons for such enthusiasm for both democracy and social justice on the
part of a writer such as Camus, whose political commitments and journalistic
experience before the war had been on the political left.
It was precisely because their political commitments were on the left that
Camus and his fellow editorialists at Combat refused to accept a return to the
compromised values and practices of the French Third Republic or the formation of a new Republic that would be democratic in name only. But because of
the passion of his political commitments and the clarity, sincerity, and force of
his writing, Camus quickly became one of the most influential voices on the
non-Communist left demanding that an important role be given to the Resistance in postwar French governments—for all factions within the Resistance,
including Communists.
Camus’ earliest postwar articles argue for the creation of a social-democratic
state out of the ruins of Vichy France. They express confidence that because of
the horrible experience of the war and the sacrifices made by those who actively
opposed Nazi tyranny the French people as a whole would be willing and able to
overcome their political differences and work together to form a truly democratic
state in the same way factions of the Resistance had been able to work together
to defeat a common enemy. The writer of these articles clearly believed that after
the war the French had both a unique opportunity and an obligation to get
democracy right. Camus’ editorials remind us once again that what is most often
accepted as democracy is not all that democracy necessarily could or should be.
Camus argues in numerous editorials that protection of individual freedoms
without the guarantee of social justice would not only perpetuate or exacerbate
existing social and economic inequities but also lead to the further limitation or
even destruction of the freedom of the poor and the oppressed. On the other
hand, to sacrifice freedom in order to pursue the goal of social justice would
inevitably result in the formation of an oppressive, centralized, bureaucratic state
in which equality was abstract rather than real. If Communists and Catholics,
socialists and Gaullists, conservative nationalists and revolutionary internationalists could work together in the Resistance in a common struggle for freedom
and justice, Camus saw no reason why French society as a whole, and ultimately

3 In his preface to the publication of a selection of his essays from Combat in Actuelles I: Chroniques
1944-1948 (Paris: Gallimard, 1950), Camus describes his journalistic experience in the following way:

“This volume represents the experience of a writer involved for four years in the public life of his country... . This experience ends, as is only natural, with the loss of several illusions and the reinforcement of
a more profound conviction. . . . To tell the truth, I cannot read one or two [of the editorials] today without distress and sadness, and I had to make a real effort in order to republish them” (Albert Camus,
“Avant-Propos,” Essais [Paris: Gallimard, 1965], 251; all translations from the Essais are my own).

x

FOREWORD

the entire world community, could not work together in the same way. But this
could happen only if what he called ideological “abstractions” did not determine
the politics of each group, only if politics could be made more “moral” and less
ideological.*
“The introduction of the language of morality into politics” is in fact one of
the constant themes of the editorials Camus wrote for Combat, but the meaning
of this phrase is not what might at first be assumed. It certainly does not mean
that Camus believed that politics should conform to a particular moral or religious system, since he distrusted all systems, whether religious, moral, or political. It was also not meant to encourage a withdrawal from politics, but on the
contrary a more critical, self-reflexive, and “moral” form of political commitment,
which, for example, might appear to “give with one hand what we seem to take
away with the other. . . . What this comes down to is saying yes and no at the
same time, and saying both with the same seriousness and the same objectivity”
(October 7, 1944). Camus is of course not advocating here either crass oppor-

tunism or the superficial support of one political position and then another.
Rather, he is highlighting what he feels is or should be the contradictory nature
of all political commitment and demanding that no commitment be blind or
total, no matter what cause is being defended or what end is being pursued.
If there should be a “no” at the core of every “yes,” it is in order to create a
space for questioning, doubt, and critical judgment. It is also to impose limits on
all political action and thus to ensure that not everything will be permitted in the
pursuit of any cause, no matter how noble. The ultimate limit that Camus will
impose on political involvement, the “no” that always be uttered, is the refusal to
accept the murder of innocent civilians as a legitimate means to any end. This
principle applies both to civilians targeted by the military during war and those
who would be the victims of terrorist acts outside of war. It would apply as much
to the French Resistance during World War II as to FLN terrorism and French
counterterrorist activities during the Algerian War. There was in fact no cause to
which Camus would ever have said simply “yes’—especially if “yes” meant that
murder would have to be excused and defended.
As the experience of the Resistance faded into the past and the euphoria of the
Liberation lessened with time, Camus articles for Combat gradually took on a less
enthusiastic, more critical tone. I would suggest that this was due in large part to
what his essays present as three major failures of French democracy in the immediate postwar period. The first failure, which occurred immediately after the
“In arguing that the Resistance should have a major role in postwar governments, Camus characterizes
the revolution he advocates as one in which politics would be replaced with morality: “The affairs of this
country should be managed by those who paid and answered for it. In other words, we are determined to
replace politics with morality. That is what we call a revolution” (September 4, 1944). In another editorial Camus acknowledges how easy it is for “morality” to degenerate into “moralism”: “If we point out the

limitations of certain ideas or political actions, we are naturally aware of our own limitations as well, and
we try to make up for them by adhering to two or three basic principles. But reporting the news is a
demanding business, and the boundary between morality and moralism is never clear. Sometimes one
crosses it owing to fatigue or negligence” (November 22, 1944).

FOREWORD

xi

Liberation, resulted from the inability of the French to deal effectively and, more
important, justly with the traitors and criminals of the war period in the purge trials (/épuration). The second was the failure of France to recognize the injustices of

colonialism and to uphold the same democratic principles in its colonies for which
the Resistance had fought and which the French people demanded for themselves.
The third major failure of democracy was related to the inadequacy of the free press
in general, but particularly to Combars own inability to remain independent and
thus in Camus’ terms faithful to its democratic mission. Taken together these particular failures represented a general failure in or of democracy itself.
This explains why at the end of Camus’ service as editor in chief of Combat,
there is little evidence in his editorials of the enthusiasm characteristic of his earliest articles. The main problem he confronts in his later articles, and especially
the last major series of articles he published in Combat under the title “Neither
Victims nor Executioners” (November 19-30, 1946), is no longer how to move
from the Resistance (revolt) to revolution (social democracy), but rather how to

work effectively for freedom and justice in an increasingly oppressive climate of
terror. It is not just how to defend democracy from its totalitarian enemies but
also how to defend democracy from itself. I shall focus primarily on the editorials that analyze the failures of democracy in postwar France, for in them we get
the best picture of what Camus meant by and expected of democracy—and of
what still could be expected of democracy today.

The Failure of Justice: The Purge Trials

No issue was more difficult for Camus to deal with, no issue in its harsh reality
clashed more directly with his dreams of creating a social democracy in France
in which justice would prevail, than the one the French confronted immediately
at the time of the Liberation: how to deal with French collaborators, especially

those who had committed atrocious crimes, ordered or encouraged others to
commit them, or supported policies that resulted either directly or indirectly in
the imprisonment, torture, deportation, or death of others. This included both
important and insignificant officials of the Vichy regime, members of the French
Milice,’ and opportunistic or ideologically committed collaborationist journalists and intellectuals.
It is clear from reading his earliest articles on the purge that Camus felt very
strongly that too many members of the Resistance and too many innocent civilians had been tortured, too many had been deported, too many had died, to pardon those responsible for the crimes committed against them. For to pardon
them would be to forget or ignore the sacrifices made by the victims. No legitimate republic could be formed until the matter of how to deal with the wide
range of collaborators was resolved, for to act as if the sacrifices of so many
> The Milice was a paramilitary organization created in 1943 by Joseph Darnand, Vichy secretary of state,
to support German actions taken against the Resistance and to aid in the arrest and deportation of Jews.

ee

FOREWORD

Xi

victims of Nazi and Vichy oppression did not really matter would be to found a
republic on the basis of the denial of those who had given their lives to make the
Republic possible. Justice demanded that the victims of Nazi and Vichy crimes
not be forgotten and that the criminals responsible for the worst crimes be punished severely—which meant that those guilty of the worst crimes should themselves be executed.
As was the case with all the most controversial issues of the post-Liberation
period, Camus was at the center of debates over how extensively and severely to
punish collaborators and which crimes actually merited the death penalty.
Camus, like most of those involved in the Resistance, initially supported the
harshest punishment for those responsible for the most heinous crimes, and even
before the Liberation, Combat, like other Resistance journals, denounced the
crimes of collaborators both to encourage more of the French to join the Resistance and to threaten those who continued to collaborate with the consequences
of their acts. For example, an article attributed to Camus and appearing in
Combat during the period when it was still being published clandestinely refers
to the members of the French Milice as “rotten branches that cannot be left
attached to the tree” but should be “lopped off, reduced to sawdust, and scattered
on the ground. . . . Courts-martial would be pointless, moreover. The Milice is
its own tribunal. It has judged itself and sentenced itself to death. Those sentences
will be carried out” (“Outlaws,” Combat, underground no. 56, April 1944).
Justice is unproblematic and absolute in such extreme cases and does not need

laws, courts, judges, or juries to be implemented: “The Milice has placed itself
outside the law. It must be made quite clear that each militiaman, in signing his
enlistment papers, is ratifying his own death sentence.” Justice for those so egregiously outside the law—not the actual law of Vichy but a higher law, the law of
justice—is obvious and transcends any legal code. The perpetrators of the crimes
know that their own acts judge them, that by their crimes they have in fact
sentenced themselves to death.
In another article attributed to him, Camus describes in vivid detail the massacre of a French village by German soldiers and demands that those responsible
for such atrocious acts pay for them: “For the question is not whether these
crimes will be forgiven; it is whether anyone will pay for them. And if we were
inclined to doubt it, the image of this village soaked in blood and from this day
forth populated solely by widows and orphans should suffice to assure us that
someone will pay for this crime, because the decision is now in the hands of
all the French, and in the face of this new massacre we are discovering the solidarity of martyrdom and the power that grows out of vengeance” (“For Three
Hours They Shot Frenchmen,” Combat, underground no. 57, May 1944).°
Vengeance in such cases would be equivalent to justice, for it would be taken not
Prise

:

:

s

;

,

’ This article of course was not signed by Camus because Combat at the time was still an underground

newspaper, but Lévi-Valensi argues that there exists unanimous agreement that he wrote it because, as she

puts it in a note, “the vigor of the style, the visionary realism, and, once again, the central idea of solidarity leave little room for doubt.”

FOREWORD

eee

Xi

out of self-interest or for political ends but rather in the name and memory of
those who were massacred and by a newly reunified people who recognize their
sacrifice. The solidarity of martyrdom, however, is an unstable and dangerous
foundation on which to build a democracy, for the power of vengeance is difficult, if not impossible, to limit and control once it is set loose, as the purge itself
would clearly demonstrate.
Camus justifies his support of immediate justice and capital punishment for
French collaborators guilty of crimes of torture or murder not by legal or political arguments but by simply describing the horrendous nature of the crimes
themselves, as if the description of the crime in itself dictated the appropriate
punishment. In one of the earliest editorials he published in Combat after the liberation of Paris, Camus describes the discovery at Vincennes, on the outskirts of
Paris, of the bodies of thirty-four Frenchmen who had been tortured before
being executed and mutilated: “We learn of comrades who had their guts ripped
out, their limbs torn off, and their faces kicked in. And the men who did these
things were men polite enough to give up their seats on the subway. . .. Who in
such circumstances would dare to speak of fogiveness? . . . It is not hatred that
will speak out tomorrow but justice itself, justice based on memory” (“The Age
of Contempt,” Combat, August 30, 1944). Camus characterizes a justice based
on the memory of such suffering and horror as “absolute” because the victims
had already paid an absolute price for resisting tyranny. Atrocities of the kind
described by Camus allow for no possibility of restraint, mitigation, or of course
pardon. For Camus, granting pardons to such criminals would not reunite the
French, as some argued, but further divide them; it would not put an end to the

Franco-French war of the last years of the Occupation but perpetuate it.
Camus, of course, would eventually modify his position on absolute justice,
but only after he had supported the necessity of such trials and engaged in an
extended polemic with Frangois Mauriac over whether charity or justice should
prevail in deciding such cases.’ Camus, of course, defended justice, which for
him meant the most severe punishment for the worst crimes. In an article he
wrote on Pierre Laval and Maréchal Pétain, whom he labels “the President of
Compromise and the Marshal of Confusion,” Camus unequivocally states that
they should be treated as murderers: “These men, who rationed everything
except shame, who dispensed blessings with one hand while they killed with the

7 Mauriac was a well-known, respected conservative Catholic novelist and fellow résistant and wrote for
Le Figaro. Camus summarizes his differences with Mauriac in the following way: “Whenever I used the
word justice in connection with the purge, M. Mauriac spoke of charity. So singular is the virtue of charity, moreover, that in calling for justice I seemed to be pleading on behalf of hatred. ‘To hear M. Mauriac
tell it, it truly seems that in dealing with these mundane

matters we must make an absolute choice

between the love of Christ and the hatred of men. Surely not! Some of us reject both the cries of enmity
that reach our ears from one side and the tender solicitations that come to us from the other. Between
these two extremes, we are searching for the just voice that will give us truth without shame. . . . This is

what allows me to say that charity has no business here” (“Justice and Charity,” January 11, 1945). But
in a talk given to a Dominican community in 1948, Camus acknowledged that “concerning the substance
and on the precise point of our controversy, Mr. Frangois Mauriac was right” (Essais, 372).

XIV

FOREWORD

other, who combined hypocrisy with terror, and who for four years treated us to
an appalling mixture of sermons and executions, homilies and torture—these
men could expect neither forgiveness nor indulgence from France. . . . We are
not men of hate. But we must be men of justice. And justice dictates that those
who killed and those who permitted murder are equally responsible before their
victims” (“Time for Justice,” August 22, 1944). The only conclusion that could

be drawn from such arguments is that both Laval and Pétain deserved to die.*
In an article written on the proposal to establish a High Court of Justice to
judge the prominent members of the Vichy government, Camus once again
expresses his support for the strongest punishments: “If there are some cases in
which our duty is not clear or justice is difficult to define, in this case we take our
stand without hesitation. The voices of the tortured and humiliated join with ours
in calling for justice of the most pitiless and decisive kind” (November 2, 1944).

Pitiless, decisive justice is the only form of justice for Camus that would not have
the effect of silencing the voices of the victims and their survivors, who alone have
absolute authority.” Camus thus makes the choice between execution and pardon
a choice between innocent victims, on the one side, and perverse torturers and
executioners, on the other. And when a choice is presented in this way, justice is
obviously on the side of the victims and legitimately “pitiless.”
But even during this period when Camus argued that “the purge is necessary”
and most enthusiastically supported capital punishment for the traitors responsible for the crimes of torture, deportation, and murder, he still argued that the
principle of proportion had to be respected: “The point is not to purge a lot but
to purge well. But what does it mean to purge well? It means to respect the general principle of justice without failing to make allowances in individual cases”
(October 18, 1944). For without proportion there could be no possibility of justice. Even or especially in the most extreme cases Camus argues that there needs
to be a balance between two radically opposed feelings: between the repugnance
that would be felt by honorable people if the death sentences of those responsible for torture, deportation, and murder were actually carried out and the repulsion, anger, or horror experienced when the suffering of the victims is
remembered and which would increase if the guilty were pardoned. It is precisely
because balance or proportion is so difficult to determine and achieve in such
instances that it is necessary.
Camus was nevertheless for a brief time a conflicted but nonetheless resolute
supporter of the death penalty for particularly atrocious war crimes, but only if
* Both, of course, were sentenced to death, but only Laval would actually be executed. Pétain died in
prison after de Gaulle had commuted his death sentence to one oflife imprisonment.
” Camus insists that only the families of the victims have the right to speak of pardon: “I see for our country two ways unto death (and there are ways of surviving that are no better than death): the way of hatred
and the way of pardon. One seems to me as disastrous as the other. . . . | shall join M. Mauriac in granting open pardons when Vélin’s parents and Leynaud’s wife tell me that I can. But not before. Never
before” (“Justice and Charity”). Vélin, or André Bollier, was Combat’ printer, who committed suicide
rather than be captured by the Gestapo. René Leynaud was a poet and early contributor to Combat; he
was captured by the French Milice and executed by the Germans just before the Liberation in June 1944.
Camus published a moving tribute to him in Combat (October 27, 1944).

FOREWORD

xv

justice was “prompt” rather than “precipitous”: “We have never called for
blind or precipitous justice. We detest arbitrary judgment and criminal stupidity, and we would prefer that France keep her hands clean. But to that end we
want justice to be prompt, and we want all prosecution for crimes of collaboration to end at some fixed date. We want the most obvious crimes to be punished
immediately, and then, since nothing can be done without mediocrity, we want
the errors that so many Frenchmen have indeed committed consigned to
carefully considered oblivion” (October 25, 1944). It soon became clear to

Camus and almost everyone else that the opposite was occurring: justice was in
almost all instances rapid and severe for lesser crimes and painfully slow and
indulgent for the greater crimes committed by Vichy officials and important
industrialists. In Camus’ own terms, the justice that was being meted out was
anything but proportional, which means it was anything but just in either a legal
or a moral sense.
It is clear that by the summer of 1945 Camus had changed his position on the
necessity for the purge after he had been confronted with its grotesque reality:
“The word ‘purge’ itself was already rather distressing. The actual thing became
odious. . . . The failure is complete” (August 30, 1945). In an earlier editorial,

however, Camus already criticizes the purge trials, given that they had repeatedly
produced further injustices, especially when indefensible crimes were being
judged. Camus attacks the trials for producing only “absurd sentences and preposterous instances of leniency. In between, prisoners are snatched from their
prisons and shot because they were pardoned. We want to say simply that all of
this was to be expected and that it is probably too late now for justice to be done”
(January 5, 1945). He deplores the fact that “they will go on handing out death
sentences to journalists who don't deserve as much. They will go on half-acquitting
recruiters with silver tongues. And the people, tired of their sick justice, will

continue to intervene from time to time in cases that should no longer be their
concern” (January 5, 1945). The moment for a higher, moral form of justice
rooted in the need to respect the memory of the victims of Nazism and the Vichy
state, a justice demanded by their silenced voices and carried out in their name,

the moment for what Camus also called pure or absolute justice, had thus passed
very quickly, as if it had never really been possible to achieve. But the obligation
to honor the memory of the victims remained, even if in reality it proved to be

difficult, if not impossible, to fulfill.
The failure of justice in the purge trials increased Camus’ doubts about the
legitimacy of capital punishment in general and led him to become a resolute
opponent of the death penalty. It was with reference to his general opposition to
the death penalty that he justified signing petitions to save the lives of two infamous literary collaborators, Robert Brasillach, who, despite the petition, was
nonetheless executed immediately after his trial in February 1945, and Lucien
Rebatet, whose death sentence was commuted and who was ultimately released

from prison in the amnesty of 1950. Camus’ reason for signing both petitions was
the same: even though he admits he felt nothing but disdain for both Brasillach
and Rebatet and considers their writings and actions to be criminal, he claims he

Xv1

FOREWORD

holds the death penalty in greater horror than he does these two militant antiSemites, collaborators, and Nazi propagandists.'°
It would thus seem that it was his perception of the injustices of the purge trials themselves that convinced Camus that the only coherent and, more important, the only just position was to oppose capital punishment in all situations,
even for those criminals he most abhorred. He realized that his obligation to the
victims of criminal injustice was not to avenge them but rather to honor their
memory in a completely different way: by a steadfast opposition to capital punishment, which for him amounted to “murder” being committed in their name
or in the name of the state or the people. Camus thus decided to choose life
before justice, even the life of criminal enemies of justice for whom he had the
greatest contempt. Ten years later, during the Algerian War, he would be much
criticized and grossly misunderstood for taking a similar position and announcing that if he were forced to choose between defending justice and defending the
life of his mother, he would choose first to defend his mother.’’ This did not in
fact, as has often been argued, reveal that he was a supporter of colonialism in
Algeria and an opponent of freedom and justice for all Algerians. It rather constituted a statement of principle: that priority should always be given to human
life, which had to be defended before ideals, no matter the legitimacy of the
ideals and the cause being pursued.
For Camus the failure of justice in the purge trials was both a sign and a cause
of the impending failure of France to “remake itself” and become a true democracy. As he put it, “a country that fails to purge itself is preparing to fail to remake
itself. The face that a nation wears is that of its system of justice” (January 5,
1945). And the face of “sick justice” the French nation wore immediately after
the Liberation was certainly far from the ideal of justice Camus proposed in his
earliest articles. In this instance and in general, a democracy whose system of justice is sick cannot really be considered a democracy at all.

'° Tn a letter Camus sent on January 27, 1945, to the novelist Marcel Aymé, who had written Camus to
ask him to sign a petition to de Gaulle asking that Brasillach’s life be spared, Camus reluctantly agreed to
sign the petition and explained why: “I have always been horrified by the death penalty, and I have judged
that as an individual the least I could do is not participate in it, even by abstention. . . . This is a scruple
that I suppose would make the friends of Brasillach laugh. And as for him, if his life is spared and if an
amnesty frees him as it probably will in one or two years, I would like him to be told the following as concerns my letter: it is not for him that I join my signature with yours, it is not for the writer, whom I consider to be worth nothing, nor for the individual, for whom I have the strongest contempt” (cited in
Olivier Todd, Albert Camus: Une vie [Paris: Gallimard, 1996], 374).
"After receiving the Nobel Prize in 1957 and during a discussion with a group of students in Sweden,

one of whom was Algerian and who repeatedly interrupted Camus with questions about democracy and
justice in Algeria, Camus made the following remark: “I have always supported a just Algeria, where the

two populations must live in peace and equality. I have said and repeated that we have to bring justice to
the Algerian people and grant them a fully democratic regime. . . . |have always condemned terror. I must
also condemn a terrorism that is practiced blindly, in the streets of Algiers, for example, and which one
day could strike my mother or my family. I believe in justice, but I will defend my mother before justice”
(Le Monde, December 14, 1957, in Essais, 1881-82).

FOREWORD

Xvi

The Failure of Politics: Colonialism

It may surprise some critics of Camus’ position on the Algerian War to discover
in this collection of editorials and articles from Combar that as early 1945 he
wrote insistently about the necessity to resolve the injustices caused by colonialism,
even or especially at a time when the seemingly more urgent problem facing
France was the monumental task of rebuilding itself after four years of deprivation, physical devastation, occupation, and in the end what amounted to a civil
war. The colonial question and more generally European imperialism were not,
however, peripheral issues for Camus, either during or immediately after the war.
On the contrary, he felt that the injustices of French colonialism constituted a
serious threat to democracy in France, and that European, American, and Soviet

imperialisms were obstacles to the creation of a truly democratic world order. It
seemed to Camus not only illogical and incoherent but, more important, unjust
for the French, who had regained their own freedom at the end of the war, to
continue to deny that same freedom to those living in the different French
colonies, some of whom had in fact fought alongside the French in the war
against Germany. It was for him not just hypocritical but strictly speaking
impossible to attempt to create an authentic democracy within France if France
continued to deny social justice and democratic rights to its colonies.
For Camus, the basic issue was simple and clear: freedom and justice cannot
be for some but not for others. Camus not only argues that France could not
continue to have two different and even opposed policies concerning democracy,
“one granting justice to the people of France and the other confirming injustice
toward the Empire” (October 13, 1944). But in an article on France’s Indochina

policy, he also calls overtly for “a policy of emancipation”: “Indochina will be
with us if France leads the way by introducing both democracy and freedom
there. But if we hesitate at all, Indochina will join forces with anyone at all, provided they are against us” (March 29, 1945). France, of course, never imple-

mented such a policy, and thus independence in Vietnam, as well as Algeria, was
achieved by other, more violent means and at a horrible cost in human lives.
Camus’ most extended analysis in Combat of the injustices of colonialism is
contained in the series of articles he published on Algeria in May and June 1945,
immediately after the riots and massacres at Sétif and Guelema. More than a
hundred French citizens were killed when demonstrations in various cities
turned into riots, with women and children savagely mutilated. In retaliation,
thousands of innocent Algerian men, women, and children were massacred by
French civilians and police.'* The massacre of Arab Algerians by French authorities and civilians nine years before the organization of an armed insurrection is
now seen by most historians as the unofficial beginning of the Algerian War.
'2 Historians agree that the figure of 1,500 Algerian deaths given by the French administration is incredibly low, while the figure of 40,000 deaths given by the FLN is grossly inflated. Most place the number
of deaths resulting from the French retaliation to be between 6,000 and 10,000, but some still argue the

figure might be even higher.

AVIEE

2. ON Ae ee See

Camus was one of the very few journalists at this time who attempted to understand the cause of the riots and who defended the rights of Arab Algerians in an
atmosphere of hatred and revenge.
In his articles Camus demands not only that Algeria not be forgotten in the
euphoria of the Liberation of metropolitan France but also that “the Arab people” of Algeria should finally be recognized as a people: “I want to point out that
the Arab people also exist. By that I mean that they aren't the wretched, faceless
mob in which Westerners see nothing worth respecting or defending. On the
contrary, they are a people of impressive traditions, whose virtues are eminently
clear to anyone willing to approach them without prejudice. These people are
not inferior except in regard to the conditions in which they must live, and we
have as much to learn from them as they from us” (“Crisis in Algeria,” May
13-14, 1945). Recognition of the existence of “the Arab people” for Camus

means recognizing Arab Algerians as a people different from but equal to the
French. Refusing to accept the indifference, if not racist hostility, of both metropolitan French and French Algerians toward “the Arab people,” Camus warns of
increased difficulties and violence if immediate steps are not taken to vastly
improve economic and political conditions in Algeria. It was a message virtually
no one in France in 1945 wanted to hear. Camus was thus at this pivotal
moment one of the very few French intellectuals or journalists who defended the
rights of Arab and Berber Algerians and their demands for freedom and justice,
and he would remain faithful to this position throughout the Algerian War itself,
even as he opposed the politics and actions of the FLN.
Camus argues that the French should be especially sensitive to the injustices
suffered by Algerians for a very particular reason: “We cannot remain indifferent
to their suffering, because we have experienced it ourselves. Rather than respond
with condemnations, let us try to understand the reasons for their demands and
invoke on their behalf the same democratic principles that we claim for ourselves” (“Crisis in Algeria”). His position on Algeria is thus the same as the one

he took on Indochina: everyone has the right to the same freedom and the same
justice. Even though Camus is not advocating a totally independent Algeria in
these articles and never supported such a proposal, it is still difficult to see how
Algeria could become the kind of democratic society Camus envisioned, with
all its inhabitants granted the rights of full citizens, without colonialism itself
coming to an end. A democratic Algeria with an Arab majority could not have
remained “French,” except by means of a system of federation that moderate
Arab-Algerian nationalists had in fact proposed before the outbreak of World
War II and that Camus would continue to support during the Algerian War,
even when the intransigence of the overwhelming majority of French Algerians
had convinced moderate nationalists that such a system could no longer be
created.
Given the general hostility among French colonialists to democratic reforms
in Algeria, in these articles Camus presents the French with a simple choice: (1)

either acknowledge openly that indigenous Algerians will always be treated as a
conquered, inferior, colonized people, with limited rights and totally dependent

FOREWORD

xix

on and subservient to the French; (2) or acknowledge that democratic principles
are universal and have to be applied to all situations given the fundamental right
of all peoples to be free. In fact, the French, in principle although not in fact, had

already chosen the latter alternative long before, Camus argues, and therefore it
had always been and still was the responsibility of France to apply democratic
principles in Algeria. What he provocatively calls the “reconquest” of Algeria
would thus constitute the conquest of freedom in Algeria for all Algerians. That
this would mean the end of colonialism had not escaped Camus, since he proclaims in another article in the series that “the era of Western imperialism is over”
(“Tt Is Justice That Will Save Algeria from Hatred,” May 23, 1945), even if it

would in fact not be until 1962 and after eight years of horrible war that French
colonialism would finally come to an end in Algeria.
The fundamental problem in Algeria, Camus argues, is not just that its Arab

and Berber populations no longer believed in the possibility of their assimilation
into French culture and economic-political life. More serious is that they also no
longer believed in democracy, especially given the grotesque form in which it had
been presented to them: “But the Arabs seem to have lost their faith in democracy, of which they were offered only a caricature. They hope to achieve by other
means a goal that has never changed: an improvement in their condition” (May
18, 1945). The issue for Camus in 1945 was not whether to work for democracy
in Algeria and thus improve the horrible living conditions of Berber and Arab
Algerians but rather ow best to do it. He was convinced that if nothing was
done and conditions continued to worsen, violence would also increase—which

is exactly what occurred. In Camus’ view, though, neither France nor any other
nation could claim to be a true democracy if it remained a colonial or imperialist power and subjugated and oppressed other peoples, if it denied others the very
freedoms it claimed for itself. The failure to peacefully put an end to colonialism
in the aftermath of World War II thus also constituted for Camus a serious, if

not the most serious, failure of French democracy itself.

The Failure of the Free Press: Terror and Silence

“We live in terror,” writes Camus in the first article of the series he published in
Combat under the general title “Neither Victims nor Executioners,” and then

adds that the entire twentieth century could be characterized as “the century of
fear.” Camus did not, however, write this series of articles during the worst
moments of World War II. Nor does the phrase “we live in terror” refer exclusively to the past atrocities of the Nazi Occupation or the crimes of the Vichy

state, some of which he had dramatically described in articles published in the
days immediately preceding and following the liberation of Paris. The series,
“Neither Victims nor Executioners,” was in fact published in November 1946,
well after France had been liberated and Nazi Germany defeated.
Europe was finally at peace. Soldiers were no longer dying in battles in Europe
and the East, and civilians were no longer living in immediate terror for their

xx

FOREWORD

lives in the cities that both Nazi and Allied forces had targeted at different
moments of the war. Camus’ Resistance comrades and other political opponents
of Nazi Germany and Vichy France were no longer being tortured, summarily
executed, or deported to concentration camps to live and die under atrocious
conditions. Jews were no longer being deported to death camps and systematically exterminated by the millions. Nazi oppression, torture, deportation, and
mass murder were thus horrible memories of the recent past but no longer part
of everyday reality. But despite all these facts, Camus argues that the reign of terror was continuing and for a very specific reason: it served a political purpose.
For “even if fear can’t be considered a science in itself,” Camus argues, “there is
no question that it is a method” (“The Century of Fear,” November 19, 1946).
And as a method, terror was in fact working all too well to silence opposition,
prevent dialogue, and force people to choose one side or the other in a battle that
each side presented as one between freedom and enslavement, justice and injustice, and ultimately between “Good” and “Evil.” The effect of terror was to
ensure that no other choices were available, that one had to choose one side over
the other. This was the method in its madness.
Camus presents terror as being even more insidious in the postwar period than
during the war, since it had spread across the political spectrum. Its primary
source was no longer Nazi Germany but other “deadly ideologies” that were continuing to struggle for hegemony in Europe and the rest of the world: “Today,
no one is talking (apart from those who repeat themselves), because the world

seems to us to be led by forces blind and deaf to warnings, advice, and supplications. .. . There is no way of persuading an abstraction, or, to put it another way,
the representative of an ideology. The long dialogue among human beings has
now come to an end” (“The Century of Fear”). The silence produced by such
ideological terror represents for Camus a deadly threat not only to freedom but
also “for all who cannot live without dialogue and the friendship of other human
beings, . . . the end of the world.” Camus thus fears that the world is on the verge
of ending not with a bang or even a whimper but with total silence, a silence created by the messianic abstractions (ideologies) that dominate the public sphere,

with people both afraid and reluctant to speak because their only choice is
between equally unacceptable abstractions.
Terror thrives in “a world of abstraction, a world of bureaucracy and machinery, of absolute ideas and of messianism without subtlety, . . . among people who

believe they are absolutely right, whether it be in their machines or their ideas.”
In this way history becomes a process of death, not of life, the product of
mechanical abstractions rather than living human beings. Camus in fact considers all the ideologies struggling for dominance in the postwar period to be potentially deadly, with each of them in its own way contributing to the creation of a
state of terror and the depreciation of life: “Because persuasion is no longer possible, because man has been delivered entirely into the hands of history and can

no longer turn toward that part of himself which is as true as the historic part,
and which he discovers when he confronts the beauty of the world and of peo-

ple’s faces” (“The Century of Fear”). And human beings who have been delivered

FOREWORD

xxi

to history and accept being determined by history become one-dimensional,
muted creatures who have an ever-diminishing moral and aesthetic sense and
thus a diminished sense of the possibilities of history itself. Above all, they lose
their sense of both natural beauty and the beauty of other human faces, and
with this loss of aesthetic judgment and a lack of recognition of the worth of
others they lose the capacity for moral judgment as well. Above all, they lose all
sense of justice.
Camus writes in this series as if the end had already occurred, as if terror had
won, as if silence was already the norm: “A man who cannot be persuaded is a
man who makes others afraid. So that alongside people who stopped speaking
because they deemed it pointless to try, a vast conspiracy of silence has arisen and
continues to spread, a conspiracy accepted by those who quake in fear” (“The
Century of Fear”). Against terror, Camus continued to defend the power of
words and thus of responsible political journalism, which he felt had as crucial a
role to play in the resistance to the conspiracy of silence as it had in the French
Resistance to Nazism.

Arguments “against ideology” are by now very familiar. But many, if not most
of these arguments are in fact ideologically motivated defenses of capitalism
and a particular form of liberal democracy. In other words, “the end of ideology”
has come to signify the end of “their” ideology—the end of Communism, for
example—and the triumph of democracy. This was not, however, Camus’ position, for if he was a staunch defender of democracy and an increasingly outspoken critic of Marxism, it is not because he felt democracy was the ideal form of
government. Rather, as he states in an article written after “Neither Victims nor
Executioners,” it is because democracy is “the least bad” political alternative. He
argues that in its best sense, democracy is “an exercise in modesty” (“Democracy
and Modesty,” April 30, 1947), an open, unfinished project, always “to be
made,” never already achieved once and for all time."
Modesty means that democracies have to acknowledge that all progress toward
greater freedom and justice is relative and can be destroyed or reversed at any
time, that freedoms already formally guaranteed and in principle protected can
be destroyed or in fact do not even actually exist, that injustices and inequalities
that have in principle been eliminated can in fact continue to exist, and perhaps
even increase. Modesty also means that democracies should never silence those
who call attention to such reversals, contradictions, and inadequacies, those who
demand that more still needs to be done, that democracies have to become
increasingly more democratic and thus more just. It is certainly true that Camus’
increasingly “anti-Communist” political position, which is expressed in a more

3 Tn a letter to Roger Quillot (June 30, 1948), he asserts that “the Marxist conception of the world is not
only false but it is also becoming lethal” (Essais, 1579).

4 The title of one of Camus’ early editorials, “La Démocratie a faire” (“The Democracy to Come,”
September 2, 1944) could in fact characterize all his remarks on democracy: that it is always “to come,”
always “to be made,” never already made.

XXxil

FOREWORD

developed form in The Rebel, is evident in his editorials from 1946 and 1947.
But what is more interesting and relevant to us and certainly more vital for our
own world, in which a different climate of terror reigns, is the way Camus
defends democracy: by offering a severe critique of the immodesty, shortcomings, and failures of actual democracies and thus of their failure to live up to
what he argues democracy could and should be. It is a critique perhaps more necessary today than ever before.
If modesty is democracy’s strength, it follows that to triumph over political
adversaries by force can never be considered proof of democracy’s superiority or
legitimacy. On the contrary, it is the proof only of the economic, political, technological, and military power of a particular democratic state or group of democratic states. In itself it has nothing to do with either freedom or justice, and
thus nothing to do with democracy as such. A democracy, for example, no matter how powerful or dominant—and precisely because it is economically and
technologically powerful and dominant—that would hold itself up as the model
of democracy, that would speak and act as if it embodied true democratic values
in its struggle against tyranny and injustice (or “Evil”), according to the logic of
Camus argument would in fact not only be deluding itself but also constitute a
threat to other democracies and to democracy itself. It would itself, no matter
how violently antidemocratic its “enemies,” be contributing to and profiting
from the climate of terror it claimed to be attacking and using fear to silence
those who oppose the actions it had taken allegedly to protect or spread democracy. By contributing to the climate of terror, it would itself constitute a form
of messianism, another ideology, what could be called an antidemocratic form of
democracy.
The paradox of democracy for Camus, therefore, is that when it is the most
triumphant it is also the least democratic, and this also holds for individual political parties and groups within a particular democracy, as well as for democracies
in general. For once “one party or group imagines itself to be in possession of the
absolute truth” (“Democracy and Modesty,” April 30, 1947), then a climate of
terror exists and democracy is at risk. It is not surprising, then, that Camus’ definition of a democrat is remarkably simple and straightforward: a democrat is “a
person who admits that his adversary may be right, who therefore allows him to
speak, and who agrees to consider his arguments. When parties and people are

so convinced by their own arguments that they are willing to resort to violence
to silence those who disagree with them, democracy no longer exists. Modesty is
therefore salutary in republics at all times” (“Democracy and Modesty”). This
may very well suggest that there have never been many true democrats or democracies, and that in spite of what is frequently claimed there are perhaps even
fewer today than ever before. It certainly means at the very least that Camus himself was suspicious and urges his readers to be suspicious of those who speak the
loudest in defense of democratic ideals and absolutes but whose goal is to instill
fear in opponents and to silence dissent. The silence that results from such terror may very well signal, if not “the end of the world,” then at least the end of
democracy—in any case, it most certainly does not indicate its triumph.

FOREWORD

XX

It is not surprising, therefore, that Camus felt that the free press had an essen-

tial role to play in all democracies: that of refusing to choose either of the sides
in ideological conflicts and thus continuing to provide a forum for dialogue
across the ideological divides. In general, this means that the role of the press for
Camus was to resist terror. An interesting aspect of Camus’ Combat editorials is
that they repeatedly question how well he and Combat in general have fulfilled
this crucial democratic and critical function. He acknowledges that it was much
easier to defend the honor of clandestine journalism during the Resistance, since
its very existence was “proof of [its] independence, because it involves a risk”

(“The Profession of Journalist,” Combat, clandestine no. 58, July 1944). But
when Combat, like other Resistance newspapers, was published openly after the
Liberation and it was no longer true that “writing an article can land you in
prison or get you killed,” for Camus it was still the case “that words have value
and need to be weighed carefully,” and that “the journalist’s responsibility to the
public” should not be taken lightly (“Critique of the New Press,” August 31,
1944). Independence and “honor” were obviously much more complicated
issues in postwar France than during the war.
Camus makes one of his most interesting assessments of Combat a year after
the Liberation. In one year, Camus claims, France has “turned a corner,” and
even if “justice has not yet arrived, . . . we have at least emerged from an abject
condition in which injustice reigned” (September 1, 1945). The same could be

said for the press as a whole, since he states that even if the press was not yet what
it should be, it was also most definitely no longer the abject agency of collaboration of the official press of the war period. But if one of the goals of Combat,
which Camus argues should also be a goal of a France striving to ensure freedom
and achieve justice, was “to create a climate in which the various tendencies of
French political life could confront one another without clashing” and thus “to
make dialogue possible by pointing out differences and highlighting similarities”
among different political groups from the moderate right to the revolutionary
left (Camus mentions explicitly Christians and Communists), then, in his eval-

uation it had definitely come up short. Or, as Camus bluntly puts it: “In this
respect, our year of work has ended in abject failure.” The press fails when rather
than being a vehicle for dialogue it provokes polemics and thus reduces opponents to silence rather than encouraging ongoing discussion. Democracy fails as
well.
In September 1945, Camus still claims to be cautiously optimistic, however,
concerning the possibilities for both Combat and French democracy. And even if
he admits that “French public life will no doubt continue to be what it is,

namely, an arena in which powerful orthodoxies confront one another while a
few solitary voices try to make themselves heard,” he is still sufficiently confident
that Combat has learned from the failures of the previous year and that “tomorrow will be better.” But in fact “tomorrow” turned out not to be better at all. Not
for the press, because newspapers like Combat became even more dependent on

financial interests and more closely connected to political parties. But not for
democracy either, because officials of the government increasingly closed their

XXIV

FOREWORD

ears to criticism and dissent and transformed the Fourth Republic into what
Camus calls “a deaf and dumb republic,” that is, not a democracy at all: for
“there is no democracy without dialogue” (“The Deaf and Dumb Republic,”
March 17, 1947). When a dominant political party or the government as a
whole believes that “no one else serves the cause of democratic truth” and thus
that it has no need to engage in dialogue with the opposition or the opposition
press, democracy suffers and is even at risk. And it makes no difference if the
government is on the left or the right.
During the time Camus was associated with Combat, it survived various crises:
paper shortages, competition for readership from existing and newly created
newspapers such as Le Monde, and even a general four-week printers’ strike that
shut down the entire industry. After the strike was settled, Camus ironically
announces the return of Combat, in spite of rumors of its demise or of its having
been purchased by a rich industrialist: “Poor but free before the strike, Combat
is back, poorer than ever but still free and determined to stay that way. Just as it
lived on the income from its sales and advertising a month ago, it continues
today to rely solely on its readers” (“The Deaf and Dumb Republic”). As noble
an idea as this might have been, the poverty of Combat, which is for Camus also
the proof of its independence, would in fact eventually prove to be fatal.
The experiment in a radically independent form of journalism did not and
could not last forever. A newspaper born in the Resistance as a fusion of various
political tendencies and that for almost all its existence was free from the control
or influence of any investors or political party definitively lost Camus as its editor in chief and chief editorialist in 1947. Even if Camus would have been the
first to say that no single journal, Combat included, was in itself essential to

French democracy, its transformation and then demise were signs not just that
the Resistance press no longer mattered in the same way it did immediately after
the war. They were also signs that the free press was being “bought” and thus was
not as free as it should be—signs that democracy in France was not what it could
be either.
When the free press fails, democracy fails as well, and the result is an increasing climate of terror and the silencing of opponents and opposing positions—on
each side of the ideological (or religious/cultural) divides. In 1947, Camus felt

this was becoming or had already become the case in France. But all was still not
lost, for to have the state of terror recognized for what it was would be a positive

step—and one of the crucial functions Camus continues to assign to the press
was to identify, analyze, and criticize the different “methods” of instilling fear
and silencing differences of opinion and dissent used by different political parties and officials. Even if a journal that took on this critical task were read by
decreasing numbers of people, its refusal to accept either polemics or silence
would at least be a sign that in spite of the climate of terror, democracy had not
been completely destroyed and silence was not total. This would be so as long as
“a forum continues to exist far from the deafening tumult of partisan voices, a

forum where independent minds can still bear witness without pretentiousness
or fear. It is good that freedom can still be exercised, at least for a little while, and

FOREWORD

XXV

even if it must swim against the tide. . . . Here, at least, it is still possible to

breathe, as lonely as the effort may sometimes seem” (“The Choice,” April 22,
1947). Thus in his last editorials for Combat, Camus expresses only a very cautious hope that “for a while” more, at least, freedom will continue to be exercised

in forums like Combat. It is not much, and certainly a far cry from the enthusiasm of his early articles. But it is still something.

Combating Terror

But on what could such hope, no matter how cautious, be based, given the
incredibly bleak picture Camus paints in his last series of articles? It was certainly
not a hope that sprang from a trust in or commitment to a particular political
party or that was rooted in a faith in any ideology. The possibility of hope came,
paradoxically, from the knowledge that things really were as bad as they seemed
to be, that terror was indeed prevalent. For Camus this meant that people would
soon have to face a dramatic choice, not between opposing political alternatives

produced by competing ideologies but a choice of a more fundamental nature:
between being either victims or executioners, losers or victors, in a war for the

ultimate conquest and domination of the world. If this really was the only choice
available, then compromise, dialogue, and cooperation would no longer be possible, because they would be considered signs of weakness rather than strength,

of defeat and not victory.
But the purpose of Camus’ last series of articles is to convince his readers that
they in fact do have another choice: it is to refuse the choice of being either vic-

tim or executioner. It is to remind them that they still have the choice of opposing the ideological forces that divide the world between Good and Evil, infidels
and believers, us and them, as well as the choice of refusing to accept, legitimize,

or directly participate in the destruction of others in the name of any ideology—
democracy included—or any set of religious, moral, or political principles, no
matter how noble—freedom and justice included. For Camus, democracy could
never come out of the barrel of a gun (or a bomb or missile), just as justice could
never be achieved as the result of the mistreatment, torture, or execution of criminals or terrorists “Neither Victims nor Executioners” thus constitutes a powerful
conclusion to Camus’ contributions to Combat and thus to this collection as well.
After reading these editorials, it is impossible not to ask if we today live once
again in an age of terror in which we are being presented with the stark choice
between being either victims or murderers. If this is indeed the case, then the
publication of Camus’ editorials and articles could not come at a more propitious moment. To understand that it is possible to reject the choice of being

either a victim of murder or responsible for the death of others is perhaps more
necessary now than at any other time since the end of the Cold War itself. As is
the need for forums such as those provided by Combat in postwar France and for
editorials by writer-journalists with the literary talent, sensitivity, moral conscience, political convictions, and even the illusions of an Albert Camus.

Xxvi

FOREWORD

Even though the following are not the last lines Camus wrote for Combat, ot
even the last of the series “Neither Victims nor Executioners,” they are an appro-

priate and dramatic conclusion to his postwar political journalism. For freedom,
justice, and democracy itself all ultimately depend on how these two very basic
questions are answered:
Oui ou non, directement ou indirectement, voulez-vous étre tué ou violenté? Oui
ou non, directement ou indirectement, voulez-vous tuer ou violenter? [Yes or no,

directly or indirectly, do you want to be killed or assaulted? Yes or no, directly or
indirectly, do you want to kill or assault?] (“The Century of Fear”)

Camus’ questions are simple and straightforward and of course meant to be
answered with a resounding “no.” For who would ever want to be killed or violently attacked by others? Who, except for the most fanatical or insane among
us, would ever want to kill or violently attack others? But underlying the two
questions is another, unarticulated question, which is whether one should accept
in the first place that the only choice one has is to be either a victim of murder
or a murderer oneself. That such a choice is unacceptable, that it constitutes no
choice at all, and that even in an age of terror, alternatives always exist to being
either a victim or a murderer are things of which it would seem we need to be
reminded once again. For this reason, Camus’ editorials could be considered as
pertinent and necessary today as they were when they were originally published
sixty years ago.
David Carroll

PREFACE

This edition is based on texts published in Combat. In the case of texts that

Camus chose to reprint in the collections entitled Actwelles and Actuelles ITI, only
significant variants (and typographical errors) have been noted. In general,
Camus eliminated subtitles, reduced the number of paragraphs, and corrected

punctuation. These strictly typographical changes are not indicated.

Works by Camus Cited in the Notes

Essays and articles others than those appearing in Combat, Actuelles, or Actuelles
IIT are taken from Albert Camus, Essais (Paris: Gallimard-Pléiade, 1965), intro-

duction by R. Quilliot and L. Faucon, referred to as Essais.
La Peste (Paris: Gallimard-Folio, 1987).
Articles from Alger-Républicain and Le Soa epabiegee Fragments d'un
combat, 1938-1940, Alger-Républicain. Cahiers Albert Camus 3. Edition estab-

lished, introduced, and annotated by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi and André Abbou.
2 vols. (Paris: Gallimard, 1978).
Carnets, mai 1935-février 1942 (Paris: Gallimard, 1962), referred to as Carnets I.
Carnets, janvier 1942—mars 1951 (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), referred to as
Carnets II.

Camus éditorialiste a “L’Express.” Introduction, commentary, and notes by Paul
Semts. Cahiers Albert Camus 6 (Paris: Gallimard, 1987).

Journaux de voyage (Paris: Gallimard, 1978). Text established, presented, and
annotated by Roger Quilliot.
Correspondence

Albert Camus—Jean Grenier, Correspondance, 1932-1960 (Paris: Gallimard, 1981).

Preface and notes by Marguerite Dobreen.
Correspondance 1939-1947 Albert Camus—Pascal Pia (Paris: Fayard/Gallimard,

2000). Presented and annotated by Yves-Marc Ajchenbaum.

avant
7

mites

Beery tug
SA HCH HN > a
;

:

poe

a

-

pager

2

rd

iar

ig i

ae :

Rraeeridiveww en

Ire

Mindy ns moron ene mle ps: a
cule

LA

aby, de Wi

rRNA

miphel’eg
bolt

oe ae
we nny 4

irigsos Pe.

Toney
aba
a ai
Ls

ean
Yr ete

Lie. ne

ey

gles) omega

CVE? leoetslling nis

fo"

ines ae

few Lomarey Ledeltae catt 908) Shummnillery sr ba

CUES Lurie] 2aOR CES: seemed Pardee
=

permits Vinee

bonnet) sigh

i

aves
ps

aa

sew Tu", \o ae euaa a dae
miiieridorlo:

ele y yl Sonera

Leay &

hel

a

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to offer my warmest thanks
To Catherine Camus, for her confidence and assistance,
To Robert Gallimard, without whom this edition would never have seen the

light of day,
To Roger Grenier, who generously shared with me his memories and docu-

ments in his possession,
To Agnés Spiquel, for her help,
To Pierre Lévi-Valensi, whose historical knowledge and patience were invaluable to me.

rt

i

ah pegaa

i i
bosonbtkeiesl ba

an

INTRODUCTION

The eminent role that Camus played at Combat as editor in chief and editorial
writer from August 1944 until June 1947 is well-known. It is difficult, however,
to be certain which articles he wrote himself. There is obviously no doubt about
those that he chose to reprint in Actuelles: Chroniques 1944-1948, published by
Gallimard in 1950, or about those that bear his byline in the paper, as is the case
for editorials published between December 13, 1944, and February 9, 1945, and
for nearly all the texts that are not editorials, such as his reflections on journalism or his reporting on Algeria, which he reprinted in Actuelles III: Chroniques
algériennes in 1958. Nor is there any uncertainty concerning those articles for
which a typescript has been preserved in the Fonds Camus. It is hard to see why
Camus would have saved typescripts of articles he had not written, particularly
since many of these correspond to articles bearing his byline. These typescripts
were made after the fact, based on the articles printed in the newspaper, as is
shown by the text dated October 8, 1944, which reproduces a sentence with a

missing line, just as it was printed in the paper. It is very likely that this version
was prepared at a time when Camus was considering publishing a volume of his
articles. Unfortunately, the typescripts in the archives end on January 11, 1945.
Those texts that pose no real problem of identification are therefore indicated
as being certainly by Camus. The other texts included in this volume must
obviously be regarded as simply “attributed to Camus,” and in each case I have
indicated the degree of likelihood in the notes. Some of these texts can be identified without much chance of error owing to the existence of objective evidence:
an allusion in a letter by Camus himself, by Francine Camus, or by some other
correspondent, or a specific memory recalled by a member of the Combat staff.
Comparison with the anthologies that some of these staff members published,
such as Albert Ollivier’s Fausses Sorties,' made it possible to avoid some errors.
This still leaves a substantial number of articles for which the only justification for
an attribution to Camus is cross-checking and extremely scrupulous internal criticism of both form and content, and obviously any such attribution can be no
more than a hypothesis. The task is made even more delicate by the fact that the
members of the staff shared a common “tone,” enforced by Camus and Pia, who
were careful proofreaders, particularly where editorials were concerned. I hope
that I have struck a proper balance between caution and a desire to be exhaustive.
This edition is not always in agreement with the incomplete list of articles that
Roger Quilliot included in Essais,” which offered a selection of articles from
Combat as “complementary texts” to Actuelles in addition to the list. The list is
not entirely reliable, however, and some of the texts are published with a byline
that was not included in the original article. This edition differs even more from

' Albert Ollivier, Fausses Sorties (Paris: La Jeune Parque, 1946).
2 Albert Camus, Essais (Paris: Gallimard, 1965). Introduction by R. Quilliot, texts established and anno-

tated by R. Quilliot and L. Faucon.

INTRODUCTION

XXXII

that of Norman Stokle, Le “Combat” d’Albert Camus, the errors in which have

been noted for some time now.’
It seemed to me desirable to present these articles in chronological order of
publication. This makes it possible to situate each article with respect to the news
of the day on which it comments, and the period 1944-1947 was indeed fertile
in news. It also allows us to follow, often on a day-by-day basis, the variety of
subjects that Camus dealt with and thus to gauge the remarkable openness of his
mind. Nevertheless, it also seemed necessary to me to propose a thematic grouping of the articles, so that their variety does not hide from view their coherence

or the “obstinacy” of Camus’ political convictions, to borrow a word that he
often used. This grouping, which can be found at the end of the introduction,
should make it possible to read all the articles on a given theme in a continuous
fashion. This is the only purpose of the categories given here, and I have no
intention of trying to impose a systematic classification on Camus’ thinking.
There are limits to any such grouping. For instance, the editorial of November 15,
1944, which deals with false information coming out of Germany, deals with the
press, the war, and the situation in Germany all at once. Although it is possible

to justify the distinction between domestic politics and international affairs,
Camus himself noted on May 25, 1945, that “there is not a single domestic issue

that does not also have global repercussions and that is not influenced in turn by
international politics.” In fact, all of his contributions to Combat could be
included under the title of the longest section of Actwelles, “Morality and Politics.”

Prompted by the news of the day, these editorials and articles are by definition
“occasional texts.” The events they comment on and the figures they describe—
men involved in the making of history—were well-known to Camus’ readers.
The journalist knew that he could simply allude to matters that were part of the
collective experience of his immediate contemporaries. Today’s reader no longer
shares this knowledge. In order to enable the reader to fully appreciate these
texts, it was therefore essential to provide them with notes, often quite extensive,
which are intended not as commentaries but merely as aids to preserve the clarity of the originals.
More than fifty years after the publication of these articles, and despite the fact
that they were intimately linked to the historical events of their times, of whose
hopes and disillusionments they offer a faithful image, they have lost none of
their force or value. They still speak to us and still have much to say to us about
freedom, justice, truth, and democracy. At times they seem to have been written

for us, for our times, to spur us on to lucidity and vigilance. They attest to the
importance and interest of Camus’ work as a journalist at Combat, and to his
astonishing resonance in contemporary consciousness.

3

.

Norman Stokle, ed., Le

«

“Combat”

»

’

>

.

:

d’Albert Camus (Quebec: Les Presses de l'Université Laval, 1970).

Apart from the errors in the notes, Stokle was very generous in his attributions and careless in the reproduction of the texts, so much so that the edition was not authorized.

THEMATIC

CLASSIFICATION

The following attempt at a “thematic classification” of the texts collected in this
volume is in no way intended to be authoritative or exclusive. Many of these
texts fall under several headings and are therefore mentioned several times. All
these articles were inspired by Camus’ desire or determination to introduce
morality into politics. The only purpose of this classification is to make clear the
continuity of his concerns and the coherence of his thought.
In what follows, the letter “s” indicates texts signed by Camus; “a” indicates
authenticated texts; and “p” indicates texts in which the attribution to Camus is
most likely correct.

History in the Making

The Liberation ofParis
8/21/44:
8/23/44:
8/24/44:
8/25/44:
8/30/44:

“Combat Continues” (a) 11
“They Shall Not Pass” (a) 15
“The Blood of Freedom” (a) 16
“The Night of Truth” (a) 17
“The Age of Contempt” (a) 20

The Continuation of the War
9/29/44: “We are emerging from euphoria.” (a) 51
10/3/44: “The Daily Mail has just published . . .” (a) 56
10/6/44: “There was plenty of noise in the night sky . . .” (a) 61
10/19/44: “France’s participation in the allied military
government ...” (p) 78
10/22/44: “The Daily Express. . .” (a) 85
11/14/44: “It is worth noting .. .” (a) 111
11/25/44: “Yes, our armies are on the Rhine...” (a) 123
11/29/44: “Only just liberated, Europe is in turmoil.” (a) 126
12/13/44: “One reads almost everywhere . . .” (s) 138

12/15/44: “The Consultative Assembly . . .” (s) 141
12/20/44: “As von Rundstedt was launching his offensive . . .” (s) 147
12/22/44: “France has endured many tragedies . . .” (s) 149
12/31/44-1/1/45:

1945 (p) 159

1/2/45: “We have read .. .” (s) 160
2/17/45: “Here, at least, we aren't living amidst lies.’”” (p) 173

4/3/45: “What was being celebrated yesterday . . .” (a) 184
4/4/45: “As the end of hostilities draws near .. .” (a) 185
4/10/45: “The victories on the western front . . .” (p) 190

4/17/45: “With every step closer to victory . . .” (p) 194

THEMATIC

XXXIV

CLASSIFICATION

5/9/45: “Who would think himself capable . . .” (p) 195
8/8/45: “The world is what it is. . .” (a) 236
8/17/45: “Now that the war is over . . .” (p) 240
9/1/45: “The postwar has begun.” (p) 251
Domestic Politics

9/2/44: “The Democracy to Come” (a) 25
9/4/44: “Morality and Politics” (a) 27
9/6/44: “The End of a World” (a) 28
9/10/44: “The new government is constituted.” (p) 34
9/19/44: “The National Liberation Movement . . .” (a) 41
9/26/44: “With the arrest of Louis Renault . . .” (a) 47
9/27/44: “Please forgive us...” (a) 48

9/28/44: “One can read the communiqué of the Council
of Ministers .. .” (a) 50

10/8/44: “Yesterday, the National Council of the Resistance . . .” (a) 64
10/20/44: “We are not in agreement with M. Francois
Mauriac.” (a) 80
10/21/44: “Yes, the drama that France faces...” (a) 82
10/21/44: “Money versus Justice” (a) 83
11/3/44: “Governing is good.” (a) 97
11/7/44: “For several weeks . . .” (a) 104

11/16/44: “The Government has decided . . .” (p) 113
11/23/44: “To judge by what one reads in the Paris press . . .” (a) 120
11/24/44: “The more one thinks about it...” (a) 121

11/30/44: “The ministry of information . . .” (p) 128
12/1/44: “The problem of the press . . .” (a) 130
12/5/44: “There is a sort of tacit agreement between M. Mauriac
and us...” (p) 133
12/13/44: “One reads almost everywhere . . .” (s) 138
12/14/44: “Two days ago, the Consultative Assembly . . .” (s) 139

12/15/44: “The Consultative Assembly yesterday . . .” (s) 141
12/29/44: “Broad questions of policy . . .” (s) 153
1/2/45:
1/5/45:
2/9/45:
3/9/45:

“Panem et circenses’ (Suetonius) 159
“Minister Tiberius” (Suetonius) 165
“To judge by what is being said about us. . .” (s) 170
“For two days, M. Teitgen .. .” (p) 174

3/11-12/45: “Yesterday we published . . .” (p) 176
3/18/45: “Breaking our general rule . . .” (p) 179
4/5/45: “I am a teacher, and I’m hungry.” (a) 187

4/6/45: “Those who look upon the resignation . . .” (a) 188
5/12/45: “We are waiting for a government shakeup . . .” (p) 196
5/25/45: “Yesterday, General de Gaulle . . .” (p) 218
5/26/45: “While awaiting the ministerial shakeup . . .” (a) 219

THEMATIC

CLASSIFICATION

XXXKV

6/27/45: “M. Herriot has just made an unfortunate statement.” (a) 227
8/23/45: “The Radical Party congress . . .” (p) 242

8/24/45: “At the Radical Party congress . . .” (p) 244
8/26-27/45: “We have proved to be excellent prophets . . .” (p) 246

8/28/45: “Many readers have asked . . .” (p) 248
11/15/45: “France is in a state of siege.” (p) 253
4/22/47: “The Choice” (s) 285

4/30/47: “Democracy and Modesty” (a) 286
Foreign Policy
RECOGNITION

OF THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT

9/30/44: “Mr. Churchill has just delivered a speech . . .” (a) 52
10/14/44: “Mr. Churchill said in his most recent speech . . .” (a) 71
10/15/44: “We beg our readers’ indulgence . . .” (a) 73
10/17/44: “We must return once again . . .” (a) 75

10/19/44: “France's participation in the allied military government . . .’

>

(p) 78
1/3/45: “The Agence Frangaise de Presse . . .” (a) 162
EUROPEAN POLITICS

11/29/44: “Only just liberated, Europe is in turmoil.” (a) 126
12/3/44: “General de Gaulle has had talks with Marshal
Sealing. < -? @) 131
12/9/44: “Yesterday, before the House of Commons . . .” (a) 135
12/18/44: “The text of the Franco-Soviet pact . . .” (s) 145
2/17/45: ““Here, at least, we aren't living amidst lies’. . .” (p) 173
8/17/45: “Now that the war is over . . .” (p) 240
GERMANY

9/15/44: “In 1933, an eager, frenetic personage . . .” (a) 37
9/17/44: “What are the people of Germany doing? . . .” (a) 40

9/20/44: “We spoke the other day about the German people . . .” (a) 43
11/15/44: “There is something irritating . . .” (a) 112
12/20/44: “As von Rundstedt was launching his offensive . . .” (s) 147
6/30-7/1/45: “Images of Occupied Germany” (s) 229

5/7/47: “Anniversary” (a) 288
GREAT BRITAIN

9/23/44: “Four years ago...” (a) 45
10/3/44: “The Daily Mail has just published . . .” (a) 56
10/22/44: “The Daily Express...” (a) 85
5/31/45: “The Syrian affair. . .” (p) 221
6/1/45: “Mr. Churchill’s ultimatum . . .” (p) 223

THEMATIC

XXxxvi

CLASSIFICATION

BELGIUM

11/19/44: “We need to look closely .. .” (a) 115
11/26/44: “This is what we have come to: Belgian blood has been shed in
Brussels...” (a) 124
SPAIN

9/7/44: “Our Brothers in Spain” 29
10/5/44: “We have said before in this space . . .” (a) 59
10/24/44: “We wish to protest .. .” (a) 86
11/21/44: “It is once again time. . .” (a) 116

12/10/44: “Yesterday, many newspapers . . .” (a) 137
1/7—-8/45: “Spain is growing fainter.” (s) 166

5/27/45: “The foreign affairs committee of the Consultative Assembly . . .”

(p) 220

8/7/45: “General Franco has officially announced . . .” (p) 235
11/25/48: “Why Spain?” (s) 297
UNITED STATES

11/9/44: “Mr. Roosevelt’s election . . .” (p) 106

4/14/45: “His face was the very image of happiness.” (a) 192
4/15—16/45: “Mr. Truman has made no secret . . .” (p) 193
GREECE

11/29/44: “Only just liberated, Europe is in turmoil. . . .” (a) 126
12/5/44: “There is a sort of tacit agreement between M. Mauriac
and sis.
(pl 33

12/9/44: “Yesterday, before the House of Commons . .” (a) 135
POLAND

1/3/45: “The Agence Frangaise de Presse . . .” (s) 162
MIDDLE EAST

5/31/45: “The Syrian affair...” (p) 221
6/1/45: “Mr. Churchill’s ultimatum . . .” (p) 223
SOVIET UNION

12/3/44: “General de Gaulle has had talks with Marshal Stalin.” (a) 131
12/18/44: “The text of the Franco-Soviet pact . . .” (s) 145
4/10/45: “The victories on the western front . . .” (p) 190
International Politics

2/16/45: “Along with other difficult issues, the Crimea
Conference...” (p) 171
6/1/45: “Mr. Churchill’s ultimatum . . .” (p) 223

THEMATIC

CLASSIFICATION

XXXVil

8/14/45: “We previously indicated . . .” (p) 237
8/15/45: “Yesterday the Washington Times Herald...” (p) 239
12/9/48: “What Is the UN Accomplishing?” (s) 301
12/25-26/48: “Responses to an Unbeliever” (s) 304
Colonial Politics
ALGERIA

10/13/44: “It is impossible to exaggerate . . .” (a) 69
11/28/44: “We get word from many quarters . . .” (p) 126
5/13—14/45: “Crisis in Algeria” (s) 198
5/15/45: “Famine in Algeria” (s) 201
5/16/45: “Algeria Asks for Ships and Justice” (s) 203
5/18/45: “Natives of North Africa Estranged” (s) 207
5/20—21/45: “Arabs Demand a Constitution and a Parliament for Algeria”
(s) 212
5/23/45: “It Is Justice That Will Save Algeria from Hatred” (s) 214
6/15/45: “After being briefly traumatized . . .” (a) 225
8/4/45: “Many things have a claim . . .” (p) 233
3/14/49: “Only Privates Are Traitors” (s, Camus and Char) 309
INDOCHINA

2/17/45: “Here, at least, we aren't living amidst lies . . .” (p) 173
3/29/45: “Truth is a harsh master, allowing no time for rest.” (p) 182
8/15/45: “Yesterday the Washington Times Herald...” (p) 239
MADAGASCAR

5/10/47: “Contagion” (s) 290
Political Line of Combat

8/21/44: “Combat Continues” (a) 11
8/21/44: “From Resistance to Revolution” (a) 12
9/2/44: “The Democracy to Come” (a) 25
9/4/44: “Morality and Politics” (a) 27
9/19/44: “The National Liberation Movement . . .” (a) 41

10/1/44: “People say, ‘Tell us in a few words, what is it you want?’” (p) 54
10/7/44: “In Algiers on March 26, 1944...” (a) 62
10/8/44: “Yesterday, the National Council of the Resistance . . .” (a) 64
10/20/44: “We are not in agreement with M. Francois Mauriac.” (a) 80
10/21/44: “Yes, the drama that France faces .. .” (a) 82
11/10/44: “Yesterday, the Congress of the Socialist Party . . .” (a) 108
11/11/44: “Our friends from Défense de la France...” (a) 109
12/5/44: “There is a sort of tacit agreement between M. Mauriac
and us... (p)to3

THEMATIC

XXxvili

CLASSIFICATION

12/14/44: “Two days ago, the Consultative Assembly . . .” (s) 139
12/15/44: “The Consultative Assembly yesterday . . .” (s) 141
12/16/44: “There is a belief in some quarters . . .” (s) 142

12/31/44—-1/1/45: “1945"(p) 159
2/9/45: “To judge by what is being said about us . . .” (a) 170
6/5/45: “Henri Frenay is one of our comrades-in-arms.” (p) 224
8/14/45: “We previously indicated . . .” (p) 237
8/23/45: “The Radical Party congress . . .” (p) 242
8/24/45: “At the Radical Party congress . . .” (p) 244
8/26-27/45: “We have proved to be excellent prophets . . .” (p) 246

9/1/45: “The postwar has begun.” (p) 251
11/15/45: “France is in a state of siege.” (p) 253
4/22/47: “The Choice” (a) 285
6/3/47: “To Our Readers” (a) 292

Morality and Politics

8/29/44: “Intelligence and Character” (a) 18
9/4/44: “Morality and Politics” (a) 27
9/6/44: “The End of a World” (a) 28
9/8/44: “Justice and Freedom” (a) 31

9/12/44: “You write us about the prisoners of war .. .” (p) 35
10/1/44: “People say, “Tell us in a few words, what is it you want?’” (p) 54

10/6/44: “There was plenty of noise in the night sky over France yesterday.”
(a) 61
10/7/44: “In Algiers on March 26, 1944...” (a) 62
10/8/44: “Yesterday, the National Council of the Resistance . . .” (a) 64
10/12/44: “There is much talk of order right now.” (a) 68

10/29/44: “The day before yesterday, the minister of information . . .”

(a) 92
11/2/44:
11/3/44:
11/3/44:
11/4/44:

“The Council of Ministers . . .” (a) 95
“Governing is good.” (a) 97
“Pessimism and Courage” (s) 99
“Two days ago, Jean Guéhenno . . .” (a) 101

11/8/44: “The Consultative Assembly met yesterday . . .” (a) 105
11/11/44: “Our friends from Défense de la France...” (a) 109

11/23/44: “To judge by what one reads in the Paris press . . .” (a) 120
11/24/44: “The more one thinks about it...” (a) 121
12/1/44: “The problem of the press . . .” (a) 130

12/14/44: “Two days ago, the Consultative Assembly . . .” (s) 139
12/15/44: “The Consultative Assembly yesterday . . .” (s) 141
12/17/44: “When a revolution has broken out...” (s) 144
12/26/44: “The Pope has just delivered a message . . .” (s) 152

12/29/44: “Broad questions of policy . . .” (a) 153

THEMATIC

CLASSIFICATION

2/9/45: “To judge by what is being said about us . . .” (a) 170
2/17/45: ““Here, at least, we aren’t living amidst lies . . .’” (p) 173
3/9/45: “For two days, M. Teitgen .. .” (p) 174
3/11-12/45: “Yesterday we published . . .” (p) 176
3/27/45: “It is rather vexing . . .” (a) 180

4/3/45: “What was being celebrated yesterday . . .” (a) 184
4/17/45: “With every step closer to victory . . .” (p) 194
5/12/45: “We are waiting for a government shakeup . . .” (p) 196
5/17/45: “‘Our food consists of one liter of soup . . .””(a) 205

5/19/45: “The day before yesterday we protested . . .” (a) 210
5/25/45: “Yesterday, General de Gaulle delivered a speech . . .” (p) 218
6/5/45: “Henri Frenay is one of our comrades-in-arms.” (p) 224
6/27/45: “M. Herriot has just made an unfortunate statement.” (a) 227
8/8/45: “The world is what it is, which isn’t much.” (a) 236
8/17/45: “Now that the war is over. . .” (p) 240

8/23/45: “The Radical Party congress . . .” (p) 242
8/24/45: “At the Radical Party congress . . .” (p) 244
8/26—27/45: “We have proved to be excellent prophets . . .” (p) 246
9/1/45: “The postwar has begun. . . .” (p) 251
3/17/47: “The Deaf and Dumb Republic” (a) 280

4/30/47: “Democracy and Modesty” (a) 286
5/7/47: “Anniversary” (a) 288
5/10/47: “Contagion” (a) 290

12/9/48: “What Is the UN Accomplishing?” (s) 301
12/25—26/48: “Responses to an Unbeliever” (s) 304
Flesh

10/27/44: “It was difficult for us to speak . . .” (a) 90
12/22/44: “France has endured many tragedies . . .” (s) 149
1/2/45: “We have read .. .” (a) 160

4/17/45: “With every step closer to victory. . .” (p) 194
5/17/45: “‘Our food consists of one liter of soup . . .”” (a) 205
5/19/45: “The day before yesterday we protested . . .” (a) 210
Neither Victims nor Executioners

11/19/46: “The Century of Fear” (s) 257
11/20/46: “Saving Bodies” (s) 260

11/21/46: “Socialism Mystified” (s) 262
11/23/46: “The Revolution Travestied” (s) 264

11/26/46: “International Democracy and Dictatorship” (s) 266

11/27/46: “The World Moves Quickly” (s) 268
11/29/46: “A New Social Contract” (s) 270
11/30/46: “Toward Dialogue” (s) 274

XXxix

THEMATIC

xl

CLASSIFICATION

The Press

8/31/44: “Critique of the New Press” (s) 21
9/1/44: “The Reform of the Press” (s) 23
9/8/44: “Critical Journalism” (s) 32

9/22/44: “As everyone knows, newspapers are today subject . . .” (a) 44
10/3/44: “The Daily Mail has just published . . .” (a) 56
10/4/44: “It is no secret that the Underground Press Federation . . .” (a) 57
10/7/44: “In Algiers on March 26, 1944...” (a) 62
10/11/44: “The situation of the press poses problems. . . .” (a) 66
10/20/44: “We are not in agreement with M. Francois Mauriac.” (a) 80

10/24/44: “We wish to protest here in a firm and measured way . . .”
(a) 86
10/31/44: “We can discuss the case of M. Stéphane Lauzanne . . .” (a) 94
11/5/44: “The Officiel has published . . .” (a) 103
11/15/44: “There is something irritating . . .” (a) 112
11/22/44: “It is time for some self-criticism.” (a) 118
11/30/44: “The ministry of information is preparing a decree .. .” (p) 128

12/1/44: “The problem of the press . . .” (a) 130
12/10/44: “Yesterday, many newspapers . . .” (a) 137
12/23/44: “French Renaissance” (Suetonius) 150

3/9/45: “For two days, M. Teitgen ...” (p) 174
3/11-12/45: “Yesterday we published . . .” (p) 176
3/16/45: “In Témoignage chrétien .. .” (p) 178
8/22/45: “The first National Assembly of the Press . . .” (p) 241
9/1/45: “The postwar has begun.” (p) 251

3/17/47: “The Deaf and Dumb Republic” (s) 280
3/21/47: “Radio 47” [freedom of speech in broadcast media can be classed
together with the written press] (s) 282
4/22/47: “The Choice” (s) 285
6/3/47: “To Our Readers” (s) 292
Justice
8/22/44: “Time for Justice” (p) 14
8/30/44: “The Age of Contempt” (a) 20
9/8/44: “Justice and Freedom” (a) 31
9/12/44: “You write us about the prisoners of war. . .” (p) 35
9/26/44: “With the arrest of Louis Renault . . .” (a) 47

9/27/44: “Please forgive us, but we are not yet done with the case of
Renault... .” (a) 48

9/28/44: “One can read the communiqué of the Council of Ministers
elsewhere.” (a) 50

10/6/44: “There was plenty of noise in the night sky .. .” (a) 61
10/12/44: “There is much talk of order right now.” (a) 68

THEMATIC

CLASSIFICATION

10/18/44: “Let us say a few words about the purge.” (a) 76
10/20/44: “We are not in agreement with M. Francois Mauriac.” (a) 80
10/21/44: “Yes, the drama that France faces . . .” (a) 82
10/21/44: “Money versus Justice” (Juste Bauchart) 83
10/25/44: “We hesitated to respond . . .” (a) 88
10/31/44: “We can discuss the case of M. Stéphane Lauzanne . . .” (p) 94
11/2/44: “The Council of Ministers has just established a High Court of
Justice . 2 (a) 95
11/5/44: “The Officiel has published . . .” (a) 103
12/30/44: “Judge Not” (s) 155

1/5/45: “The press has lately been preoccupied with injustice.” (s) 163
1/11/45: “Justice and Charity” (s) 168
3/29/45: “Truth is a harsh master, allowing no time for rest.” (p) 182
5/23/45: “It Is Justice That Will Save Algeria from Hatred” (a) 214

6/15/45: “After being briefly traumatized . . .” (a) 225
8/2/45: “Since the Court of Justice has acknowledged . . .” (p) 232
8/30/45: “We beg the reader’s indulgence . . .” (a) 249
5/10/47: “Contagion” (a) 290
The Church

9/8/44: “Justice and Freedom” (a) 31
9/16/44: “A wire service report .. .” (a) 38

12/26/44: “The Pope has just delivered a message . . .” (s) 152
3/27/45: “It is rather vexing . . .” (a) 180
3/22/47: “No Excuse for This” (s) 283

Miscellaneous

12/24/44: “The Poet and General de Gaulle” (Suetonius) 151
12/31/44: “The Thirteenth Caesar” (Suetonius) 158
1/2/45: “Panem et circenses” (Suetonius) 160
1/17/47: “What do you think of American literature?” (s) 277

xli

CAMUS at Combat

CHAPTER 1

Combat Underground: March—July 1944

Articles that appeared in clandestine issues of Combat can at best be classified as
“probably” by Camus, and it is not out of the question that he wrote others. For obvious reasons, he kept no record of what he wrote, and no firm conclusions can be
drawn from either the themes or the style of what was published, since everything
that appeared in the paper constituted an act of resistance and reflected goals
shared by everyone who wrote for it.

Combat, Underground No. 55, March 1944
Against Total War, Total Resistance!

Lying is never without purpose. Even the most impudent lie, if repeated often
enough and long enough, always leaves a trace. German propaganda subscribes
to this principle, and today we have another example of its application. Inspired

by Goebbels’s minions,” cheered on by the lackey press, and staged by the Milice,’ a formidable campaign has just been launched—a campaign which seeks, in
the guise of an attack on the patriots of the underground and the Resistance, to
divide the French once again. This is what they are saying to Frenchmen: “We
are killing and destroying bandits who would kill you if we weren't there. You
have nothing in common with them.”
Although this lie, reprinted a million times, retains a certain power, stating the
truth is enough to repel the falsehood. And here is the truth: it is that the French
have everything in common with those whom they are today being taught to fear
and despise. There is one France, not two: not one that is fighting and another
that stands above the battle in judgment. For even if there are those who would
prefer to remain in the comfortable position of judges, that is not possible. You
cannot say, “This doesn’t concern me.” Because it does concern you. The truth
is that Germany has today not only unleashed an offensive against the best and

1 As Roger Quilliot and Yves-Marc Ajchenbaum have suggested, it seems more than likely that this article was written by Camus.

2 Goebbels, Joseph Paul (1897-1945). After joining the Nazi Party in 1922, he devoted himself primarily
to psychological action, news, and propaganda. Named head of propaganda for the Nazi Party in 1928,
he became Minister of Propaganda and Information in 1933. Loyal to Hitler to the end, he and his fam-

ily committed suicide by poison during the final stages of the battle for Berlin.
3 The Milice (Militia), created by Darnand in January 1943, was charged with supporting German efforts
to suppress the French Resistance. [Milice is left untranslated throughout, but members of the Milice are
referred to as “militiamen.”]

22

CHAPTER

1

proudest of our compatriots, but it is also continuing its total war against all of
France, which is exposed in its totality to Germany’s blows.

Dont say, “This doesn’t concern me. I live in the country, and the end of the
war will find me just as I was at the beginning of the tragedy, living in peace.”
Because it does concern you. Take note. On January 29, in Malleval in the Isére,
a whole village was burned by the Germans on the mere suspicion that compulsory labor service holdouts* might have taken refuge there. Twelve houses were
completely destroyed, eleven bodies discovered, fifteen men arrested. On
December 18 at Chaveroche in Corréze, five kilometers from Ussel, where a German officer was wounded in murky circumstances, five hostages were shot and
two farms put to the torch. On February 4 in Grole, in the Ain, Germans, after
failing to find the holdouts they were searching for, shot the mayor and two leading citizens.
These dead Frenchmen were people who might have said, “This doesn't concern
me.” But the Germans decided that it did concern them, and on that day they

demonstrated that it concerned all of us. Don’t say, “This doesn’t concern me. I’m
at home with my family, I listen to the radio every night, and I read my newspaper.”
Because they'll come after you on the pretext that somebody at the other end of
France refused to go. They'll take your son, who also said it was no concern of his,
and they'll mobilize your wife, who until now thought the whole business was for
men only. In reality, it does concern you, and it concerns all of us. Because all the
French are today bound together so tightly by the enemy that one person's act
inspires all the others and one person’s inattention or indifference can cost ten others their lives.
Dont say, “I sympathize, that’s quite enough, and the rest is no concern of
mine.” Because you will be killed, deported, or tortured as a sympathizer just as
easily as if you were a militant. Act: your risk will be no greater, and you will at
least share in the peace at heart that the best of us take with them into the prisons.
That way France won't be divided. The enemy’s effort is in fact intended to
encourage Frenchmen to hesitate to do their national duty to resist the $.T.O.”
and support the underground. It would succeed but for the fact that the truth
stands in its way. And the truth is that the combined efforts of the assassins of
the Milice and the killers of the Gestapo® have yielded risible results. Hundreds

4 Réfractaires. the term refers to Frenchmen who refused to leave for Germany when ordered to do so as
part of the Service du Travail Obligatoire, or $.T.O., the Compulsory Labor Service. I have translated it
as “holdouts.”
° The S.T.O. was established in February 1943 by the Vichy government acting under German pressure.

The goal was to supply German factories with French labor. Many of the people drafted into the S.T.O.
chose to go underground rather than depart for Germany, but 170,000 French “laborers” nevertheless
answered the call.
6 The Gestapo (short for Geheime Staatspolizei, or Secret State Police) was the political police force of the

Nazi Party. Created by Goring in 1933 and later led by Himmler and Heydrich, it conducted a reign of
terror in Germany and the occupied countries, employing the most horrific means to persecute opponents
of the regime, resisters, and Jews. At the Nuremberg trials after the war, it was condemned for crimes
against humanity.

COMBAT

UNDERGROUND:

MARCH-JULY

1944

3

of thousands of holdouts are still holding out, fighting, and hoping. A few arrests

wont change that. And that is what the 125,000 young men whom the enemy
plans to deport every month must understand. For all of them are in the enemy's
sights, and the 44 and °45 drafts to which the enemy refers with admirable candor as “a labor reserve” stand for France itself, which in Germany’s hate-filled
eyes stands united.
Total war has been unleashed, and it calls for total resistance. You must resist

because it does concern you, and there is only one France, not two. And the incidents of sabotage, the strikes, the demonstrations that have been organized
throughout France are the only ways of responding to this war. That is what we
expect from you. Action in the cities to respond to the attacks in the countryside.
Action in the factories. Action on the enemy’ lines of communication. Action against
the Milice: every militiaman is a possible murderer.
There is only one fight, and if you don’t join it, your enemy will nevertheless
supply you with daily proof that that fight is yours. Take your place in it, because
if the fate of everyone you like and respect concerns you, then once again, rest
assured, this fight does concern you. Just tell yourself that together we will bring
to it the great strength of the oppressed, namely, solidarity in suffering. That is
the force that will ultimately kill the lie, and our common hope is that when that
day comes, it will retain enough momentum to inspire a new truth and a new
France.

ComBAT

Combat, Underground No. 56, April 1944

Outlaws’
What is the Milice? To go by the Paris press, it’s our greatest hope, our last
chance, and this last chance had better not be missed. This helps us to understand. Because the Milice is defending something, and that something has nothing to do with the order it claims to be upholding. It is defending the lives and
the interests, the shame and the calculations, of a small proportion of Frenchmen

who have turned against France and who face annihilation when victory comes.
It enlists crime on behalf of cowardice.
But it also enlists crime on behalf of treason. For the past four years, the enemy
has not let a single day go by without trying to turn some Frenchmen against

7 In the view of Jacqueline Bernard, as reported by Yves-Marc Ajchenbaum in A a vie, a la mort, p. 80, it
is unlikely that this article was written by Camus. Yet the article leads off with a question, a device used

by Camus in several of his editorials (see, for example, “What Is an Insurrection?” August 23, 1944, or
“What Are the Germans Up To?” September 17). The repetition of the phrase “it took four years” is similar to the repetition in the article “From Resistance to Revolution,” August 21. And the mix of irony and
seriousness is frequent in Camus’ writing. Finally, if the Milice was obviously a frequent target of articles
in underground newspapers, the attacks on these “outlaws” are quite similar to those contained in the July
article, “You Will Be Judged by Your Actions,” which was very likely written by Camus.

4

CHAPTER

1

others. Everything was grist to its mill. Yet it is fair to say that it took the enemy
no fewer than four years to persuade a small number of disgraced Frenchmen to
bear arms against France herself and the best of her men. For during those shameful four years of madness, there were indeed among us heads of state, ministers of
government, and a police force that, consciously or not, out of cowardice or out

of weakness, in treason or inertia, played the German game. There were also
Frenchmen willing to fight on distant battlefields and to defend the cause of the
very people who were subjecting their own country to torture. But it took four
whole years to recruit a troop of murderous mercenaries resolved to lend France's
enemy a hand against France herself. It took four years of German propaganda to
dig up a “hero of two wars” prepared to sully his decorations in the most cowardly
and degrading police work.
But such men were found, and their very existence poses a problem of justice.
For as is always the case, Sganarella wants to outdo Don Juan, the lackey seeks
to go the master one better. On this point, convinced [sic] that the servants are

well trained. These self-appointed guardians of order courageously kidnap an
elderly couple, strip them naked in a field, and slaughter them with the most
refined methods of torture. Recently in Nice these exemplary French heroes had
the Germans hand over six Frenchmen arrested by the Gestapo (mostly for frivolous reasons) so that they could torture them, disfigure them, and put them to
death. They portray themselves as defenders of the law, yet they bring patriots to
trial before a court of bandits and send them to the firing squad a few seconds
after being found guilty in a parody of judgment. The “hero of two wars” claims
to be carrying on an admirable French tradition. Apparently it consists in taking
hostages, killing intellectuals and workers, and relying on a servile press to heap

lies and insults on the victims of torture and humiliation. In truth, however, we
know this tradition well. It was born on the other side of the Rhine in the heart
of another war hero. For M. Darnand,® what's involved is not tradition but
treason.
But all this explains why the problem of justice is easily resolved. For while it
is desirable in the case of other traitors that the forms of justice be respected, the

Milice has placed itself outside the law. It must be made quite clear that each
militiaman, in signing his enlistment papers, is ratifying his own death sentence.
By turning against France, these people exclude themselves from France. Rotten
branches cannot be left attached to the tree. They have to be lopped off, reduced
to sawdust, and scattered on the ground. That is the fate awaiting each of Darnand’s murderers. Courts-martial would be pointless, moreover. The Milice is its
own tribunal. It has judged itself and sentenced itself to death. Those sentences
will be carried out.
8 Darnand, Joseph (1897-1945) fought in World War I as a heroic commando and then became an active

militant in the extreme right-wing Action Frangaise between the wars. A champion of collaboration with
Germany, he served as secretary ofstate for the interior in the government of Vichy and founded the Service d’ordre légionnaire and the Milice, which he directed for the purpose of combating the Resistance.
After fleeing to Sigmaringen with Pétain and later to Italy, where he was arrested, he was sentenced to
death and shot on October 10, 1945.

COMBAT

UNDERGROUND:

MARCH-JULY

1944

5

Combat, Underground No. 57, May 1944

For Three Hours They Shot Frenchmen?
The truth must be told: we are vaccinated against horror. All those faces
disfigured by bullets and heels, all those crushed bodies, those murdered innocents, at first filled us with the revulsion and disgust we needed in order to know
what we were fighting for. Now the daily struggle has colored everything, and
although we never forget the reasons for it, we may at times lose sight of them.
But the enemy is there, and as if to make sure that no one avert his eyes, he is
increasing his efforts, outdoing himself, each time descending a little deeper into
infamy and a little further into crisis. Today, in any event, he went beyond what
anyone could have imagined, and the tragedy of Ascq reminds all Frenchmen
that they are engaged in a general and unremitting struggle against a disgraced
enemy.
What are the facts?
On April 1, 1944, during the night, two explosions severed a railway line and
led to the derailment of two cars of a German troop train. The line was blocked.
No one on the train was killed.
At around 11 that night, M. Carré, the station chief at Ascq, having been
awakened at his home by night shift personnel, was on the telephone dealing
with the situation when a German transportation officer entered his office
screaming, followed by a number of soldiers who used their rifle butts to beat
M. Carré along with M. Peloquin, a senior clerk, and M. Derache, a telegrapher,
who also happened to be on the premises at the time. The soldiers then withdrew to the office doorway and from there fired on the three prostrate employees with submachine guns. Carré and Peloquin were gravely wounded in the
stomach and thighs. Then the officer led a large contingent of troops into the town,

broke down the doors of the houses, searched them, and rounded up some sixty
men, who were marched to a pasture opposite the station. There they were shot.
Twenty-six other men were also shot in their homes or thereabouts. Among the
eighty-six people shot, some lay wounded.
The telegrapher, Derache, managed to alert district headquarters in
Lille, which notified the Prefecture of the Nord. The prefecture called the
Oberfeldkommandantur.
The executions did not stop until officers of the general staff arrived on the
scene. The killing went on for more than three hours.
Whether it is possible to conjure up vividly enough an image of a scene
described in such blunt language I do not know. But is it possible to read this
report without being overcome by feelings of revulsion and disgust at the mere
sight of the numbers: eighty-six men, three hours?

9 Like the article of March 1944, this one is unanimously attributed to Camus (see Y.-M. Ajchenbaum,

op. cit., p. 80). Indeed, the vigor of the style, the visionary realism, and, once again, the central idea of
solidarity leave little room for doubt.

6

CHAPTER

1

Eighty-six men’? just like you, the readers of this newspaper, passed before the
German guns. Eighty-six men: enough to fill three or four rooms the size of the
room youre sitting in. Eighty-six faces, drawn or defiant, eighty-six faces overwhelmed by horror or by hatred.
The slaughter continued for three hours, a little more than two minutes for
each victim. Three hours, the amount of time that some of you will have spent
that day at dinner or talking quietly with friends, while elsewhere people
watched a film and laughed at made-up adventures. For three hours, minute
after minute, without letup, without a pause, in a single French village, shots
were fired one after another and bodies fell writhing to the ground.
This is the image that must be kept in mind so that nothing is forgotten, the
image that must be shown to any Frenchman who remains on the sidelines. For
among those eighty-six innocents were many who thought that, having done nothing to oppose the German forces, nothing would be done to them. But France is
one, there is but a single wrath, but a single martyr. And when M. de Brinon'!
writes to the German authorities not to complain about the massacre of so many
Frenchmen but to whine that his work with the vice squad is being hampered, he
is responsible for that martyrdom and guilty before that wrath. For the question is
not whether these crimes will be forgiven; it is whether anyone will pay for them.
And if we were inclined to doubt it, the image of this village soaked in blood and
from this day forth populated solely by widows and orphans should suffice to
assure us that someone will pay for this crime, because the decision is now in the
hands of all the French, and in the face of this new massacre we are discovering the
solidarity of martyrdom and the power that grows out of vengeance.

Combat, Clandestine No. 58, July 1944
The Murderers’ Great Fear

On the walls and urinals of Paris, Darnand displays his prose. He addresses his
own men, demands absolute obedience, and promises exemplary punishment for
those who fail to comply. So there are disobedient militiamen! Will anyone be
surprised by the news?
When the Germans burned villages and captured patriots, the militiamen carefully delayed their arrival until it was time to take charge of the prisoners. They
stared at the silent captives and grew angry. Nothing is more irritating than the
sight of a man to those who have deliberately ceased to be men. And then their
work began. Their job was to prove that human dignity is a lie and that the idea
of a self-conscious individual, master of his own fate, is but a democratic myth.

'0' The text continues on page two under the headline “Slaughter at Ascq.”
' Fernand de Brinon (1885-1947). An active proponent of collaboration, he represented the Vichy government before the German authorities in Paris and later served as secretary of state. After the Liberation
he was sentenced to death by the High Court of Justice and executed.

COMBAT

UNDERGROUND:

MARCH-JULY

1944

4

They heaped insults on their victims to whet their own appetites, to debase their
prisoners with words and to debase themselves a bit further. Then they plucked out
a few fingernails, stomped a few chests. The goal was to extract a cry of suffering
from the gasping victim, a confession, a renunciation. If they succeeded, they
breathed a little easier. They thought, We're all alike, those people won't be thumbing their noses at us anymore. They were happy to have transformed their silent
judges into accomplices of their own degradation. Malraux says somewhere that it
is impossible to aim a flamethrower at a man who is looking you in the eye.'? So
imagine, then, what a militiaman must be like to take pleasure in torturing a man
whose eyes are open. These torturers have a very specific mission: it is to wipe out
anything that isn't vile, anything that isn’t cowardly, and to demonstrate by their
own example and by making an example of others that man is made to live in
chains and terror. If they were to succeed, there would be no more witnesses, and
their own personal ignominy would be identified with the flaws of human nature.
Today, though, some would assign these people a new role. The Germans, occupied elsewhere, are no longer there to defend them. A resistance army has arisen
out of the earth. The torturers are being asked to fight like men, rifle against rifle.
And that is profoundly unjust. Where would anyone expect them to find the
courage? They would need precisely those qualities that they were previously asked
to destroy in themselves and others: confidence in man, confidence in the individual. Darnand’* knows this. That is why he is making threats. But it is too late.
There is no threat terrible enough to make a man out of a member of the Milice.

Combat, Clandestine No. 58, July 1944
You Will Be Judged by Your Actions'4

Now that the final battle is getting under way, Pétain’’ and Laval'® have raised
their discordant voices and sought to gain favor for their common policy by
seeming to speak in two different keys. Both addressed the country, and in
12 In LEspoir (Mans Hope), during the fighting in the Alcazar of Toledo, one of the republican fighters,
the Negus, finds himself face-to-face with a fascist holding a flamethrower. Because the man hesitates “a
quarter of a second” before aiming the flamethrower at him, the Negus has the time to fire a shot at him.

Later he remarks: “It must be difficult to burn alive a man who’s looking you in the eye.” (Oeuvres completes, vol. 2, Pléiade, Gallimard, 1996, p. 113.)

13 See n. 8 above.

14 The insistence on commitment through words and on justice; the use of expressions such as “the flesh
of France,” which anticipates a chapter title in Actuelles, and “the war has become total,” which echoes the

idea of the March 1944 article; and the very tone of this article, perfectly in line with those that went
before, all argue in favor of attributing it to Camus.
15 Pétain, Philippe (1856-1951). Marshal of France in 1918 and regarded as the victor of Verdun, he
served as Minister of War for a few months in 1934. Close to Maurras and the Action Frangaise, he

became ambassador to Franco's Spain in 1939. He served as Vice-President of the Council of Ministers

under Paul Reynaud in March 1940 and became President when Reynaud resigned on June 16, 1940,
whereupon he asked for an armistice with Germany and became head of the French state—’Etat francais,
which replaced the Republic after the vote of the National Assembly on July 10, 1940. He installed his

8

CHAPTER

1

keeping with their traditional division of labor, Laval spoke of Germany, while
Pétain pretended to speak of France. In truth, however, both spoke of treason,
albeit in tones of sadness, as though that treason had suddenly become clairvoyant. This has been going on for years. Ever since Pétain laid the groundwork in
Vichy for a regime that rationed everything it gave us except humiliation and
shame, he has played what he takes to be a shrewd game, so that he remains our
supreme symbol of compromise and confusion. When compromise reigns
supreme, however, it suffices to speak plainly. We have reached a stage where
there is no shrewd strategy other than courage and plain speaking. As usual,
moreover, it is the French Resistance that speaks a language in which France can
recognize herself. And since the hour for appeals is on us, the Resistance, too, is

issuing an appeal to the people of this country. It is saying that there is nothing
more to think over, weigh, or evaluate. Pétain’s secret thoughts, if he has any, and

Laval’s tricks are of no importance: neutrality is no longer possible. The time is
fast approaching when the people of this country will be judged not by their
intentions but by their actions, and by the actions to which their words have
committed them. That alone is just.
And the French Resistance is telling us clearly that for the past five years the
words and actions of Pétain and Laval have done nothing but divide and humiliate France and kill Frenchmen. Pétain and Laval have been disgraced by the war.
They will be judged for it.
The Resistance is telling you that we are now at a stage where every word
counts, where every word is a commitment, especially when those words ratify
the execution of our brothers, insult our courage, and deliver the flesh of France
herself to the most implacable of enemies. When they call patriots terrorists and
murderers, when they bestow the name “honor” on what is simply resignation,

“order” on what is simply torture, and “loyalism” on what is simply murder,
compromise is impossible.

government in Vichy. Adopting the new motto “Work, Family, Fatherland,” he adopted a policy of active
collaboration with Germany, although he had to share power with Laval and was further weakened when
the Germans occupied the former Free Zone in November of 1942. After being evacuated to Sigmaringen at the end of the war, he returned to France in April 1945, where he was put on trial (July 23 to
August 15, 1945). Sentenced to death, his penalty was immediately commuted to life imprisonment. He
died on the Ile d’Yeu in June 1951.

16 Laval, Pierre (1883-1945). Elected deputy first as a socialist and later an “independent socialist,” Laval
served several terms as a minister of the Third Republic and twice as President of the Council of Ministers. Forced to resign in 1936, he returned to power after the defeat of 1940. As minister of state under
Pétain, he persuaded the Parliament to approve a revision of the constitution putting an end to the Republic and played a leading role in establishing the government of Vichy, in which he served as VicePresident. A passionate advocate of collaboration, he arranged the meeting between Pétain and Hitler at
Montoire in October 1940. Arrested on orders from Pétain, who replaced him with Darlan from January
1941 until April 1942, he was freed by the Germans, who made him the strong man of the Vichy regime,
in which he served simultaneously as Minister of the Interior, Information, and Foreign Affairs. He is
known to have declared his preference for a German victory in the war. Toward the end of the war he left
for Sigmaringen with Pétain, then went to Austria. Eventually he was arrested and sentenced to death and
after a suicide attempt died before a firing squad on October 15, 1945.

COMBAT

UNDERGROUND:

MARCH-JULY

1944

9

The Resistance is telling you that you have no government on French soil and
you don’t need one. We are quite grown up enough to clench our teeth and bear
what is surrounding and oppressing us; quite grown up enough to bear the
thought of our imprisoned and tortured comrades, of whom we never speak,
whom we leave enveloped in the silence of fraternity; quite grown up enough to
endure hunger and murder. We don’t need Vichy to settle our score with shame.
We don't need hypocritical blessings. We need men and courage. We don’t need
to serve the cult of suffering; we need only to overcome it. Not alone, but with
an entire people against a predatory nation and a few dishonorable traitors. We
don't need a holiday from morality, we need soul, and we can’t get it from those
apostles who preached abdication of all our responsibilities.
Frenchmen, the French Resistance is issuing the only appeal you need to hear.
The war has become total. But a single struggle remains. The flower of the nation
is preparing to sacrifice itself, and now is not the time to be tempted by forgiveness. Anyone who isn’t with us is against us. From this moment on there are only
two parties in France: the France that has always been and those who shall soon
be annihilated for having attempted to annihilate it.

Combat, Clandestine No. 58, July

1944

The Profession of Journalist'”

“For the first time in history, the profession of journalist has become an honorable profession,” M. Marcel Déat declared."
M. Marcel Déat is right.
Clandestine journalism is honorable because it is a proof of independence,
because it involves a risk. It is good, it is healthy, that everything to do with current political events has become dangerous. If there is anything we don't want to
see again, it is the shield of impunity behind which so much cowardly behavior
and so many underhanded machinations once took refuge.
Having become honorable activities, politics and journalism will be obliged
one day to judge those who dishonored them. . . . For example, M. Marcel Déat.

17 The liveliness, irony, and conception of journalism underlying this little sidebar leave little doubt as to
its author's identity.
18 Déat, Marcel (1894-1955). Socialist deputy, minister of the Third Republic, Déat became editor of the
newspaper L’Qeuvre in 1940 and founded the Rassemblement National Populaire, which favored collab-

oration. Appointed Secretary of State for Labor and Social Affairs in 1944, he proved to be a very active
propagandist. After he sought refuge in Italy, he was sentenced to death in absentia.

WMhcrincee -ef,

Are 50th Beir

‘

va

Ni Aca yuk Mea

ie MALE

ands slow ona aucmys Me th

Aafia

Sapnay Lively, thaseoshes am
ieane ie iperoihaat |
“ git “a

nue

ae. seek

o4, sora

ii
Si
LE gel

ae tilk Sortlal Te) Pacer

:

1

a

wed
inciteia

ia

fea

>

~

casa Paeas

on RRMA eaega de areneTee

| oy= san vay
Lasogge ta GAS ea ea
aa,

pileve multiball

leh

peasy Aer

wot ustbyoud

gh ahs Hi

7

m

9 peers takeTek Hwee

Pee

io hap

90 RRS. ital) aR : Py

basilfogs Paoli
P?
renee

corns

beeen be

w

Deabhaaial.

ror A yond

yop

as

gea
)
oi
“tren k es ay ton
‘ Pound Petey. aete Linke the ord
daha
meet
a

Hiei’

oe Sf Wea

pier yee

ited onomtend tak5
o
é

«2

é

cates

Ge
ie

SS

aAne
‘

;

“

Mad

yi
-

%

eunte
bl

baie 4OW Ue

oo Hogitur
ee

TMT

= ape

»

|

ot tals

rie

DuBiet

passntgt

Cit Ge abba

C

nied

hs

Lae

petewnt:
Lei

va

ysl te Cyt

a

:

a

;

haa?

-t

s

hate etal

As aan

“the,

in aa:

(Pani

pay

=

CNG ay ly

sue F alsa
sri

Ui

1

~—

praia

|

*

airs a

Us

Pi

,

;

*
|

\ibyesms habegrle

"

\

Mf

ry

re,

ei

lia

Sean

oe vhidhe

Grrefed wiles ow

atid

neree

=

: bax

re.

as

‘ -_
(aye
ie :

*

meabenedad

ONO

Ga

Oe

Lire

0

inl?

i

alec

. =

<The A

aan +
uf

> i, B= pare

;

=

éo,€ rye eh

ae

Wy ei 5
NEY
Pry ai
2 CEE bree, wHET hae wi. eens if

iad
oie

hit

Pe a pet

aii fe eater em

y FE

Row at)
haaey,

F

Are Lape

.

ry

Ate

aneparca a rhe stn ooh

a

CHAPTER 2

August 21, 1944—November 15, 1945

Throughout this period, and until January 11 in particular, Camus’ participation in the
work of Combat was active and remarkably fruitful. After February 9 his contributions
became somewhat less regular, although he remained quite active, as is clear from
numerous editorials (which unfortunately were unsigned and for which no typescript
remains in the archives), as well as the important series on the “Crisis in Algeria.”
After writing a final editorial in November, Camus left the staff of the newspaper.

August 21, 1944

Combat Continues . . .!
Today, August 21, as this newspaper hits the streets, the liberation of Paris is

nearing an end. After fifty months of occupation, of struggle and sacrifice, Paris
is rediscovering the feeling of freedom, even as bursts of gunfire erupt at street
corners around the city.
It would be dangerous, however, to return to the illusion that the freedom that

is the due of every individual comes without effort or corresponding pain. Freedom has to be earned and has to be won. It is by fighting the invader and the
traitors that the Forces Frangaises de l'Intérieur [FFI, or French Forces of the
Interior] are restoring the Republic, which is the indispensable condition of our
freedom. It is through struggle that freedom and the Republic will triumph.
The liberation of Paris is but one step in the liberation of France—and here
the word LIBERATION has to be understood in its broadest possible sense. The
fight against Nazi Germany continues. It will be waged unremittingly. But if this
is the most difficult of the battles for which all France has mobilized, it is not the
only one we must wage.
It won't be enough to regain the outward appearance of freedom for which
France was obliged to settle in 1939. And we will have accomplished only an
infinitesimal part of our task if the French Republic of tomorrow were to find
itself, like the Third Republic, under the strict control of Money (l’Argent).”

Of course the struggle against the power of money was long one of the favorite
themes of Pétain and his team. Yet it is also true that Money has never weighed
more heavily on our people than in the period that began in July 1940, when it
helped the traitors gain power and, in order to protect and expand its privileges,

deliberately tied its interests to Hitler's.

1 Editorial. Typewritten text. Until September 10 the editorials are generally titled and marked with the
symbol X in lieu of a signature.
2 This would remain a constant theme in the political attitude of both Combat and Camus.

CHAPTER

ib

2

It is no accident that men like Laval, Bouthillier,? Baudouin,* Pucheu,’ and

Leroy-Ladurie® succeeded one another in Vichy’s ministerial councils.
It is no accident that the so-called “organizing committees” were headed by
“organizers” whose relations with the proletariat in most cases were never anything but the relations of masters to servants.
Thanks to the fight we are waging with the Allies against Hitler's armies, all of
French territory will soon be liberated. But it is up to us to secure our freedom.
The combat continues.
xX

August 21, 1944

From Resistance to Revolution’

It has taken five years of obstinate, silent struggle for a newspaper born of the
spirit of resistance and published without interruption despite all the dangers of
clandestinity to be able to appear at last in the light of day, in a Paris liberated
from its shame. It is impossible to write these words without emotion. The
stunned joy that we are just beginning to read on Parisian faces is a joy we share,
a joy we feel, perhaps, even more deeply than most. But the task of the men of
the resistance is not yet complete. The end of the ordeal can now be glimpsed
ahead. It is easy for us to make time for celebration. Joy now takes the place in
our hearts that for five years was occupied by hope. There, too, we shall keep the
faith. But the time that is now upon us calls for joint effort. The magnitude of
the task that now awaits us obliges us to stifle our cries of joy and ponder the fate
of the country for which we have fought so hard. Today, with the appearance of
our first public issue, the men of Combat want to state as loudly and as clearly as
possible what five years of perseverance and honesty have taught them about
France’s greatness as well as her weaknesses.
Those years were not wasted. The Frenchmen who entered this period with a
reflex reaction of humiliated honor end it with superior knowledge, as a result of
which they now rank above all else the intelligence, courage, and truth of the
human heart. They know, moreover, that the insistence on these values, as general

as they may seem, establishes certain daily obligations of a moral and political
kind. To put it in a nutshell, just as they shared but a single faith in 1940, today,

3 Bouthillier, Yves. Minister of Finance (1940-1942).
4 Baudouin, Paul. Minister of Foreign Affairs.

> Pucheu, Pierre. A former director of the Steel Cartel, Pucheu served first as Minister of Industrial Production and then as Minister of the Interior (1941-1942). Sentenced to death in Algiers, he was executed
in March 1944. Camus wrote an article about him entitled “Not Everything Can Be Arranged,” which
appeared in a clandestine issue of Les Lettres frangaises in May 1944 (Essais, op. cit., pp. 1468-1470).
° Leroy-Ladurie, Jacques. Minister of Agriculture and Food Supply (1942).
’ Article. Typewritten text. Reprinted the next day with an introductory paragraph underscoring the fact
that it “sets forth the political line” of the newspaper and explaining the slogan.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

13

in 1944, they share but a single politics, in the noble sense of the word. Having
begun with resistance, they want to end with Revolution.
What We Know

We do not believe in ready-made principles or theoretical plans. In the days to
come we will define, through our actions as well as in a series of articles, the content of the word “revolution.” For the time being, however, this word gives
meaning to our preference for energy and honor, to our decision to be done with

the spirit of mediocrity and the moneyed interests and with a social state whose
ruling class failed in all its duties and demonstrated a lack of both intelligence
and heart. We want without delay to institute a true people’s and workers’
democracy. In this alliance, democracy will contribute the principles of freedom
and the people will contribute the faith and courage without which freedom is
nothing. We believe that any politics that cuts itself off from the working class is
futile. The France of tomorrow will be what its working class becomes.
What We Want®

That is why we want immediate implementation of a Constitution that will
restore full guarantees of freedom and justice; serious structural reforms, without

which any politics of freedom would be a sham; merciless destruction of the
trusts and moneyed interests; and a foreign policy based on honor and loyalty to
all our allies, without exception. In the present state of affairs, such a program
goes by the name “Revolution.” This can probably be achieved in a calm and
orderly fashion, but it is the price that must be paid if France is to regain the pure

countenance that we loved and defended above all.
Many things in this shattered world are no longer in our power. But our
honor, our justice, and the well-being of the humblest among us are ours to
decide. And it is by upholding or creating such values, by unflinchingly destroying those institutions and clans that are bent on denying them, and by honoring
the revolutionary spirit growing out of the resistance that we will define for the
world and for ourselves the image and example of a nation saved from its worst
mistakes and emerging from five years of humiliation and sacrifice with a youthful visage of grandeur regained.”
8 This subhead repeats that of an article published in February 1944 in a clandestine issue of Combat,
“Where Is the Resistance Headed?” It set forth the broad outlines of the “Fourth Republic,” which was
supposed to be created by new men and lead to the birth of a broad-based republican and revolutionary
party as the heir to the Resistance. The style of this article did not justify attributing it to Camus, but it
is not impossible that he had a hand in its writing, particularly since the same issue contained a short item

entitled “The Short-Story Writer.”
9 That same day, a sidebar listed “the references of the newspaper Combat.” The text offered a brief history of the paper, pointing out that fifty-eight clandestine issues had been published during the war and
that the paper had begun as the official organ of the “Combat” movement led by Henri Frenay before
becoming one of the newspapers of the Mouvements Unis de Résistance (United Resistance Movements)

CHAPTER

14

2

August 22, 1944

Time for Justice'®

The Vichy government has gone up in smoke.
With the first allied push against Paris and the first shock of insurrection, the
men of Vichy, who governed against the nation for so long that in the end they
forgot about it, thought they could go on deceiving the people. When the country turned on them, they failed to recognize France in faces distorted by excitement and rage. They left.
Those who had been the cruelest also proved to be the most cowardly.
Darnand and Déat fled. But those who had deceived and lied constantly
departed amid further deceit and lies. Laval and Pétain tried to make people
believe that they had been forcibly spirited away. The President of Compromise
and the Marshal of Confusion remained true to themselves, at least, even if they
had not been true to France.
But confusion and compromise are no longer possible. This needs to be stated
loud and clear.
There is no difference between Laval and Pétain, because in certain circumstances there is no difference between treason and resignation.
These men, who rationed everything except shame, who dispensed blessings

with one hand while they killed with the other, who combined hypocrisy with
terror, and who for four years treated us to an appalling mixture of sermons and
executions, homilies and torture—these men could expect neither forgiveness

nor indulgence from France.
We imagined what we needed to imagine when faced with countless stories of
our brothers being arrested, deported, massacred, and tortured. Those dead children, kicked and beaten into their own coffins, remained in our hearts for four

long years. We are not about to lose our memory now.
We are not men of hate. But we must be men of justice. And justice dictates that
those who killed and those who permitted murder are equally responsible before
their victims, even if those who covered up the murders speak today of “doubleedged politics” and “realism.” This is the kind of language we despise the most.
There are not two politics. There is only one, and it is the one that makes a
commitment. It is the politics of honor.
In 1940 began an era in which all words and all actions made a commitment.
And those who then seized control of what they called the destinies of France

and later of the Mouvement de la Libération Nationale (National Liberation Movement). The article then

went on to say that “the journalists who took the initiative to turn Combat into a daily paper of news and
combat were members of the editorial staff of the clandestine paper. This entitles them to say today that
they know their responsibilities and will know how to find their words.” The text ends with an homage
to Vélin (André Bollier) and to the staff's deported comrades.

'0 The title, certain formulas, and the themes of this article suggest that it might have been written by
Camus, but it is impossible to be sure.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

15

simultaneously assumed responsibility for the heads that began to fall and for the
faces disfigured by bullets. No “realism” can stand in the face of that simple
truth.
To our comrades we took an oath that we never uttered out loud but nevertheless swore in the depths of our hearts—and we will keep it to the end.

August 23, 1944

They Shall Not Pass"
What is an insurrection? It is the people in arms. What is the people? It is that
in a nation which refuses ever to bend its knee.
A nation is worth what its people are worth, and if ever we were tempted to
doubt our country, the image of its sons on the march, brandishing rifles, should
fill us with overwhelming certitude that this nation is equal to the loftiest of destinies and is about to win its resurrection along with its freedom.
On the fourth day of the insurrection, in the wake of the enemy’s first retreat
and a phony truce cut short by the murders of Frenchmen, the people of Paris
will resume the fight and erect new barricades.
The enemy ensconced in the city must not be allowed to leave. The retreating
enemy must not be allowed to reenter. They shall not pass.
To those few Frenchmen bereft of memory and imagination, forgetful of
honor, heedless of shame, and cushioned by their own personal comforts who ask,
“What good can any of this do?” we feel compelled to respond here and now.
A people that wants to live does not wait for its freedom to be delivered to it.
It takes its own. And in so doing it helps itself even as it helps those who seek to
help it. Every German who is prevented from leaving Paris means one bullet less

See

for the Allied soldiers and our French comrades in the East. Our future, our rev-

olution, depend entirely on the present moment, echoing with cries of anger and
with the wrath of liberty.
The choice to kill was not ours.'* We were placed in a position where we had

either to kill or to bend our knees..And despite those who tried to put doubts in
our minds, we know now, after four years of terrible struggle, that it is not in our
blood to kneel.
Despite those who still wish to put doubts in our minds, we also know that
we are a mature nation. And a mature nation takes charge regardless of its destiny, be it one of shame or pride.

11 Editorial. Typescript. This title is obviously a translation of the Spanish Republican slogan “No passarén,” and Camus is known to have felt close to the Spanish Republican cause. He would later write a
number of editorials and articles about Spain. See the thematic index.
12 This sentence echoes one of the central themes of Lettres 4 un ami allemand (Letters to a German
Friend).

2

CHAPTER

16

We found the strength to bear the weight of our defeat, and we will not shrink

from the burdens of victory.
On August 21, 1944, a battle began in the streets of Paris, a battle that will

end in liberty or death for all of us and for France."
xX

August 24, 1944

The Blood of Freedom'*
Paris is firing all its ammunition into the August night. Against a vast backdrop
of water and stone, on both sides of a river awash with history, freedom’s barricades are once again being erected. Once again justice must be redeemed with
men’s blood.
We are all too familiar with this war, and our flesh and our hearts are all too
engaged to accept this dreadful condition without bitterness. But we are only too
aware as well of what is at stake and where the truth lies to refuse the harsh fate
that we alone must bear.
Time will tell that the men of France did not want to kill and that they went
with clean hands into a war that was not of their own choosing.'? Did it therefore take powerful reasons for them suddenly to grab their rifles and start firing without letup into the night at soldiers who for two years thought that war
was easy?

Yes, and they have powerful reasons. Those reasons are measured by the
immensity of their hope and the depth of their rebellion. They are reasons that
point toward the future of a country that for so long some have sought to confine to morose rumination on its past. Paris is fighting today so that France can
have a voice tomorrow. Tonight the people are in arms because they hope to see
justice done tomorrow. There are a few who say that it isn’t worth the trouble
and that with patience Paris would be'® delivered at little cost. This is because
they have a vague sense of how many things are threatened by this insurrection—
things that would remain as they are if events were to unfold differently.
Indeed, one thing must be made perfectly clear: no one can possibly believe
that freedom won in the dark of night and with such bloodshed" will have the
tame and tranquil face of which some are pleased to dream. These terrifying
birth pangs signify a revolution.

'3 The same slogan was among those shouted by the revolutionaries of 1789.
'4 Editorial. Reprinted in Actwelles, untitled, in the chapter on “The Liberation of Paris,” with some minor
changes.
'5 Cf. editorial of August 23, p. 15, and Les Lettres a un ami allemand.
'6 In Actuelles the conditional serait was changed to the future sera.
'7 In Actuelles the words dans ce sang (with such bloodshed) were changed to dans ces convulsions (in such

upheaval).

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

17

No one can hope that men who have fought for four years in silence and for
days now in a din of thunder and rifle fire will agree to the return of the forces
of resignation and injustice in any form whatsoever. No one can expect that
those men—the best and the purest'® that France has to offer—will again be
willing to do what the best and the purest did for twenty-five years, which was
to love their country in silence while silently despising its leaders. The Paris that
is fighting tonight wants to assume command tomorrow. Not for the sake of
power but for the sake of justice, not for political reasons but for moral ones, not
to dominate their country but to ensure its grandeur.
Our conviction is not that this will happen but that it is happening today in the
suffering and obstinacy of combat. And that is why the words that must be uttered
above the moans of men in pain and despite the blood and the anger, despite the

irreplaceable dead, despite the unjust wounds and blind bullets, are words not of
regret but of hope—the terrific hope of men alone with their destiny.
Paris—this enormous, dark, sweltering city with its stormy skies and stormy
streets—seems more illuminated now than the City of Light that was once the
envy of the entire world. It is aglow with all the fires of hope and pain, with
the flame of lucid courage, and with all the splendor not just of liberation but of

the liberty to come.

xX

August 25, 1944

The Night of Truth’?
As freedom’s bullets continue to whistle through city streets, the cannon of lib-

eration are passing through the gates of Paris amid shouts and flowers. On this
sultriest and most beautiful of August nights, the permanent stars in the skies
above the city mingle with tracer rounds, smoke from burning buildings, and

variegated rockets proclaiming the people’s joy. This night unlike any other ends
four years of a monstrous history and an unspeakable struggle that saw France at
grips with its shame and its fury.
Those who never lost hope for themselves or their country are finding their
reward tonight. This night is a world unto itself: it is the night of truth. The
truth in arms, the truth in battle, the truth in power after languishing for so
many years empty-handed and chest bared. Truth is everywhere on this night,
which finds the people and the cannon roaring in unison. The truth speaks, in
fact, with the voice of the people and the guns; it wears the triumphant and tired
face of the fighters in the streets, beneath their sweat and their scars. Yes, this is
indeed the night of truth, and of the only truth that counts, the truth that is prepared to fight and win.

18 In Actuelles the phrase “and the purest” was deleted.
19 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, untitled, in the chapter on “The Liberation of Paris.”

18

CHAPTER

2

Four years ago, a few men rose up amid the ruins and despair and quietly proclaimed that nothing was yet lost. They said that the war must go on and that
the forces of good could always triumph over the forces of evil provided the price
was paid. They paid that price. And the cost was indeed heavy: it had the weight
of blood and the terrible oppressiveness of prison. Many of those men died,
while others spent years enclosed within windowless walls. That was the price
that had to be paid. Yet those same men, if only they could, would forgive the
terrific and marvelous joy that floods our hearts tonight like an inrushing tide.
For this joy is in no way unfaithful to their memory. On the contrary, it justifies what they did and proclaims that they were right. United in suffering for four
years, tonight we remain united in intoxication; we have earned our solidarity.
And on this overwhelming night we are stunned to discover that throughout
those four years we were never alone. We experienced four years of fraternity.
Harsh battles still await us. But peace will return to this gutted earth and to
hearts tormented by hope and memories. One cannot live by murder and violence
alone. Happiness and righteous affection will have their day. But the coming
peace will not erase our memories. And for some of us, the faces of our brothers
disfigured by bullets and the great virile fraternity”? of these years will never leave
us. May our dead comrades rest in the peace that awaits us in the breathless night,
the peace they have already won: our combat will be theirs.
Nothing is given to mankind, and what little men can conquer must be paid for
with unjust deaths. But man’s grandeur lies elsewhere, in his decision to rise above
his condition. And if his condition is unjust, he has only one way to overcome it,

which is to be just himself. Our truth tonight, the truth that hovers in the August
sky, is in fact man’s consolation. What gives our hearts peace, as it gave peace to
our dead comrades, is that we can say before the impending victory, without scolding and without pressing any claim of our own, “We did what had to be done.”
X

August 29, 1944

Intelligence and Character”!
M. Bergery” has offered his services to General de Gaulle. He was not obliged
first to withdraw his previous offer to Pétain, Pétain having withdrawn himself
from the scene. M. Bergery was thus left with a surplus of services of no immediate use to anyone and only the best of intentions.

20 The expression is borrowed from André Malraux (1901-1976), from the preface to Le Temps du mépris,

a novel that Camus adapted for the Théatre du Travail in Algiers in 1936. Cf. the editorial of August 30,
which bears this title. Malraux was serving at the time as commander of the “Alsace-Lorraine” brigade,
then fully engaged in combat in eastern France.
21 Editorial. Typescript.
* Bergery, Gaston (1892-1974). A lawyer who served as a Radical deputy and chief of staff in Herriot’s
government, Bergery quit the Radical Party in 1934 and founded the newspaper La Fléche. He was one

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

19

Having pondered the situation, he came to the conclusion that it was immoral
to let a mind like his go to waste, so he made a gift of his intelligence to General
de Gaulle.
For M. Bergery is an intelligent man. Indeed, he wrote the one intelligent
message that Pétain read on the radio. Before the war he published one of the
few intelligent newspapers of the Third Republic. Its pages included a great deal
of talk about purity and revolution, and trusts came in for some harsh words. All
this intelligence led M. Bergery to become one of the thinkers of the Vichy
regime. Now his oft-proclaimed purity has led him to offer his services to two
different masters in quick succession without noticing what the gesture might
lack in the way of tact. In short, M. Bergery is a practitioner of political realism.
This is uniquely a consequence of his intelligence. The faculty of intelligence
is quick to grasp the relativity of all things. In examining a historical event, it
usually comes to the conclusion that this too shall pass, hence that there is no
reason to put oneself out. Having made the transition from the revolution to
Pétain, why not go a step further and offer to work for the very people whom
Vichy sought to dishonor.
If we were to reveal the pure essence of our thinking, namely, that political
realism is a degrading thing, M. Bergery would be surprised, because intelligence
alone is not enough to grasp this obvious truth. Character is also necessary, and
M. Bergery has never shown any.
In one respect, however, he is not wrong. Character is indeed rare in this

world, and it takes only a little intelligence to trim your course as circumstances
might require, for who is there to point out your mistakes? Thus in politics realism is always right, even if it is morally wrong.
There are times, however, when morality comes back into politics, because
men suddenly start paying for their politics with their blood, as some in France
paid with their tortured bodies or their lives while others paid with secret sacrifices and unheralded nobility. And overnight realism becomes wrong, for when
men of character set out to make history, history insists on character.
These are the moments when everything becomes clear, when every action

constitutes a commitment, when every choice has its price, when nothing is neutral anymore. It is the time of morality, that is, a time when language becomes
clear and it is possible to throw it back in the realist’s face.
And this is what the language of morality has to say: M. Bergery failed to
understand that in speaking for Pétain, he joined with him in his resignation,
of the founders of the “Common

Front against Fascism” or “Frontist Party,” which called for a realign-

ment of left and right around a platform of pacifism and structural political and economic reform. On

February 13, 1939, Camus published a rather favorable review of a Bergery lecture about this party in
Alger-Républicain. See Fragments d'un combat, Cahiers Albert Camus 3 (Paris: Gallimard, 1978), vol. 2,
pp. 623-625. In July 1940, however, Bergery was among those who believed that France ought to find its

place in the new Europe, and he voted to grant “full powers” to Pétain. He was appointed Vichy’s ambassador to Moscow and later to Ankara. The day before this article appeared, Combat had reported that
Bergery had written from Ankara asking General de Gaulle for instructions. Tried by the High Court in
1949, he was acquitted of all charges.

20

CHAPTER

2

and that in drafting a political message for Vichy, he also endorsed the execution
of patriots and the acts of treason the regime committed.
M. Bergery, having discredited himself for four years, has now dishonored
himself as well. And as long as men of character remain among the members of
the Resistance, their role will be to point out to M. Bergery whenever and wherever possible that his intelligence was not enough to protect him from the unpardonable blindness that has cut him off from the nation forever.

August 30, 1944

The Age of Contempt”?
Thirty-four Frenchmen tortured and then murdered at Vincennes: without help
from our imagination these words say nothing.“ And what does the imagination
reveal? Two men, face-to-face, one of whom is preparing to tear out the finger-

nails of the other, who looks him in the eye.
This is not the first time we have had to confront such unbearable images. The
year 1933 marked the beginning of an era that one of the greatest of our contemporaries has rightly dubbed the Age of Contempt.” And for ten years, whenever we heard the news that naked, unarmed human beings had been
methodically mutilated by men with faces just like our own, our minds reeled,
and we asked how such things were possible.
Yet such things were possible. For ten years they were possible, and today, as
if to warn us that victory on the battlefield does not signify total triumph, we
learn of comrades who had their guts ripped out, their limbs torn off, and their
faces kicked in. And the men who did these things were men polite enough to
give up their seats on the subway, just as Himmler,”® who made a science and an
art of torture, used the back door when he returned home at night so as not to
wake his pet canary.

°3 Editorial. Reprinted in Actwelles, untitled, in the chapter on “The Liberation of Paris.” Camus had previously used the title, which he borrowed from Malraux, for an article published in Le Soir-Républicain
on December 14, 1939; see Fragments d'un combat, Il, pp. 756-757.
4 The news had been broken in Combat the day before under the title “Martyrs’ Testimony”: “In the
trenches around Vincennes, the bodies ofthirty-four Frenchmen tortured by the S.S. were found.”
»5 Cf. editorial of August 25, above, p. 17. The great contemporary is André Malraux. Combat would later
express anxiety when Malraux went missing and was presumed dead, and the staff offered him a warm
welcome when he visited on September 23. On that day the paper published an often-reproduced photo
showing Camus and Malraux together. Starting on October 4, the paper published excerpts from La Lutte
avec lange under the title “May Victory Belong to Those Who Fought the War without Liking It.”
26 Himmler, Heinrich (1900-1945). Very close to Hitler, head of the Gestapo, and commander of all

German police forces, Himmler became the Reich's Minister of the Interior in 1943. He bore major
responsibility for the operation of the concentration and extermination camps. In 1945 he was sacked by
Hitler after he parachuted into England in the hope of entering into negotiations with the Allies. The
English arrested him, and he committed suicide later that year.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

21

Yes, such things were possible, as we know only too well. But so many things
are possible: why was this particular course of action chosen rather than some
other? Because the point was to kill the human spirit and humiliate men’s souls.
Those who believe in force know their enemies well. They know that when a man
believes in his heart in the justice of a cause, a thousand rifles aimed at him will
not alter that belief. And if that man dies, other righteous men will say “no” until
force exhausts itself. Hence it is not enough to kill the righteous man; his spirit
must also be killed, so that the example of a righteous man renouncing human
dignity may discourage all other righteous men and dishearten justice itself.
For ten years, one nation devoted itself to the task of destroying souls. It was sure
enough of its strength to believe that the soul was the only obstacle still standing
in its way and that it had to be taken care of. They set out to do just that, and, woe
unto them, sometimes they succeeded. They knew that there is always some hour
of the day or night when even the most courageous of men feel like cowards.””
They were always clever about waiting for that hour to arrive. And when it
did, they sought the soul through the body’s wounds, they reduced the body to
exhaustion and madness and at times to treachery and deception.
Who in such circumstances would dare to speak of forgiveness? Since spirit
finally understood that it could defeat the sword only by the sword, since it took
up arms and achieved victory, who would ask it to forget? It is not hatred that
will speak out tomorrow but justice itself, justice based on memory. And it is justice of the most eternal and sacred sort to forgive, perhaps, on behalf of those of
us who died without talking, with the sublime peace of hearts that never
betrayed, yet to strike a terrible blow for those of us who, though among the
most courageous, were reduced to cowards by degradation of their souls, and

who died in desperation, carrying in their ravaged hearts forever their hatred of
others and their contempt for themselves.

August 31, 1944

Critique of the New Press”®
Since we have been granted a brief interlude between insurrection and war, I
would like to discuss today a subject I know well and which is close to my heart,

namely, the press. And since the press in question is the new press that has
emerged from the Battle of Paris, | want to speak of it with the fraternity and

clarity that one owes to comrades in combat.

27 The same formula occurs at the end of Tarrou’s notebooks in La Peste (The Plague): “He ended by

answering . . . that there was always some hour of the day or night when a man was a coward, and his only
fear was of that hour.” Folio edition, p. 254.
28 This (signed) article is the first of a series on the press, continued on September 1 and 8 and November 22,

1944. It was reprinted in Actuelles, with its title, in the chapter on “Critical Journalism.” Note that when
Camus signed an article, he wrote in the first person singular and spoke in his own name, which he never
did in his editorials, where the editorial “we” was always used.

22

CHAPTER

2

When we were underground, we naturally wrote our articles simply and without declarations of principle. But I know that for all our comrades at all our
newspapers, we did so with a great secret hope. We harbored the hope that these
men, who had braved mortal dangers for the sake of a few ideas they held dear,

would find a way to give their country the press it deserved and no longer had.
We knew from experience that the prewar press had forfeited its principles and
its morals. Hunger for money and indifference to grandeur had combined to give
France a press that, with few exceptions, had no goal beyond that of aggrandizing the power of a few and no effect but that of debasing the morality of all.
Hence it was not difficult for this press to become what it became from 1940 to
1944, namely, a stain on the country’s honor.
Our desire, all the more intensely felt because it was often unspoken, was to
liberate the newspapers from their dependence on money and give them a tone
and a truth that would allow the public to discover what was best in itself. At the
time we believed that a country is often worth what its press is worth. And if it
is true that newspapers are the voice of the nation, we were determined to do our
own small part to raise the country’s stature by ennobling its language. Rightly
or wrongly, it was for this ideal that many of us died in unimaginable conditions,
while others endured solitude and coercion in prison.
In fact we merely occupied offices in which we cobbled together newspapers
that we put out while the battle raged. This was a great victory, and the journalists of the Resistance deserve the respect of all for the courage and determination they showed. But—and I beg pardon for saying this in a time of general
enthusiasm—this achievement pales because so much remains to be done. We
have won the means to make the sweeping revolution we wanted, but we have
yet to make it a reality. And to put it bluntly, the liberated press, to judge by the
first dozen issues that have appeared in Paris, leaves a great deal to be desired.
I hope that what I have to say on this subject in this and subsequent articles
will be taken in the right spirit. I speak on behalf of a brotherhood born of combat, and my remarks are not aimed at anyone in particular. These criticisms are

addressed to the press in its entirety, including ourselves. Some will say that these
criticisms are premature, that our newspapers must be allowed time to organize
themselves before they are asked to examine their consciences. I disagree.
We are well aware that our newspapers have had to be put together in unbelievably difficult conditions. That is not the point, however. The point is that a
certain tone could have been adopted from the beginning but wasn’t. Indeed,

now that the press is in the process of defining itself, of deciding what shape it
will ultimately take, it needs to take a hard look at itself. It will then have a
clearer idea of what it wants to be and what it will become.
What do we want? A press that is clear and virile and written in a decent style.
When you know, as we journalists have known these past four years, that writing an article can land you in prison or” get you killed, it is obvious that words

29 In Actuelles “and” was substituted for “or.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

23

have value and need to be weighed carefully. What we were hoping to restore was
the journalist’s responsibility to the public.
Sin of Sloth*®®

Amid the haste, wrath, and frenzy of our offensive, our newspapers sinned by
sloth. During the insurrection the body was so overworked that the mind let
down its guard. Let me say here in a general way what I propose to examine in
detail later on: many of our newspapers reverted to formulas that one might have
thought outdated, and they did not shrink from the kinds of rhetorical excess
and appeals to the shopgirl sensibility that filled the columns of our papers before
and after the war.
The reason for the first fault is that we need to persuade ourselves [that we

have won], although what we are doing is merely reproducing the occupation
press with the roles reversed. The reason for the second is that we followed the
path of least resistance and reverted to formulas and ideas that threaten to
undermine the morality of the press and the country. Neither is acceptable unless
we wish to abdicate our responsibilities and abandon hope of accomplishing
what we need to accomplish.
Now that we have won the means to express ourselves, our responsibility to
ourselves and to the country is paramount.” It is essential that we recognize this,
and the purpose of this article is to make sure that we do. The task for each of
us is to think carefully about what he wants to say and gradually to shape the
spirit of his paper; it is to write carefully without ever losing sight of the urgent
need to restore to the country its authoritative voice. If we see to it that that voice
remains one of vigor rather than hatred, of proud objectivity and not rhetoric,

of humanity rather than mediocrity, then much will be saved from ruin, and we
will not have forfeited our right to the nation’s esteem.
ALBERT CaMUS

September 1, 1944

The Reform of the Press*”

Any moral reform of the press would be pointless if it were not accompanied
by political measures intended to guarantee the newspapers real independence
from the power of capital. Conversely, political reform would make no sense if
it were not inspired by a searching examination of the nature of journalism by

30 In Actuelles there was no subhead.
31 The notion of “responsibility” is essential to Camus’ conception of journalism: this programmatic text,
which deals specifically with the press, complements the article of August 21, “From Resistance to Revolution,” reprinted above, p. 12.

32 Signed article, continuing the one published the day before, but not reprinted in Actuelles.

24

CHAPTER

2

journalists themselves: 33 In this as in other respects, politics and morality are
interdependent.
The journalists of the new press were obliged to conduct just such an examination during the years of clandestinity, or so we believed. I still think this is true.
But I said yesterday that questions of the sort we raised then are not much in evidence in the way the press presents itself today.
What is a journalist? He is first of all a person who is supposed to have lee
This point deserves special scrutiny and will be dealt with in another article.”
He is also a person who every day takes it upon himself to inform the public
about the events of the day before. In short, he is a historian of the moment, and
truth must be his primary concern. Yet every historian knows that even with distance from events, comparison of documents, and testimony from different wit-

nesses, truth in history is an elusive thing. The only thing he can do about this
state of affairs is to offer an ethical corrective in the form of a concern with objectivity and prudence.
How urgent these virtues become, therefore, in the case of the journalist, who
is deprived of any distance from events and unable to check all his sources! What
is a practical necessity for the historian becomes an imperious law for the journalist, a law he cannot violate without turning his professional activities into acts
of wickedness.
Can we say that our press today observes the requirement of prudence and is
concerned solely with the truth? Certainly not. It has reverted to methods born
of the competition for news before the war. Any news is fit to print provided it
appears to be a scoop (see, for instance, the false hope given to Parisians concerning the restoration of gas and electricity).
Since it is difficult always to be first with a major news story because currently
there is only one source for such stories, journalists have been quick to jump on
details thought to be picturesque. And even though war is still raging in Europe
and our days are too short even to list the tasks that lie ahead and our memories
too limited even to remember the names of all the comrades still in need of rescue, one newspaper has seen fit to publish a banner headline heralding the pointless statement of a public entertainer who has just discovered a vocation as an
insurgent after four years of pusillanimous compromise. This sort of thing was
already contemptible when Paris-Soir*® set the tone for the rest of the press. But
its truly disheartening when it affects newspapers in which the hopes of the
entire country are now invested.

33In “Examens de conscience” in Le Figaro of September 9, Francois Mauriac wrote that “the wish
expressed by M. Albert Camus deserves our full approval.”
*4 This formula sums up one of the essential principles of Camus’ thought, one that explicitly or implicitly underlies all of his positions.
® See the article of September 8, 1944, “Critical Journalism,” reprinted below, p. 32.
*¢ Camus worked on the editorial staff of Paris-Soir in 1940, and for him the newspaper symbolized mediocrity, cowardice, self-indulgence, and sentimentality. It was a paragon of bad journalism.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

25

Thus we see a proliferation of layouts intended to sell newspapers, with headlines in large fonts bearing no relation to the value of the information contained
in the articles they introduce—articles written to flatter the public’s taste for the
simpleminded or sentimental. The newspapers shout right along with their readers and seek to please when they ought simply to enlighten. In fact, they give
every sign of holding their readers in contempt, and in so doing journalists judge

themselves more than they judge the public.
The argument for the defense is well known: “We give the public what it
wants.” But this isn’t what the public wants. It’s what the public has been taught
to want for twenty years, which isn’t the same thing. For the past four years,
moreover, the public, too, has been mulling things over: it is ready to accept the
tone of truth because it has just been through a terrible period of truth. But if,
day in and day out, twenty newspapers fill the air with mediocrity and fabrications, the public will breathe that air and become dependent on it.
We have been given a unique opportunity to createa public spirit and to rise
to the level of the country at large. Compared with that, what do a few sacrifices

of money and prestige amount to, or the daily effort of thought and care that
should suffice to maintain the quality of a newspaper? I merely pose the question
to our comrades in the new press. Whatever their reactions may be, I cannot
believe that they would take such a question lightly.
ALBERT CAMUS

September 2, 1944

The Democracy to Come*’
As we have said before, a problem of government has arisen. This is in substantial
measure our business, because it is everyone's business. But we have not yet taken
a clear stand, because we were of the opinion that the men who have thus far represented France to the outside world deserved our confidence. We thought that
when they consulted those who defended France on French soil, they would swiftly
recognize the appropriate solution to this problem. We still think so.
But others have taken a stand, and their statements have surprised us. And
since we cannot conceive of politics without straight talk,°* we must take this
opportunity to say what we think.
Our comrades at Le Populaire® have reported on a meeting between General
de Gaulle and the Secretary General of the Socialist Party. The Secretary General

37 Editorial. Typescript.
38 Camus often called for “straight talk” (un langage clair) not only in politics but also more generally: “I
grasped the fact that all of man’s misfortune stemmed from avoidance of straight talk,” said Tarrou in La
Peste (op. cit., p. 229).

39 Founded in 1916, Le Populaire became the official newspaper of the Socialist Party at the Congress of
Tours in 1920. Léon Blum served for a long time as its political director, and Vincent Auriol often wrote
for it. It ceased to appear during the Occupation and along with Combat numbered among the “patriotic

26

CHAPTER

2

is said to have agreed to the formation of a government consisting of “a mix of
experienced men, to ensure continuity of the Republic and doctrinal solidarity
with yesterday's democracy, and new men, whose presence in the government
will provide the injection of new blood that the country plainly wants.”
We have fought side by side with our socialist comrades and shared their hopes
often enough to feel that we have a right to say that this vocabulary in itself is not
good. But, pending clarification, what it conceals troubles us even more.
We are perplexed by the mention of those “experienced men,” whose policies,
to put it plainly, were not so brilliant as to require us to affirm our solidarity with
them today. Many of them betrayed France, either deliberately or out of weakness. Others, who did not betray their country, did not serve it well. They no
longer have any business among us.
To be sure, we recognize that we must offer certain reassurances both at home
and abroad. Order needs to be restored in France, for the sake of both France
and her friends. But there must be agreement about that order.
An order that merely reflected the restoration of a regime, and of individuals,
that proved incapable of withstanding the shock of war and of a Parliament that
by a vast majority resigned its powers to Pétain;*° an order that consecrated moneyed interests, behind-the-scenes intrigues, and personal ambitions—such an
order would be nothing other than a form of disorder, since it would consolidate
injustice.
Order means a consenting people. And unless the dreadful experience of those

four years was in vain, unless our hopes be mere smoke and our faith foolish, the
people cannot consent to the return of the very men who left when they should
have stayed. In any case, the underground people—the anonymous men and
women of the resistance—will not consent to their return.
The surest way of obtaining disorder is therefore to seek to restore that
mediocre and corrupt order represented by men such as M. Chautemps,”

newspapers” authorized to appear after the Liberation. In its first free issue, it paid tribute to Léon Blum,
and thereafter it reminded its readers daily that Blum had been “deported to Germany” (where he
remained until May of 1945). Guy Mollet would succeed Blum as political director. On September 1, the
paper published an account of the meeting between Daniel Mayer, Secretary General of the Socialist Party,
and General de Gaulle, along with an editorial by Mayer focusing on the issue that Camus addresses in
this article.
40 On July 10, 1940, the two combined chambers of the legislature voted to grant full powers to Pétain

by a vote of 570 to 80. On the attitude of the deputies, see the excellent work by Olivier Wieviorka, Les
Orphelins de la République (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 2001).
41 Chautemps, Camille (1885-1963). An active member ofthe Radical party, Chautemps held several min-

isterial portfolios and even served as prime minister, particularly in 1937 and 1938. A member of Paul
Reynaud’s cabinet in 1940, he quit Pétain’s government on July 10 and left for the United States. There he
was among the group of immigrants who did not support de Gaulle and encouraged Roosevelt's suspicions
of de Gaulle and his Provisional Government. Camus often attacked the Radicals in the wake of the
“national unity” governments that drained the substance from the Popular Front, as can be seen in various
articles that he published in Alger-Républicain (see Fragments d'un combat, op. cit.). After the Liberation, he

saw the Radicals as typifying the prewar politicians whom he held responsible for the war and the defeat.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

zy

M. Chichery,” and so many others on the vain pretext of restoring democracy.
It pains us to have to say it, but the old order that some would seek to revive
today was not democracy but a caricature of democracy.
Democracy—real democracy—remains to be constructed. And we will do so
in an orderly society—a truly orderly society, that of a united people determined
to survive, in which each person will have the place he is due, hence in which
those “experienced men” who today inspire nothing but indifference or contempt will always be able to spend their time writing memoirs destined to be
read by no one.

September 4, 1944

Morality and Politics
When we look at what is happening around us or, even more, when we ponder
how we arrived where we are today, we see no need to rethink the scope of our
last editorial or moderate our wariness of the political leadership that was swept
away in France’s defeat. On the contrary, further reflection has only made us
more cautious.

There is no point in hiding from our friends around the world how profoundly uneasy the vast majority of patriotic Frenchmen felt on hearing of the
political developments that followed the Allied landing in Algeria.“ This uneasiness stemmed from the very nature of French hopes. And those hopes revolved
around ideas of justice and rebirth.
That men already condemned by the people of France should return to the
French political scene with innocent smiles on their faces was contrary to justice.
And the rebirth of the country was seriously compromised by the fact that politicians determined to bring politics down to their own level of pettiness were

42 Chichery, Albert. As president of the Radical Group in parliament in 1939, Chichery moved closer to
Laval. He was executed by the underground on August 15, 1944.
43 Editorial. Typescript, not reprinted in Actuelles. An important chapter of that book does bear the same

title, however, although it is a title that could be applied to most of Camus’ Combat articles.
44 After the Allied landing in Algeria and in the wake of agreements signed at Cherchell between the
United States and the local resistance, which had greatly assisted the landing, General Giraud was to
assume leadership in North Africa. But the fortuitous presence of Admiral Darlan, who served as vicepremier from January 1941 to April 1942 and who remained the official successor to Pétain and head of
the French armed forces, made it essential to deal with him. It was Darlan who signed the accords with
General Clark as well as the cease-fire for North Africa on November 10. As Pétain’s representative, he

headed an Imperial Council consisting of prominent individuals and officials appointed by Vichy, while
General Giraud had command of French troops. Faced with protests over this compromise with Vichy,
Roosevelt spoke of it as a “temporary expedient.” But nothing changed after the assassination of Darlan
in December 1942. The Imperial Council simply put Giraud in charge of civilian as well as military
affairs. Vichy laws—and officials—remained in place until de Gaulle’s arrival in March 1943 and the
formation of the French Committee of National Liberation in May 1943. Some saw this policy as one of
American protection for “Vichyism.”

28

CHAPTER

2

permitted to speak and act as if they had the slightest idea of either the nation's
grandeur or its suffering.
To come straight to the point, M. Chautemps has done us a great deal of
harm—M. Chautemps and others like him.“ They supplied our friends with
information, but they who supplied the information didn’t know what they were
talking about. In fact, they never really knew what they were talking about, but
they knew even less after France was plunged into an abyss whose depths their
imaginations were too shallow to measure.
They spoke of France as of something dead or abstract, ignorant as they were
of the land of blood and tears that went on living without them. Hence their
words were false, and those words harmed us twice over, first because they were
false and second because they drowned out our muffled cries. Today, it will take
all our newspapers and all our voices together, and then some, to give a better

account of ourselves.
If this history leaves us without resentment, it nevertheless stiffens our resolve.
And we are resolved first of all not to open the doors of French politics to those
who left at a time when the resistance was prepared to welcome them. In other
words, the affairs of this country should be managed by those who paid and
answered for it. In other words, we are determined to replace politics with morality. That is what we call a revolution.*°
X

September 6, 1944

The End of a World*’
For some time now our country has had only two real aristocracies, one of labor,
the other of the mind. We now have a new definition of the word aristocracy: that
part of the nation which refuses to be enslaved or to enslave others.
But the four years of defeat and resistance have only confirmed what was
already clear before the war to all who loved France even as they judged her disconcerting failings. Plainly, the country’s ruling class just gave up.
The French bourgeoisie had enjoyed a period of grandeur, but it had outlived
itself. It could no longer rise to its duties and lived exclusively on the memory of
its rights. When it comes to taking the full measure of any class, these are signs
of decadence. What is more, the bourgeoisie was afraid. If the verdict against it
had to be summed up in a few words, one might say that it did not love the people and would have accepted any bargain to save itself from them.

45 See above, n. 41.
“6 The final sentences of this article sum up two points that Camus would make repeatedly: that France
must be governed by men who had served in the Resistance, and that morality must ultimately govern
politics.
47 Editorial. Typescript.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

29

It is fear that makes traitors. And many of those who subsequently betrayed their
country did so only because they did not like the people, who always marched
straight ahead with the blithe unconcern of those who know they are in the right.
Whatever words Bergery*® may have put in Pétain’s mouth, the Vichy regime stood
for revenge for the events of 1936. The cruelest were indeed the most cowardly.
Make no mistake: our condemnation is in no way abstract. Many representatives of the bourgeois class shared France’s suffering and her struggles. They have
their place wherever honor and fidelity have theirs. The point, however, is to see

and understand the fact that the leading role of the bourgeoisie ended in 1940
and that its political representatives need only listen to and understand the great
voice that is emanating today from a people concerned about its future.
We would have said exactly the same thing before the defeat. Today, however,
we speak with memories of our humiliation still fresh in our minds. These memories do not incline us toward indulgence. When France is a happier and
stronger country than she is now, there may come a time when we can look on
calmly as a moribund class demonstrates through its political maneuvers that
experience has taught it nothing.
Today, however, that is clearly impossible.
We have too much to do and too much to repair. What can one whose heart
is still heavy with shame say to them besides, “Go away!” Yes, let them go away
and leave us alone. They must recognize that France is no longer theirs to run.
We are about to go to work. We are going to attempt, lawfully, honestly, day after
day, to rebuild what they destroyed, to restore the incomparable and hidden face
of the nation of which we dreamed throughout these past four years of darkness.
To accomplish what we need to accomplish, however, we need to be alone. We

must not be obliged to destroy still more before we rebuild.
None of us is asking this class to disappear. We know now that French lives
are irreplaceable. But this class must understand, it must leave us at last after
wearying us for so long. And having proved so wanting in courage and generosity, it must demonstrate enough basic intelligence to bear witness to a grandeur
that it proved incapable of producing by itself.
September 7, 1944

Our Brothers in Spain®
This European war, which began in Spain eight years ago, cannot be ended without Spain.” Things are already changing on the peninsula. A ministerial shakeup
has been announced in Lisbon. The voice of Spanish Republicans can once again

48 See n. 22 above.
49 Editorial. Typescript.
50 Spain was Camus’s “second fatherland.” See J. Lévi-Valensi, “Camus et Espagne,” in Espagne et Algérie

au XXe siecle (Paris: LHarmattan, 1985), pp. 141-157. His visceral attachment was not limited to
“eternal Spain,” however. He championed the Spanish Republican cause, whose case he pleaded first in

30

CHAPTER

2

be heard on the airwaves. This is perhaps a good time to say a word or two about
this country like no other, a country great by dint of the heart and pride of its
people, who have never for a moment failed to merit the world’s esteem despite
the despair brought on by their defeat.
At the beginning of this war, the Spanish people were chosen to set an example of the virtues that would ultimately save Europe. In point of fact, however,
it was we and our Allies who cast them in that role.
That is why since 1938 many of us have been unable to think of our Spanish
brothers without a secret sense of shame. Indeed, we feel doubly ashamed, first
because we allowed Spain to die alone and second because when our brothers,
defeated by the same arms that were later to crush us, turned to us for help, we
sent policemen to turn them away. Those whom we called leaders at the time
invented names for this abdication of responsibility. They called it “nonintervention” one day and “political realism” the next. Compared with such imperious language, what could a poor little word like “honor” count for?
But the Spanish people, to whom the language of grandeur comes so naturally,
having only just awakened from six years of silence, misery, and oppression, are
already speaking to us, to deliver us from our shame. As if, being the very image
of generosity, they understood that it was now up to them to reach out to us and
had no difficulty whatsoever in finding the right words.
Yesterday, speaking on the radio in London, their representatives said that the

French people and the Spanish people had suffered as one, that French Republicans had been attacked. by Spanish Phalangists just as Spanish Republicans had
been attacked by French fascists, and that because the two countries had been
united in the past by their common pain, they should tomorrow be united by
the shared joys of freedom.
Who among us could hear those words and remain unmoved? And how can
we not say here and now, as loudly as possible, that we must not repeat the errors
of the past, that we must recognize our brothers at once and liberate them as we
ourselves have been liberated? Spain has already paid the price of freedom. No
one can doubt that this fierce people is prepared to pay that price again. But it
is up to the Allies to spare them the need to shed their own blood, of which they
have been so prodigal but which Europe should take care to hoard, by granting
our Spanish comrades the Republic for which they have fought so hard.
The Spanish people have the right to speak out. Give them but a minute and
they will speak as one, they will shout out their contempt for Franco's regime and
their passion for freedom. If honor and loyalty and the misfortune and nobility
of a great people are the reasons for our struggle, let us recognize that that struggle
transcends our borders and that we will never achieve victory as long as the cause
of freedom continues to be crushed in long-suffering Spain.

Révolte dans les Asturies (1936) and later in articles published in various places, from Alger-Républicain to

LEtat de siége, and he often spoke out on the subject. A number of Combat editorials were devoted to the
Spanish Republicans and to Allied policy toward Franco.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

31

September 8, 1944

Justice and Freedom?!

In yesterday's Figaro, M. d’Ormesson” commented on the pope’s speech. The
speech had already caused a stir, but M. d’Ormesson deserves credit for stating
in very clear terms the problem that Europe faces today.
“The problem,” he said, “is to harmonize individual freedom, which is more
necessary and sacred than ever, with the collective organization of society made
inevitable by the conditions of modern life.”
That is very well put. Nevertheless, we would suggest to M. d’Ormesson an
even more succinct formulation by saying that for us the problem is to reconcile
justice with freedom. To ensure that life is free for each of us and just for all is
the goal we must pursue. Between those countries that have, with varying
degrees of success, striven to give freedom priority over justice on the one hand
or justice priority over freedom on the other, France has a role to play in seeking
a superior equilibrium.
We must not hide from ourselves the fact that achieving such a reconciliation
will be difficult. If what we read in history books can be believed, it has never yet
been done, which suggests that these two principles are somehow contradictory.
How could it be otherwise? Individual freedom means freedom for the banker
and the ambitious businessman, hence injustice. Justice for all means that the
personality of the individual must be subordinated to the collective good. In
such circumstances what does it mean to speak of absolute freedom?

51 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, untitled, in the chapter on “Morality and Politics.” This article initiated
the dialogue with Le Figaro.
52 D’Ormesson, Wladimir (1888-1973). French Ambassador to the Vatican from May to October 1940
and to Argentina after the war, from 1945 to 1948, and then again to the Vatican from 1948 to 1956,

d’Ormesson was a writer who served after the Liberation as an editorialist at Le Figaro, where his editorials alternated with those of Francois Mauriac. On September 7, under the title “The Pope and the Social
Problem,” he asserted that only Christianity, “whose primary law . . . is the law of charity,” could succeed
in reconciling individual freedom with social organization. On September 11, d’Ormesson borrowed
Camus title with a slight variation: “Justice et la liberté” instead of “Justice et liberté.” It is worth quot-

ing its opening passage in full: “The newspaper Combat—whose editorials exhibit such a fine style—has
recently devoted its attention to the article in which I commented on the pope's recent speech. The paper
raised objections to the argument I was making, objections couched in such interesting terms that I
thought there might be some point to continuing the discussion. How comforting it is in any case to be
able at last to resume the practice of courteous debate! How marvelous it is to write what one thinks and
arouse unfettered criticism!”
53 The Pope in question was Pius XII, Eugenio Pacelli (1876-1958), who was elected Pope in March

1939. Having served as papal nuncio in Bavaria and later Berlin in 1920, he was no doubt influenced by
his time in Germany. He tried to define the conditions of a “Christian peace.” On December 26 Camus
would point out that he had failed to denounce the dictatorships while they were still in power. His silence
on the genocide of the Jews would become the subject of lengthy polemics in years to come. His condemnation of Marxism and the formation of two rival blocs in the Cold War led to a severing of relations
between the Vatican and the East. In France, he would take steps to restrict the activity of worker-priests.
On September 1, 1944, the Pope had broadcast a speech on “the gigantic effort needed to restore social
life” and the need to restore “a moral law.”

CHAPTER

32

2

M. d’Ormesson, however, is of the opinion that Christianity provides a solution to this problem. Perhaps he will allow a person formed outside of religion but
respectful of the convictions of others to express his doubts on this point. Christianity is in essence a doctrine of injustice (and that is, paradoxically, the source
of its greatness). It is based on the sacrifice of the innocent and the acceptance of

that sacrifice.” By contrast, justice cannot exist without rebellion, as Paris has just
proven with a series of nights illuminated by the flames of insurrection.
Must one therefore give up on this effort to achieve what would seem to be an
impossible reconciliation? No. One must simply appreciate the immense diffculty of the undertaking and make it clear to those who in all good faith would
like to simplify everything.
Indeed, nothing else is worth living and fighting for in today’s world. In the

dispiriting conditions of the present age, the difficult and prodigious task we face
is to establish justice in the most unjust of worlds and to save the freedom of
souls destined from inception for servitude. If we fail, mankind will be plunged
back into darkness. But at least we will have tried.
Last but not least, this effort calls for clear thinking and astute vigilance to
warn us that whenever we deal with a social issue, we need to think about the
individual, and whenever the individual claims our attention, we need to consider the good of all. M. d’Ormesson is right to think that Christians will manage to persevere in the face of such great difficulty because they are taught to love
thy neighbor. Yet others who do not share their faith may yet hope to arrive at
the same goal out of a simple concern for truth, a spirit of selflessness, and an
appreciation of man’s greatness.
X
September 8, 1944

Critical Journalism>?
We also need to consider the journalism of ideas. Previously, we pointed out that
the French press leaves something to be desired when it comes to its conception
of news. Newspapers seek to inform their readers quickly rather than to inform
them well. Truth is not the beneficiary in this setting of priorities.
Hence it makes no sense to complain that background articles take up space
that would otherwise be wasted on news. One thing is clear: the news that is fed
to our newspapers today—news which they print as they receive it—is useless
without critical commentary. The press as a whole might do well to take this formula to heart.

*4 Without going into detail here about Camus’ relation to Christianity, it is important to point out that
care must be taken to avoid oversimplifying the problem, which touches on a theme of great importance

in Camus’ thought and work, namely, the theme of guilt and innocence.
® Article reprinted in Actuelles with the same title, which is also the title of the chapter containing four
texts dealing with the press. It can be read as a veritable breviary for the journalist according to Camus.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

33

For one thing, the journalist can help the reader understand the news by providing context aimed at defining the limitations of information whose source
and purpose may not always be obvious. For example, he can lay out the news
in such a way as to place contradictory dispatches next to each other, so that each
can cast doubt on the other. He can enlighten the public as to the likelihood that
a given piece of information is accurate in view of its origin with a particular foreign agency or bureau. To be more specific, it is clear that among the many
bureaus maintained abroad by various news agencies before the war, only four or
five could offer the kind of guarantees of accuracy that a press determined to play
its proper role ought to insist on. It is the job of the journalist, who is better
informed than the public, to indicate the extent to which news is based on
sources he knows to be dubious.
In addition to this direct criticism within the text and in the selection of
sources, the journalist might also try to explain the technology of news reporting to the public as clearly and accurately as possible. Since readers are interested
in Dr. Petiot® and his swindles, there is no obvious reason why they should not
be interested in the way in which an international press agency operates. This
would have the advantage of awakening their critical faculties rather than appealing to their baser instincts. The only question is whether such critical reporting
is technically feasible. | am convinced that it is.
There is another way in which the journalist can contribute to public debate,
and that is by providing political and moral commentary on the news. The news
reflects the chaotic forces of history, and it might be a good idea to record the
daily thoughts of an informed observer or the common thoughts of a number of
observers. Yet this cannot be done without scruples, distance, and some notion

of the relative importance of things. Of course a predilection for the truth in no
way prevents taking a stand on the issues. Indeed, if we have begun to get across
the idea of what we are trying to do in this newspaper, neither truth nor commitment makes sense without the other. Here as elsewhere, however, there is a
tone to be set, for without it nothing has any value.
When we look at today’s press, it is clear that the astonishingly rapid progress
of the Allied armies, the spate of news from abroad, the sudden shift from undying hope of liberation to certainty of victory, and, last but not least, the approach
of peace have obliged all of our newspapers to delay no longer in stating their
views of what this country is and what it wants. That is why there is so much
talk of France in the articles they publish. But of course this is a subject that can
be broached only with an abundance of caution and carefully chosen words. If
we were to revert to the patriotic clichés and phrases that so annoyed the French

56 “Doctor” Petiot was a swindler and murderer whose numerous crimes in the period 1942-44 were widely
commented on by the French press in general, though not by Combat, which on November 3 remarked
that “we are loath to magnify an affair that is disgusting from so many points of view. All too many distressing and urgent problems demand our attention for us to waste time on the scandalous details of sensational news. We only hope that our readers will be grateful to us for this choice.” Petiot was sentenced
to death.

34

CHAPTER

2

in the past that they grew to detest the very word patrie, we would do nothing
to clarify the definition we are after. But we are stripping away a great deal. New
times call, if not for new words, then at least for new arrangements of words.
And only the heart can dictate what those arrangements ought to be—the heart
and the respect that stems from true love. This is the price that must be paid if
we are to contribute in our own small way to the project of providing the country with a language that will induce it to listen.
Clearly, this comes down to insisting that substantive articles have substance
and that false or dubious reporting not be presented as truthful news. These
practices, taken together, are what I mean by critical journalism. And to repeat,
the right tone is also necessary, and many things must be sacrificed. It might be
enough, however, if people simply began to think about these things.
ALBERT CAMUS
September 10, 1944°”
The new government is constituted. At first sight, it looks like any other government. It is a list of names. We are used to lists of names. So used to them that
we no longer read them. To satisfy one’s conscience, one is therefore tempted to
say that the government will be judged by what it does rather than by what it is.
That would seem to be common sense. In fact, however, it would be to take
the easy way out. Justice means judging men for themselves and not for their
names or ideas. This ministry is not just a ministry. It is an assembly of living,
breathing men, who have a certain way of shaking hands and of tying their ties.
This government will be worth whatever these men are worth.
From this standpoint, certain men in today’s ministry have already rendered a
verdict on themselves by what they have done. Ministers were for far too long
merely names or symbols for us not to rejoice at the sight of men of flesh and
blood in their place, men who have paid a personal price. In the past, politicians
took control of ministries, and only then did we try to persuade them to assume
their responsibilities. Now, however, we have men who assumed responsibilities
before taking over ministries, men who occupied jail cells before sitting down
with green portfolios. France can thus take justifiable pride in having a minister
who was only yesterday with the Breton underground” and another who is able
to take up his duties only because he escaped from the train that was deporting
him to Germany by climbing onto the roof of one of its cars.”
To be sure, this does not count as a revolution, but it is at least a revolution
in our political mores. And that puts us in a good situation for the real revolution—the one we have begun, and which we are waiting quietly but vigilantly
for the government to finish.
*” Editorial. Probably by Camus. From this date on, editorials had no specific title, and the final X was
replaced by the heading COMBAT.
*6 Francois Tanguy-Prigent, named Minister of Agriculture.
°° Pierre-Henri Teitgen, named Minister of Information.

ee

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

35

And of course having done good time in prison is no guarantee that one will
make a good administrator. But it is at least a token that one is worthy of confidence at the outset.
We grant our confidence unreservedly to these men. They in turn must weigh
the value of the capital that the country is entrusting to them with this confidence. They must not squander it. We see only one way for them to live up to
their past, which is to bring the revolution that has begun in the streets into the
institutions of government itself.°°
But we shall have more to say on this subject.

September 12, 1944°!
Comrade,
You write us about the prisoners of war and about your joy, mixed with sad-

ness, at the arrival of Leclerc’s victorious troops.°* We would like to take this
opportunity to respond.
Of men defeated in battle and now in danger of being forgotten you write that
the thought of victory was never far from their minds. We know this. Those
defeated soldiers have no need of anyone to plead their cause for them. They are
men of our generation, we suffered defeat along with them, and after four terrible years we know that the brotherhood forged by defeat is more certain than
that which is born of victory. No gulf separates us from them.
None of us liked war. Ten centuries of intellect and courage had made us civilized men. Hatred was not to our taste, and the idea of justice existed in our
minds. So we asked ourselves if justice was on our side. And while we were asking ourselves that question, a thunderbolt struck and hurled us into the dirt.
We went into this war with the idea that it was absurd but that there was no
other choice. Today we can say that we went into it to save our honor. What
troubled us, though, was that honor spoke the language of M. Daladier,” and
60 Camus and Combat generally would often return to this theme.
61 Editorial, probably by Camus.
62 Leclerc de Hauteclocque, Philippe (1902-1947). After escaping from a prisoner-of-war camp, Leclerc
joined de Gaulle in London. He was named governor of Cameroon and military commander of French
Equitorial Africa, which he aligned with Free France, and led his army from Chad to Tripoli. He participated in the D-Day landing in Normandy with Allied forces and entered Paris at the head of the Second
Armored Division. He subsequently liberated Strasbourg and accepted Japan’s surrender on behalf of
France. He died in a plane crash in 1947 and was made marshal of France in a posthumous promotion.
63 Daladier, Edouard (1884-1970). A Radical-Socialist, Daladier served several times as a minister or

prime minister under the Third Republic and as vice-premier in the government of Léon Blum, whom he
succeeded as premier from April 1938 to March 1940. His signature was on the Munich accords, and it
was his government that declared war on Germany on September 3, 1939. Imprisoned by the Vichy government and put on trial at Riom, he was deported to Germany in 1943. After the Liberation he resumed
his post as deputy. In Camus’ eyes, he, like Herriot, symbolized those “right of center” politicians who
exhibited little concern with social justice. Camus frequently attacked him in Alger-Républicain (see Fragments d'un combat, |, pp. 234-237, and II, pp. 668ff.).

36

CHAPTER

2

the democracy we sought to defend had for some time been debased to government by executive order. While we were busy trying to resolve this contradiction,
Germany smashed us in the face, while French traitors stabbed us in the back.
Since Munich,™ in short, it has taken some time to articulate a consistent
view. This basic need for coherence forced us to pay a tribute whose weight was
measured in blood. But we ask if there is anyone in the world who can say that
France did not enter this war with pure hands® or who would dare insult the
defeated soldiers who paid the price that had to be paid for errors that were not
only theirs but all of Europe's.
For you paid, and we paid. We know now that justice is with us. But our
knowledge comes from executions at dawn and nights of agony, of frenzy, waiting, and terror.

What we say to you, however, is that there is no reason for regrets. It was better to perish with justice than to triumph with injustice. With patience and honor
we have taken care that triumph should come only when justice itself comes.
Neither your suffering nor ours was in vain. In truth it was the same suffering,
and what we shared in distress, today we must recover together in grandeur. For
it was your refusal, coupled with our rebellion, that made us what we are. When
you began your long and bitter meditation in June 1940, France meditated with
you. We did what had to be done so that you would not be killed along with your
thoughts, but you did what you had to do lest you die along with your dignity.
When our comrades come home, you mustn't be afraid that we will shun
them. They are our brothers in arms and in victory, and their place is among us.
Their fate seems harder than ours, for we at least were able to fight for the justice that suddenly became clear to us. So much solitude and loneliness, so much
courage and helplessness—your fists clenched in idleness, you suffered long years
in silence: our hearts sink at the thought. Our four years of war without uniforms are as nothing: you have our respect.
And should official France dare to forget you, you should know that we will
link our fate to yours, since your fate is the fate of the entire country, which you
and we have led from the most desperate of defeats to the most lucid of victories.

64 The accords signed in Munich on September 30, 1938, by Hitler, Mussolini, Chamberlain, and
Daladier in an effort to save the peace actually allowed the Germans to occupy the Sudetenland in
Czechoslovakia and then to invade the country.

® Like the editorial of August 24, 1944, “The Blood of Freedom,” which also contains the phrase “pure
hands,” this one echoes themes from the Lettres 4 un ami allemand.
66 On the same day, Combat began publishing a series of articles by Georges Bernanos with an introduction probably written by Camus:
“We are today beginning a series of articles by Georges Bernanos, which have not been published previously in France. These articles were passed on to us by a personal friend of the writer, who felt they
belonged in this newspaper.
“This is an opportunity for us to affirm our deep solidarity with a spirit from whom many things might
have separated us but for whom we have never felt anything other than fraternal gratitude.
“Our ambition is to speak as Bernanos does, but in our own voice. His is the only language capable of
making the country aware of its greatness.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

37

September 15, 1944°”

In 1933, an eager, frenetic personage perched himself atop the ruins of the
Weimar Republic® and announced to a delighted nation and an incredulous
world that a magnificent new era had begun for his country and himself. Eleven
years later, enemy armies have marched into the German fatherland and are
about to deliver a final blow to a nation exhausted by ten years under arms and
five engulfed by the flames of war. The experiment has proved conclusive.
A great many people believed in Adolf Hitler’s genius: nearly all the Germans,
many Europeans, and a few Frenchmen.” This was because, for many people,
success is a law and brutality a temptation. It is by no means certain that such
beliefs have altogether disappeared. Now that German territory has been invaded
for the first time in more than a century by enemies determined to inflict upon
it the marks and wounds of victorious force, it is time for a fresh look at the idea
of Hitler’s genius.
Hitler gambled everything on the ultimate success. of his policies. Years without comfort; privations of every kind; the harshest of discipline; art, philosophy,
and morality all enslaved to the common goal; Germany’s material and spiritual
resources mercilessly enlisted for one purpose only—never has a nation been
subjected to such discipline or nursed such hopes. Acting in the name of the
German people, Hitler made a fatal choice of power over happiness. Obedient
to his word, eighty million human beings renounced ordinary well-being in the
sole hope of someday achieving power.
One has to concede that, had Hitler succeeded, history would have acknowledged him as a great man. Some of us would no doubt have gone on denying
this on the grounds that the word “man” had lost all meaning under the Nazi
regime, thus debasing forever the very idea of “greatness.” Yet all of Germany and

much of the world would have forgotten the irredeemable mediocrity of this
man consumed by his obsessions; the crimes hitherto unnamed but now bearing
his name; and, finally, the misery that he trailed in his wake and caused to
descend like night on so many desperate countries.
Today, however, faced with the result, History itself will recoil. It will weigh

in the balance the sacrifices demanded of the German nation and the abyss of
humiliation and suffering that will be its reward.

67 Editorial. Typescript.
68 The Weimar Republic refers to the German political regime from 1919 to 1933. It was a highly unstable regime and further weakened by economic crisis, which aided the growth of National Socialism and
its eventual triumph. Hindenburg, the last president of the Weimar Republic, was obliged to appoint
Hitler chancellor in 1933.
69 Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) imposed the Nazi ideology on Germany and the occupied countries during

World War II: totalitarian dictatorship, territorial expansion, supremacy of the Aryan race, persecution of
Jews and opponents, etc. He became chancellor of Germany in 1933 and then “Reichsfiihrer,” chancellor
and president, in 1934. He committed suicide on April 30, 1945, as the Third Reich was about to go

down to defeat.

CHAPTER

38

2

A nation that would have treated the happiness of a thousand peoples as nothing compared with the power of a great individual will be compelled to recognize that Germany sacrificed everything to obtain nothing. Deprived of
happiness for ten years, it will not taste power for many years to come.
Yes, the experiment has proved conclusive. This man was no genius, this man

who for ten years screamed his hatred above thousands of helmeted heads and
who alone bears a weight of crimes and lies so great that no human forgiveness
can ever lift it from his shoulders.
Order thus remains intact. For order insists that in the end realism does not
pay. A lie may achieve victory when truth is afraid of its own strength. But there
comes a time when truth refuses to die and takes up its sword. From that day
forward, the lie is doomed, and realism is sapped of its strength.
What can spirits liberated from hatred as well as weakness learn from the terrifying example of Germany in agony? That in history as in other realms, genius
never lies in falsehood but is contained entirely within truth aware of its own
power. It took us ten years and millions of dead to recognize this obvious fact.
Having paid so dearly for this lesson, at least we won't forget it.

September 16, 1944”°
A wire service report that we published in our September 14 edition announced
changes in the French episcopate. The issues raised by this announcement are
general enough in their repercussions to call for further elaboration. The situation is clear, moreover. While many bishops, such as Msgr Saliége
of Toulouse,”’ did honor to their faith and their country, a minority of Church
dignitaries adopted attitudes during the Occupation that were incompatible
with the interests of the nation. Cardinal Suhard” of Paris was one of the latter
group.
Prior to 1940, many of us who respected Christianity as a prodigious spiritual
phenomenon, nevertheless asked ourselves what blindness had led the Church to
remain stubbornly aloof from the appalling problems that had plunged the century into turmoil. For years, many Europeans waited for leading spiritual voices
to condemn what needed to be condemned. And for years those voices remained
silent.
This determination to stand apart from the torment of nations in order to
survive without having to take sides was the most unmistakable sign of a pervasive decadence in the Church. In 1936 the crisis became serious enough that one

70 Editorial. Typescript.
71 Msgr Jules Salitge (1870-1956),

archbishop

of Toulouse,

publicly denounced

the anti-Semitic

measures of August 30, 1942, from the pulpit as well as in a “diocesan letter.” He was named cardinal in
1946.

” Cardinal Emmanuel Suhard (1874-1949), archbishop of Paris during the war, never protested in any

way against the persecutions.

:

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

39

major Catholic voice, that of Bernanos, was obliged to speak out and denounce
the Church's lethargy.”
Since 1940, this issue has been laid to rest—and we say this all the more
emphatically because we stand outside religion. Christians have once again
embraced the life of the nation by embracing its risks. Doctrines, like nations or
individuals, die only when they refuse to engage. Today we can say that for four
years our Christian comrades proved that their faith was a living one.
This fact justifies our severity in judging those whose attitude risked separating the Church from the Nation. After all, if we show no mercy to the treachery
of creatures whose business was to traffic in moral values under cover of politics,
what awful accusation should we level against those whose business was to
defend the spirit, to ennoble men’s hearts, and to denounce evil?
We ask consistency of politicians who traditionally showed none. So how can
we remain silent about the inconsistency of men who cloak themselves in one of
the purest messages humanity has ever known? How can we not remind them
that for a Christian, to be afraid is to betray one’s faith?
The eternal vocation of these men was in fact to affirm that force is of no avail
against spirit that refuses to recognize it. Their vocation was not to concede and
temporize, it was to refuse and, if need be, to die. They betrayed their vocation.
It was more difficult for the Resistance to have martyrs than for the Church.
Many of our comrades who are no longer with us went to their death without
hope or consolation.”* Their conviction was that they were dying, utterly, and
73 The allusion is to Georges Bernanos’s Grands Cimetiéres sous la lune, which condemned the Church's
attitude in the Spanish civil war. Camus

consistently showed his admiration for the Catholic writer,

though the two were far apart in many ways. In 1939 he published a fine critique of Scandale de la vérité
in Alger-Républicain.

Combat printed articles by Bernanos on several occasions, some sent from Brazil,

where Bernanos spent the war years, others given directly to the paper after his return to France.
On October 28, 1944, Combat reprinted Bernanos’s article “Monseigneur Suhard et Jeanne d’Arc,”
which was written in January 1941, when Laval was recalled by Pétain. It is not out of the question that
the short introductory paragraph was written by Camus: “When Pierre Laval was recalled by Pétain in
January 1941 with the assent of the archbishop of Paris, Georges Bernanos wrote the following article,

which reveals the full dimensions of Cardinal Suhard’s attitude during the Occupation. This is an issue
we have raised before. There has been no response. We therefore leave it to the greatest of Catholic voices
to describe the true scope of this conflict of Catholic conscience.”
Bernanos had this to say: “French Catholics will try to accept this latest blow to their conscience and
to their honor with patience, but they will not forget it and will not forgive it... . This modern concept
of passive obedience . . . must have its advantages, since dictators have made it the fundamental rule of
totalitarian Morality... . The temporal salvation of France must have some importance in the eyes of the
Almighty, since he deigned long ago to ensure it through the intervention of a Saint [Joan of Arc]....

The temporal independence of my country is also the guarantee of its spiritual liberty.”
It is easy to see why a text like this would have captured Camus’ attention.
On October 31, 1944, Combat published a response from Cardinal Suhard, claiming that he never
intervened in politics and had resigned from the National Council established by Pétain. Combat did not
wish to contradict Bernanos and said that it would await his return so that he could clarify his position.
It added: “We reproach Cardinal Suhard for not having been Monseigneur Saliége at a time when all
Christians should have lived up to the example set by the archbishop of Toulouse.”
74 Cf. “the conscious certainty of a death without hope” in “Le vent 4 Djémilla,” Noces (Essais, p. 63), and
of course LEtranger.

CHAPTER

that their sacrifice would end everything. They were nevertheless willing to make
that sacrifice. How, then, can we not feel bitterness in judging the tepidness of
men for whom death is but a way station and martyrdom a superior liberation?
For all these reasons, the problem is a serious one. It is politically serious, as
the example of Spain, where the Church cut itself off from the people, ought to
prove. But it is also morally serious. It is a problem of consistency and honor
involving a person’s whole attitude. Neither our friends at Temps présent” and
Témoignages chrétiens’® nor our Christian comrades at Combat will contradict us
when we say that this problem must be resolved by Catholics without delay. It is
up to Christianity itself to reject unrelentingly those who have demonstrated that
they were Christians by profession only.

September 17, 1944”

What are the people of Germany doing? Sleeping. Their sleep is filled with
nightmares and anxiety, but they are sleeping. We have awaited their awakening
for so long, yet they continue to remain silent behind breached borders, stolid,
stubborn, and silent as to the crimes committed in their name, resigned to the
appalling destruction that is raining down on their cities.
People are asking about them almost everywhere: “They're about to wake up.
They're going to redeem themselves in the eyes of the world and alleviate somewhat the awful responsibility they bear before History.” But nothing is happening.
German youths are falling in battle to preserve an honor that Germany’s leaders
have prostituted a thousand times over; a nation is about to die, a century of effort
toward unity is about to culminate in the bloodiest of failures, but the German

people remain unmoved. This enormous mass remains silent, as if the entire world
and its own destiny had become alien to it. All observers, neutral as well as Allied,

agree: the German people slumber on amid the twilight of their gods.
75 Temps présent was a Catholic weekly whose literary editor was Stanislas Fumet. It ceased publication in
June 1940 and resumed in late August 1944. On September 8, it published an article entitled “Justice for
Truth,” signed by “Synchrone,” which paid homage to Combatand Camus: “One cannot fail to be moved
by the rigor one finds in Combar's editorials. We liked the following statements, which are more profound
than what one reads elsewhere.” [The article then quoted the final sentences of “Age of Contempt,” from
“It is not hatred that will speak out tomorrow but justice itself, justice based on memory’
p. 21).]

(see above,

“We believe that this editorial was written by Albert Camus. He deserves praise for it.”
The article ended by pointing out that Combat and Temps présent shared the same conception of
“morality”: “Tt is public salvation, and purification of the air that the political spirit must breathe if it
wants to live.”
76 Founded in November 1941 by Reverend Father Pierre Chaillet, a Jesuit theologian, to breathe life into

the “spiritual resistance” to Nazism, the Cahiers du témoignage chrétien became Témoignage chrétien (sin-

gular; Camus erroneously used the plural) at the Liberation. Camus engaged in debate with Father Chaillet in his editorial of March 16, 1945. On the history of this weekly, see Le Monde, December 1, 2001,

for an article by Thomas Férenczi marking its sixtieth anniversary.
77 Editorial. Typescript.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

4l

In truth, the German people are true to their deepest vocation, the vocation
of a country that did not want to think and that for years has been concerned
only to avoid the burdens of thought. The unity that began with Bismarck’® was
not a harmonious and fruitful fusion of different individuals. It was unanimity
from the beginning. And never was that unity as total as under Hitler. It was the
indistinct and amorphous unity of a people content to have peace. Yes, this was
a people that made war because it wanted peace of mind. And that peace of mind
consisted in leaving to others the chore of thinking in its stead.
The German people do not love liberty, because they hate criticism. That is

why they do not like revolutions that emancipate man and have made only legal
revolutions, which reinforced state and nation simultaneously. And it accepted
the Hitlerian regime, which deprived it of happiness and dignity, of honor and

private life, because in the end it found the slumber of the spirit of which it had
always dreamed.
That is why the Germans are sleeping today. Those who say that if the Germans rebel tomorrow, it will be out of despair and not under the impetus of constructive reflection, are right. They will succumb thereafter to the same old
torpor and inertia, which will deliver them into the hands of the victors of the
moment, concerned only with making their way slowly and obscurely back to
that wonderful German warmth they cannot do without.
Then perhaps a new orator will come and offer some novel nostrum of his
own to this unconscious unanimity. And we'll be back where we started.
Must we therefore give up all hope in Germany forever and take it upon ourselves to declare that eighty million Europeans will never be good for anything
but denying the free spirit and killing people? We cannot accept that. But let us
in any case admit our present uncertainty and disappointment. Even with the
biggest heart in the world, who could plead the case of a people that refuses to
speak out in its own defense?

September 19, 1944”

The National Liberation Movement®” has held its first major public meeting.
Men who spoke on behalf of no party and to no constituency that existed before
the war were acclaimed by a fairly substantial number of Frenchmen. The novelty

78 Bismarck, Otto von (1815-1898). As chancellor, Bismarck unified Germany and won the war of 1870

against France. He proclaimed the Second Reich at Versailles.
79 Editorial. Typescript.
80 The Mouvement de Libération nationale, or National Liberation Movement, replaced the Mouvements

unis de la Résistance (United Resistance Movements) in January 1944. The importing meeting discussed

in the article took place on September 17. Combat announced it by printing a communiqué that began,
“The Resistance is calling you today, September 17.” On September 19, the paper published a long report
on the meeting.

CLCARArFIT
ER

€

of this may have gone unnoticed. It may also have gone unnoticed that
these men, who for four years spoke of nothing but France, spoke yesterday of
revolution.
Let us try to understand. What kind of revolution do they have in mind? The
revolution that was discussed on Sunday at [the Salle] Pleyel was not like any of
the revolutions proposed before the war by parties of very different kinds. For
that reason they strike some people as vague. People are in the habit of relating
words to the images they are most familiar with. For many people, “revolution”
means 1789 and 1917. The rest is too tiresome to think about. It isn’t even clear
that the movements represented at yesterday's meeting have any precise idea of
the revolution they have in mind. But they were speaking in the name of an
inner force that transcends them, that has sustained them for four years, and that
under certain conditions could tomorrow take on its true form.
Revolution is not rebellion.®’ What sustained the Resistance for four years was
rebellion. In other words, total, uncompromising, initially almost blind refusal

to accept an order that sought to put men on their knees. Rebellion begins with
the heart.
But there comes a time when it moves on to the mind, when feeling turns into
idea, when spontaneous enthusiasm culminates in concerted action. That is the
moment of revolution.
The French Resistance in its original form began in the purity of total refusal.
But four years of struggle have provided it with the ideas that were lacking at the
beginning. At the end of its triumphant rebellion, it has come to the point of
wanting a revolution. And if that rebellion doesn’t run out of steam, it will make
the revolution by providing it with what the country is waiting for, namely, a
new theory specifically tailored to the situation. We here believe that it is already
possible to lay down the preliminary features of this new doctrine, and we shall
come back to this topic in the days to come.
For the time being, and despite the skeptics, we are pleased, leaving certain
formal reservations aside, with this affirmation of will. We here do not believe in
definitive revolutions. All human effort is relative. History’s unjust law is that
man must make immense sacrifices for results that are often paltry. Yet as slim as
man's progress toward his own truth might be, we believe that it always justifies
these sacrifices. We believe, in fact, in relative revolutions.
In any case, the amorphous thought that is coming to the surface today after
four years of darkness should not be underestimated. It carries within it the seed
of passions and rebirths of every conceivable kind.
Those who harbor doubts may be proved right in the future, but for the time
being they are wrong, because they are giving in to mental sloth and cannot
imagine how history might redeem itself.

8! These reflections on rebellion and revolution would become central to L’Homme révolté (The Rebel).

The evolution from rebellion to revolution figures here as an illustration of Combats masthead: “From
Resistance to Revolution.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

43

Revolution does not necessarily mean guillotines and automatic weapons, or,
rather, it resorts to automatic weapons only when necessary. Those to whom this
new force seems vague or unimportant may be the same people who have already
fallen to the rear and who, thinking they hold the truth of the moment, have forever lost the truth tout court, which is always the truth of tomorrow.

September 20, 1944°”

|

:

We spoke the other day about the German people and their silence. Yet if the
Germans do not speak, they nevertheless wish to listen. They wish to listen, in
fact, to the man to whom they owe the dispensation from the need to speak for
themselves. In Germany and above all in the Rhineland, people are waiting for
a Hitler speech. But they wait in vain.
Hence the newspapers are speaking for him. Thus the Kélnische Zeitung
explains in its editorial that Hitler will not say anything because the time is not
right: “The Fiihrer’s silence speaks today to the German nation, and this silence
is more eloquent than any words could be.”
It is true that this silence is eloquent. It coincides with the silence of all
Germany, and it is the silence of a man who has also given up on thinking. Hitler
was of course not a thinker. But he was a man for whom words took the place of
ideas. His meditations were screamed out to hundreds of thousands of Germans
at the top of his lungs. For him to remain silent is no longer to exist.
Insufficient attention has been paid to the fact that Hitler never spoke as
much as he did between 1938 and 1942. Those were his years of victory. After
1942 he was heard less and less, and in this summer of 1944 the great silence
began. And the German people, who had renounced everything for the gruff
voice of one man, ceased to exist even as its leader ceased to speak.
From this history one can draw a lesson that ought to discourage dictators around
the world forever. People can speak only when they think they are right. Germany
consented to be right or wrong with Hitler. And for Hitler might made right.
Germany consented to be right or wrong depending on its might. The deep conviction of the German people was that Hitler would always be mightier than fate. But
no man can ever subdue fate by force except in the silence of his heart or through
the power of love. The type of force on which Hitler relied made fate laugh.
Today, the Germans’ extraordinary imprudence in linking their fate to one
man’s ideas and speeches is reaping its reward. A people that so detested individualism has taken up individualism’s basest aspect: the elevation of one man above
all others in contempt of all conscience. If that man is wrong and falls silent, that
suffices as a sign of expiation.
Expiation will be terrible for this unhappy nation. But it cannot be alleviated.
Behind its silent leader it is about to embark on a bloody and desperate adventure whose end cannot be foretold.
82 Editorial. Typescript, follow-up to the editorial of September 17, p. 40 above.

CAHRAPFPIENR«£4

For Hitler has not fallen silent because he was wrong; he has fallen silent

because he has lost. And continuing to identify his own person with that nation

he has drenched in blood and shame, he will maintain his silence until it reaches
its natural conclusion, which is death.
This man and this nation are about to die in a dreadful silence. But those who

can no longer speak can still strike poses. Hitler can be counted on to see to it
that Germany’s attitude is bloody and theatrical. The coming days will not be
happy ones. History will see this time as one in which a nation and its leader
consented to collective suicide.*?

September 22, 1944°4

As everyone knows, newspapers are today subject to military censorship—which
they have willingly accepted, moreover. We all understand the need to avoid giving anything away that might aid the enemy. So well do we understand this that
whenever possible we censor ourselves. Every night, moreover, we are told with
inexhaustible good will that the regime to which we are subject is not one of censorship but rather of military control. How can we not bow to such restraint and
unwavering courtesy?

Now, however, a dispute over interpretation has erupted. We thought that
“military control” dealt, as the term suggests, with control of military news. And
we believed that military news dealt with information of potential interest to
military operations. The control agency has a different interpretation, however.
“Military news” is any news in which military people are mentioned. Since the
most recent communiqué of the National Council of the Resistance alluded to
certain armed formations, any mention of it by any newspaper was censored.*?

83 Hitler would indeed commit suicide in April 1945, but Camus’ idea of the German people was to
be contradicted by what he discovered in Germany at the end of June 1945: see “Images of Occupied
Germany,” below, pp. 229-231.
84 Editorial. Typescript.
85 Combat had already protested the day before against the censorship of the NCR communiqué under
the title “A Bad Method”: “In the course of its Tuesday meeting, the National Council of the Resistance
adopted a resolution whose text was communicated to us Tuesday evening.
“There is no need to point out that this text contained no indiscretion that might have put the nation
in danger. Publication was nevertheless prohibited by the military control authorities.
“Having no wish to create an incident, Combat respected this ban. For that reason it feels all the more

comfortable in stating that the method ofsilencing the National Council of the Resistance by keeping its
texts out of the public eye is a bad method of government.”
These lines may have been written by Camus. He had already been involved in friction with the censors in his days with Alger-Républicain and even more at Soir-Républicain, and he had protested on numerous occasions, often in a jocular tone. See, for instance, in Fragments d'un combat, Il, p. 750, a formula

that is rather close to the present text: “We believe that the censor has opted for a bad method in attempting to sustain the ‘morale’ of the country in this way.” See also, in the same work, pp. 720-725, “Notre
position” (November 6, 1939), “Mise au point” (November 7, 1939), pp. 752-757, and “Pétrone et les
ciseaux” (December 18, 1939), pp. 708-710.

|

|
||

:

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

45

And if for some reason we wished to describe the celebrated saber of Joseph

Prudhomme,** we would have to submit it to the censor.
The result is clear. The military control authorities were yesterday subjected to
ridicule in the French press. No one has anything to gain by this. And we would
point out to the authorities that it is best to avoid becoming the butt of ridicule
in a country that has just barely seen the end of its humiliation.
It is understood that the press is free. Without being military men in the sense
in which military men understand the term, we proved for quite some time that
we enjoyed our liberty. Liberty, whatever one may think about it, can coexist
quite well with certain constraints, but only on condition that those constraints
are freely accepted and clearly defined. Since the competent authorities have not
proved capable of providing a clear definition, we must do it for them. Here,
then, are our explanations:

We freely accept military censorship on news that might be of use to the
enemy. We do not accept political censorship in any form. Above all, we do not
accept that a control agency known by a specific name be used in furtherance of
a policy that has no name.
In particular, we do not grant the military censorship the right to control the

thought and actions of the leading Resistance organization.
If the authorities are prepared to understand these guidelines, we assume that
things will proceed smoothly. If they are not, it will be up to the newspapers to
meet in a plenary assembly to defend the freedom of the press in their own way.
And we say this with calm assurance: one way to do this is to go underground to
publish the political news and commentary that the authorities seek to censor.
This is a kind of work with which we are, in the broadest sense, well acquainted.*”

September 23, 1944°°

Four years ago, on September 15, 1940, to be exact, Germany lost the war when
it lost the Battle of Britain. Although Hitler believed himself to be riding a crest
of victories, 185 German bombers fell around London, and Great Britain
remained in the fight.
This is perhaps a good time to pay our English friends their due, namely, our
somber friendship and our indelible memory of what they did, which will stay
with us forever. That memory was born in the summer of 1940, when people
brought together by retreat and exodus mingled in exhaustion in the cities of the
86 Joseph Prudhomme was a character invented by Henri Monnier to symbolize the smugness, conformism, and stupidity of the petite bourgeoisie in the age of Romanticism.
87 This statement provoked a reply from Francois Mauriac in Le Figaro for September 24-25. Mauriac
wrote ironically of the extreme reactions of certain newspapers, and in particular about the call “to return

to the underground with a clandestine press’—though he did not mention Combat by name. This was no
doubt the first crack in the mutual understanding that had prevailed until that point between Mauriac
and Camus.

88 Editorial. Typescript.

4

south, abandoned all hope, and prepared for the desperate history that lay ahead.
Those people had their doubts about England. They thought that England, too,
would capitulate. But she did not, and despite all that followed, and the painful

tragedies that failed to separate us, that is what we will never forget.
Of course we are not laboring under any illusions. Germany would never have
been defeated without the incalculable sacrifices of great Russia, without the formidable blows struck against German forces by the Red Army. Germany would
not have been defeated without the endless flow of matériel that America poured
into Europe, without the industrial genius that managed to win the most desperate of battles with the least possible bloodshed.
But we cannot forget that England stood alone for a year, that she gritted her
teeth for all that time but never gave up hope. We cannot forget that not a single Englishman entertained the idea of capitulation even for a minute.
We should add, moreover, that this heroism and calm determination would
not have been so admirable had they not been accompanied by such modest
reserve. Even today most Frenchmen are unaware of the seriousness of the
wounds that Germany inflicted on Great Britain because the superb people of
Britain forgot to complain. They suffered in silence and concerned themselves
solely with winning the war. It was this inner strength and tranquil courage,
moreover, that paved the way for a miracle: a country faced with extinction that
nevertheless left intact the democracy on which it had thrived.
Many things could have separated or may yet separate us from our English
friends. At times we have a hard time understanding one another. We often exasperate them, and they sometimes disconcert us. Yet come what may, some of us
will never forget the astonishing spectacle of a nation that combined a courageous heart with a courageous tongue and, alone in a world gone mad, defended
its freedom without once raising its voice.
In the article we published, the great writer Charles Morgan asked the French
to forgive England for its victory and its might.*? We forgive her with all our
heart. We would not be a great nation if we did not know how to recognize
nobility wherever it is found. Greatness must be given its due, and the British
people have demonstrated their greatness. Despite what is being written all over
France today, we are under no illusion that France has regained its former

strength. We know that much remains for us to do, and we will try to do it with
fidelity and clear thinking. Yet our pained and proud concern for our own country will never be allowed to make us ungrateful or cause us to forget that month
of September when the humane truth that was being crushed in France scored
its first victory in free England.
89 Charles Morgan (1894-1958) was a novelist, playwright, and critic whose best-known novels were The
Fountain and Sparkenbroke. Camus included a short note about him in his Carnets II, p- 21 (1942).

On September 20, Combat reprinted an article by Morgan entitled “Forgive Us Our Victory” that had
appeared in La France libre at the end of 1943. In it, Morgan recalled his vain attempt to create the
“United Powers” and stated his loyalty to England and love of France, and he then addressed the French
in these terms: “When by dint of blood, sweat, and tears we have won the war, forgive us our victory. . . .
Forgive us our strength. There will be times when we lack tact. . . . Forgive us our sins.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

47

September 26, 1944”

With the arrest of Louis Renault, French big business has been put on trial.”!
The problem is complex because the interests involved are not simple. There is
no hope of resolving it in a few lines. But if ever it were possible to reconcile
objectivity with energy, one would want to do so in this case because of its
importance for the national morale.
There is first of all a fact: French industry—and Renault along with it—
worked for the enemy.” This is the plain truth, which immediately strikes the
simplest souls, those who in one respect are never wrong. But explanations are
readily offered. The French government had signed an armistice, which had
every appearance of being legal. And under the terms of that armistice, French
factories were obliged to work for the occupying power. French industrialists
were merely obeying their government.
They can also demonstrate (as will become fairly clear in the Renault trial) that
they did so against their will. They have compiled figures to prove that work was
slowed and that Renault’s output during the four years of the war attained barely
a quarter of its prewar level. The profits they earned are more embarrassing. But
it is no secret that certain industrialists can prove that they passed this money to
the defenders of the good cause, though not always through direct channels.
Let us not close our eyes to the fact that this is a strong defense. Apparently
there is no law under which firms can be condemned for saying that they had no
choice but to respect the terms of an armistice that had the force of law. What
can we adduce against this argument? The simple intuition that, in this instance,

one of the most sacred duties of man and citizen was violated. But traditional
judges will only laugh at this. Nevertheless, this is the intuition that needs to be
fleshed out with content.
One could obviously contest the slowdown in production by attributing it to
Allied bombing. One could point out that a substantial number of Renault factories were used not for production but for repairing German vehicles. But we
prefer to say that these facts are beside the point.
Note, moreover, that a hasty revolutionary tribunal would not even argue the
case. It would simply find the defendants guilty. That is not the course we have
90 Editorial. Typescript.
91 Louis Renault (1877-1944) was a French industrialist and founder of the Renault automobile firm. He

had worked for French aviation in World War I. Under the Occupation, his factories worked for Germany.
On September 23, Combat, along with other papers, published a report from Madrid stating that “the
well-known industrialist [Louis Renault], allegedly wanted by the French government for his collabora-

tionist attitude, has left France.” The report was contradicted the next day: “The industrialist Louis
Renault is under arrest.” Incarcerated at Fresnes, he was accused of having delivered more than 6 billion
francs’ worth of war matériel to Germany. He defended himself by arguing that his factories were occupied and that he had been obliged to produce in order to avoid the deportation of workers and machinery to Germany. He died, however, before he could be brought to trial.

92 Combat would frequently return to the need to judge French industrial leaders who had collaborated
with Germany.

48

CHAPTER

2

chosen; we are preserving liberty even when it benefits those who always fought
against it. If we want to find them guilty, we must therefore substantiate the
charges against them.
We must not be ashamed to say that those charges have a moral basis from
which there is no appeal. To put it in a nutshell, the problem is one of responsibility. A captain of industry who enjoyed every privilege cannot be judged in the
same way as some minor official who obeyed Vichy because he was in the habit
of obeying. Men must bear responsibility for their privileges. Louis Renault, who
before the war enjoyed a degree of power for which he was widely detested, had
an opportunity to justify that power and make it bearable by demonstrating that
he was aware of the duties that went with it.
For in the end obedience to the government is not among the necessary
virtues of a captain of industry. In 1936, French industrialists proved that they
were perfectly capable of disobeying the law and of putting themselves above the
government. The same men cannot claim that when the moment to assume great
responsibilities arrived, they passed theirs on to a government of their own
choosing.
For us, nothing could be clearer: in 1940 the leading French industrialists had
a duty to place themselves above the law and the government, this time in the
name of the true interests of the nation. They will respond that their factories
would have been taken over by the Germans. But they did say that already, and
the results were lamentable. Production reduced to a quarter of its prewar level
is still production. Construction slowed is still construction, and the sharing of
profits was nothing but a sordid bargain.
Meanwhile, others did place themselves above the law. They had no papers
and no money. What was a simple duty for them, a duty they found in their
hearts, should have been an imperious and ineluctable obligation for Louis
Renault. To put it plainly, he should have rebelled before the people did.
To speak in such terms is new and lends itself to ridicule. There would be less
laughter if these ideas became law and if proportional responsibilities found some
juridical translation. During these four dreadful years all Frenchmen were witnesses to a crime not foreseen by any law (and in saying this we are weighing our
words carefully): the crime of not doing enough. French big business is guilty in
our eyes because it refused to risk anything. It separated itself from the nation forever by calmly ignoring the nation’s rebellions. And those men who invoked the
law to evade their duties should hand over their places to others, to those who,

though they cared nothing for honors, nevertheless saved their country’s honor.
September 27, 1944”°
Please forgive us, but we are not yet done with the case of Renault. The problem transcends the individual accused. It is no exaggeration to say that it bears
on the country’s future in that it will demonstrate whether or not we have the
°3 Editorial. Typescript. Continuation of the preceding article.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

49

weapons necessary to destroy the legal fiction with which Vichy covered its
treachery.
Indeed, the charge against Louis Renault has painful consequences. As we
pointed out yesterday, French industrialists have tried to shift responsibility for
their actions onto the government of Pétain and have tried to hide behind the
armistice. If we condemn them, we will therefore have to condemn the host of
others who also obeyed. And we will then cut ourselves off from the majority of
the French.
That is not what we want, and that is why we tried yesterday to delineate the
specific responsibility of French industry. Put simply, we had to show that that
responsibility might not have been a matter of law.
It remains a responsibility nonetheless. We live in a time when politics has to
be conducted on a moral plane, as a matter of sacrifice and responsibility, which

is why it touches our emotions.” For four years, we judged not in the name of
the written law but in the name of the law we carry in our hearts. The law of the
law books was of use to no one but the executioners. Yet those who acted outside the law knew full well that they were acting within the truth. Hence there
are cases in which law and truth do not coincide. Big business errs by hiding
behind a law already rejected by truth, while for us the difficulty is to judge big
business in the name of a truth that has yet to be embodied in law.
This situation is hard because it is general. It is not entirely new, however. In
daily life we are all familiar with offenses that fall outside the strictures of the law.
In such cases people sometimes resort to tribunals of honor. Hence we ought to
appeal to a law of honor that would allow these cunning industrialists to be
judged. Such a proposal may seem strange. But it comes down simply to saying
that our country will never regain its greatness unless it punishes breaches of
honor and duty as the gravest of offenses.
Even if all the courts in the world were one day to absolve Renault and recognize his defense as irreproachable in the eyes of law, on that day we would still
maintain that his actions fall within the jurisdiction of a higher law, a law as clear

in the popular mind as in the writings of specialists, a law whose dictates are
imperative. That law, which the war industries violated, commanded them to
ignore the law and to recognize that the era of responsibility had begun.
In 1940 an era began in France in which men were called upon to judge themselves one by one, in solitude, and deprived of all traditional support. From that
moment on, for the next four years, French industrialists who produced for
Germany judged themselves. We have only to ratify that judgment.
The government, which has taken the bold and novel step of setting the law
to one side for the sake of this higher justice, deserves to be thanked. To it falls
the task of fashioning its own new law around the permanent truth in the name
of which Louis Renault stands condemned. But it is up to us to maintain clarity
as to the moral nature of the difficult problem it is proposing to solve.
94 Note Camus’ insistence on dealing in moral terms with a problem that has not really been solved even

fifty years after the fact.

50

CHAPTER

2

September 28, 1944”

One can read the communiqué of the Council of Ministers elsewhere.
We simply want to say here why we consider the government’ decisions to be
important.

Without misplaced vanity, we want to say that these decisions reaffirm the
principles we set forth in our discussion of the Renault case yesterday and the
day before. More importantly, they translate those principles into practice.
The notion of “consorting with the enemy” (indignité nationale) as defined by
the minister of justice corresponds to what we called the law of honor. It concerns those who were clever enough to betray their country without breaking the
law. They will lose both their civic rights and their property. No justice could be
more deserving of respect in our eyes. For liberty demands that it be extended to
the enemy, and that demand, as difficult as it is to honor, is respected here: the

guilty are not touched in their person.
Who can object if men who neglected all conscience in favor of money are
deprived of what they held most dear, namely, the very same money that led
them astray? This measure, at once implacable and well calculated, seems to us
so invaluable that we hope it will be extended to any number of other cases in
which men of liberty and justice are bound by their own principles and would
be prevented from acting unless they decide once and for all to derive the new
law they need from their own consciences.
Indeed, one of the first consequences of this measure can already be seen in
the decision regarding the Renault factories. They have been requisitioned. The
nation is taking them over because for four years they took care of Vichy and the
occupying forces. In the eyes of the law it may be impossible to convict Louis
Renault of cooperating with the enemy. But in the eyes of the nation he is
accused of not having lived up to his privileges and his function. In the great
economy of the French nation, people will henceforth need to have proved that
they deserve what they own.
These decisions have started us down a necessary path. They are aimed at protecting the safety of the public. We will never approve them emphatically
enough. The government has just demonstrated that it knows what the real
95 Editorial. Typescript.
9% The communiqué did indeed announce a number of important measures:
FE. de Menthon, the minister of justice, won approval of an order to speed up prosecutions for “consorting with the enemy” (ndignité nationale) and confiscation of the property of those found guilty.
R. Lacoste, the minister of production, announced measures to purge industry of collaborators, and the
government approved the requisition of the Renault factories and the nationalization of coal mines in the
Nord and Pas-de-Calais, as well as the confiscation of illicit profits.
P.-H. Teitgen, minister of information, issued temporary regulations governing the press and defining
the provisional status of the Agence Frangaise de Presse and the Entreprise des Messageries des Journaux
Frangais.

It is easy to imagine that these measures, which paralleled Camus’ calls of the previous several weeks for
morality and justice, would have received his full approval, as well as that of the Combat team generally.

AUGUST

124,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

51

problems are and that it can deal with them. Acts of this kind will ensure that it
enjoys the cooperation of the entire country. We have given enough proof of our
independence to be able to say today that we unequivocally grant our full support to the spirit and will just demonstrated by the Council of Ministers.

September 29, 1944”
We are emerging from euphoria. In a legitimate access of enthusiasm, all of
France believed that the liberation ended the whole ordeal and that Paris once
again enjoyed peace the moment its flags were raised anew. This was not a clearly
formulated thought but rather a natural inclination on the part of people who
had suffered and fought a great deal and who had formed the habit of confusing
their hopes of freedom with their hopes of ultimate victory.
Freedom has arrived, and little by little we are discovering that it has its pressures and burdens and will continue to have them as long as the war is not over
and its consequences have not been overcome. Freedom has ended nothing. It is
a beginning. Freedom is not peace. We have enjoyed our victory but have yet to
see the victory of all. And we now know that all we have won is the right to go
on fighting.
Of course we haven't forgotten the internal war against money and resignation, which we must continue to support. But for the time being it’s a matter of
war tout court, the war that flattened us, the war from which we picked ourselves

up, the war that we must join anew.
In the enthusiasm of the liberation, and with help from a few overly hasty war
correspondents, the French people came close to believing that Germany would
be crushed in two weeks. At least we, for our part, never shared this illusion. And
whenever we had occasion to speak of Germany, we expressed our conviction

that it would hold out to the bitter end.
We hope we're wrong. But it seems to us that Hitlerian Germany is determined
to end it all in the most tragic and theatrical of suicides and that it will impose a
heavy price in blood for the victory that is not yet in hand. If we were inclined to
doubt this, Mr. Churchill’s recent predictions would provide food for thought.”®
We must resign ourselves to the fact that the war is going to last longer than we
expected. Even if we are fortunate enough to be proved wrong, we must live and
act in the meantime with the conviction that the war will go on. This amounts to
saying that the freedom we have just won commits us as much as it delivers us.

97 Editorial. Typescript.
98 Churchill, Winston (1874-1965), served first as a Liberal MP, then as a Conservative, and received his

first ministerial portfolio in 1917. On succeeding Chamberlain as Prime Minister in May 1940, he organized Britain’s resistance to the Nazis and became its symbol during the Battle of Britain and the threats
of German invasion. He played a leading role in the war against Germany and its allies, coordinating the
war effort and laying plans for the postwar period. He was defeated by Labor leader Clement Attlee in the
July 1945 elections but returned to power from 1951 to 1955.

52

CHAPTER

2

We say this without pointless zeal. No war is ever short enough. The world we
are hoping for has already exacted too high a price. If more blood and more pain
are needed, then that blood must be shed and that pain endured. Yet not a single European can contemplate this prospect lightly. In any case, in this country,
where we have just experienced the full extent and full absurdity of human misery, no one can be expected to look forward to it.
As bitter as our situation is, our resolve must be no less firm. Not all Frenchmen recognized in 1939 that the war made sense.”” They know now that it does.
Indeed, it has taken on a higher meaning for them, since their task is now not
just to destroy an enemy but also to banish the idea of France that four years of
official treachery have created abroad. We no longer have a place to defend, but
we do have a place to regain. As harsh or even at times unjust as this fate may
seem, it must be accepted initially so that in the end it can be laid to rest.
We have put ourselves in the difficult position of a people who must once
again demonstrate that we possess a nobility and grandeur that used to be taken
for granted. That we must do this with the lives of the best among us is the
dreadful tragedy of our new history. We have begun this revolting and necessary
demonstration. We carried it on through four years of thankless struggle still too
often ignored. Now we must continue it on the field of battle.
Some abroad may be aware of the difficult destiny with which we are
faced. But we mustn't wait for others to express their gratitude. We must be silent
and go to work. We must convince ourselves that the war is going to last and
accept the sacrifices of victory as courageously as we assumed the burdens of
defeat.
Victory itself will not be the end of it. Nothing is more difficult than to regain
grandeur once it is lost in the eyes of the world. Yet we shall be on our way to
rebirth and consecration if we can show the world the image of a nation generous to others and hard on itself, manfully resigned to the necessary sacrifices yet
never oblivious of its own honor or of the happiness of others.

September 30, 1944!
Mr. Churchill has just delivered a speech whose force stems wholly from its clarity.'°! That is why reading it is so comforting. For resolute minds, truth is always
the best news.
*» Camus may have had himselfin mind. See the passages of Carnets J, esp. pp. 165-182, in which he questions what the war is about.
100 Rditorial. Typescript.
'01 In his speech to the House of Commons, Churchill said that he hoped to see France take its place as
soon as possible in the Allied high command. Expressing “sympathy” and “compassion” for France and
paying homage to the French people, he added that he hoped to see the new French government recognized as soon as possible. This implied that the National Liberation Committee (the name initially
adopted by the Provisional Government) would be responsible to an expanded “Consultative Assembly”
approved by the people of France. See the editorial of October 14, 1944, p. 71 below.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

53

But this same reasoning persuades us that truth remains the only valid means
of diplomacy. And we speak the language of truth when we say that the only part
of the speech that isn’t clear is the part that deals with France.
Of course we know that Mr. Churchill cannot be clear. He could speak clearly
in one of two ways: either by refusing to recognize the French government or by
recognizing it. But he does not wish to do either, or at any rate he cannot do
either alone. It is no secret that certain quarters of American officialdom are
opposed to recognition.
Although this issue is painful to our pride, and French sensitivities are still raw,
we want to discuss the subject without bitterness yet with the frankness that,
while necessary, has not always been apparent in this matter. The fact is that
there seem to be two reasons for this wariness of recognition. The first is opposition to General de Gaulle personally.'°* The second can be summed up as stemming from a certain reserve with respect to the Party of the Resistance, which
some pretend to believe is entirely communist. From this comes the idea that
nothing can be done before the legislative elections, in which the assumption is
that Gen. de Gaulle might be rejected or that reassuringly safe political parties
might return to the surface.
It will be evident that we are speaking frankly. But since this is the impression
that we have in France, we have no reason to hide it. There is no other way of
reaching a legitimate agreement. Having thus frankly acknowledged the wariness
that some people outside France feel toward us, we must be equally forthright in
stating our response.
Which is that France today is unified. It has internal issues to deal with, but
these are nobody else’s business, and if it deals with those issues with the requisite
102 Charles De Gaulle (1890-1970) fought in World War I, was captured by the Germans, and made sev-

eral attempts to escape. After the war he wrote books on political history and military strategy and in 1940
was named brigadier general (“temporary status”). As undersecretary of defense in the government of Paul
Reynaud, he rejected the armistice and went to London, where on June 18 he issued an appeal to the
French to continue the fight. He organized the Free French Forces with resources from the French
colonies. In 1943, at the instigation of Jean Moulin, he created the National Resistance Council, which
sought to coordinate resistance activities in France. After the Allied landing in North Africa, he overcame

opposition and won Anglo-American recognition of his authority as replacement for Gen. Giraud. He also
created the French National Liberation Committee. At the Brazzaville conference in January 1944, he

proposed a new colonial policy under the auspices of the French Union. As head of the provisional government of the French Republic, first in Algiers and then in Paris as of August 1944, he became the incarnation of free France, restored the authority of the state, and reconstituted the French army, which fought
alongside the Allies. Elected president of the government by the first constituent assembly in November
1945, he resigned in January 1946. In April 1947, he created the Rassemblement du Peuple Frangais
(RPF). He returned to power in May 1958 in the wake of events in Algeria and proposed a new consti-

tution, which became the basis of the Fifth Republic, of which he was elected president by universal suffrage. After eight years of war, he recognized Algeria's independence in 1962. Following failure of a

referendum on regionalization and reform of the senate, he resigned in 1969.
Combat fully supported de Gaulle as liberator and head of the Resistance, but some journalists, includ-

ing Camus, had doubts about his political activities and reserved the right to criticize him as they saw fit.
A real split developed in 1947 between supporters of de Gaulle’s RPF (Ollivier, Pia, Chauveau) and the

rest of the staff.

54

CHAPTER

2

clarity of mind, it will emerge greater than ever. This is our affair, and we are giving thought to it. But for all external matters, France is unified. And it must be
treated as unified, including both Gen. de Gaulle and the communists.
Because Gen. de Gaulle, the parties of the resistance, and the communists
have forged in shared combat a fraternity that they will not repudiate. They are
not obliged always to have the same ideas about everything. We are not obliged
to approve of Gen. de Gaulle in every instance or to share all his views of the
Communist Party. On this or that issue we may even oppose each other strongly.
But today there is only one France, the France of hope and of danger. Those who
hoped together, who suffered, succumbed, and triumphed together, cannot allow

themselves to be disunited just because certain foreign circles may hold one
French party or another in suspicion.
Our allies must understand this and must choose either to recognize France or
not. To postpone recognition until legislative elections that cannot be held before
the end of the war is neither generous nor reasonable. If our American friends
want a strong and united France, dividing France from outside is not a good way
to go about it.
Some say, of course, that the French people have not spoken for five years and
must be heard. This is not news to us. We fought to restore to the French people the right to speak. But the fact is that the people have just spoken. They
spoke with their rifles and grenades from many barricades. Their voice, gruff and
excited, was not of a sort to please everyone. But we swear to our friends that it

was the voice of freedom itself.
We have lost many things in this war, but not so much that we are willing to
resign ourselves to begging for what is rightfully ours. If we must keep silent and
go to work by ourselves, we will do so. But that is not what we want. We want
to be able to love our friends freely and to prove that there is no bitterness in our
gratitude. We believe that we are not asking for much. And if that is still not
convincing, then we ask that steps be taken to ease our difficult task in view of
our long history of teaching the very name of freedom to a world that knew
nothing about it.

October 1, 1944!

People say, “Tell us in a few words, what is it you want?”!* This is a good question because it is direct. It calls for a direct answer. Of course that can’t be done
in one or two articles. As we return to it from time to time, however, we should

strive to clarify our thinking.
103 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, which picked up ideas expressed in the August 21 article “From
Resistance to Revolution” and helped to define what might be called Combar’s political line.
'04 This text seems to be an indirect response to an article that appeared in Défense de la France on
September 28. Like Combat, Défense de la France was a newspaper that came out of the underground.
“Founded during the Occupation on July 14, 1941, former underground newspaper of the Resistance,”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

55

As we have said more than once, we hope for a reconciliation of justice with
liberty. Apparently this isn’t clear enough. We shall therefore define “justice” as a
social state in which each individual is granted every opportunity at the outset
and in which the majority of the country’s population is not kept in a shameful
condition by a privileged minority. And we shall call “liberty” a political climate
in which the human person is respected as to what it is and what it expresses.
That much is fairly basic. The difficulty has to do with the balance that is
struck between these two definitions, as is shown by historical experiments with

both. History offers us a choice between the triumph of justice and that of liberty.
Only the Scandinavian democracies have come close to the necessary reconciliation of the two. But their example is not entirely convincing on account of their
relative isolation and of the limited framework within which they have operated.
Our idea is that the reign of justice must be ensured in the economic sphere
while liberty is guaranteed in the political sphere. Since we are making statements
about fundamentals, we will say that what we want for France is a collectivist
economy and liberal politics. Without the collectivist economy, which takes privilege away from money in order to grant it to labor, liberal politics is a fraud. But
without constitutional guarantees of political liberty, the collectivist economy
risks absorbing all individual initiative and expression. A constant, carefully balanced equilibrium between the two is a necessary and sufficient condition, not for
the happiness of mankind, which is another matter, but for each individual to

bear sole responsibility for his happiness and destiny. It is simply a matter of not
adding a purely human injustice to the profound miseries of our condition.
In short, and we beg pardon for repeating what we have said before, we want
to establish a true people’s democracy without delay. Indeed, we believe that any
polity that cuts itself off from the working class is pointless and that the France
of tomorrow will be what the working class becomes.'”
.
That is why we want the immediate implementation of a constitution in
which liberty will be granted its guarantees and of an economy in which labor
will be granted its rights, which are primary. It is impossible to go into details
here. We shall do so whenever necessary. For those who know how to read us, we
have already done so on any number of specific points.
A word also needs to be said about method. We believe that the difficult equilibrium we are seeking cannot be achieved without unremitting intellectual and
moral honesty, which alone can provide the necessary clarity of mind. We do not
as the paper billed itself, its first open issue appeared on August 9, 1944, in Rennes. Only on September 17
did it begin to give a Paris address: it shared quarters at 100, rue Réaumur with Franc-Tireur and Combat. It used the same printer as Combat and was also produced by unionized workers. Its first Paris edition appeared on September 22. As of November 8, 1944, the paper took the name France-Soir while
retaining Défense de la Franceas its subtitle. On several occasions the two papers engaged in polemics, in
a friendly tone at first but more aggressively later on.
Robert Salmon’s article reproached “some of our best friends” for engaging in systematic criticism of
the government, said to reflect the “intellectual’s taste for hypercriticism, degenerating into sympathy for
anarchy . . . a priori suspicion of a minister because he does not belong to the same tendency they do.”
105 In fact, this paragraph repeats verbatim phrases used previously in “From Resistance to Revolution.”

56

CHAPTER

2

believe in political realism. Lies, even well-intentioned lies, separate men from
one another and relegate them to the most futile solitude. We believe that, on
the contrary, men are not alone and that when faced with hostile conditions,
their solidarity is total. Anything that serves this solidarity and reinforces this
communion, hence anything that involves sincerity, is just and free.
That is why we believe that political revolution cannot take place without
moral revolution, which goes hand in hand with it and establishes its true dimension. This may help to explain the tone that we are attempting to give to this
newspaper. It is simultaneously a tone of objectivity, of free criticism, and of
energy. If only people made the effort to understand and accept it, we are foolish
enough to believe that for many Frenchmen a period of great hope would begin.

October 3, 1944!
The Daily Mail has just published an interesting article on the French press by
Allan Forbes.'®” It goes without saying that this article is well-disposed toward
France. It simply sets forth the views of a perceptive colleague, who is surprised that
the French press in general devotes more space to domestic politics than to news
of the war. The English journalist is glad that this is not the case in his country.
He is right to be glad. This fact is proof that England is in good health. That
is not the case with France. We have criticized the shortcomings of the French
press often enough not to take exception to objective criticism courteously presented. But objectivity requires us to set Mr. Forbes’s observations in context.
To begin with, why don’t we devote more space to the war? The answer is simple: we don’t receive any more information than we publish. All our war news
comes from one source: the Agence Frangaise de Presse,'”® which, incidentally,
has been doing its job competently. Unlike our British colleagues, we do not
have the two or three national and foreign agencies and foreign bureaus we need.
No French newspaper today is able to send a correspondent abroad, not even to
Geneva. We can’t even get a journalist out to the front at Saint-Nazaire.
Furthermore, English papers can add dispatches from their own war correspondents to their other sources of information. After more than a month of attempts,
we have not managed to persuade the Allied armies to accredit ours. Clearly, in this
case, our responsibility has to be judged in light of these circumstances.
As a rough estimate, we would guess that we receive about one-third as much
war news as our British colleagues. It should therefore surprise no one that we
106 Editorial. Typescript.
107 The Daily Mail, founded in 1896, is an important British daily newspaper. In the 1930s it had the
largest circulation of any newspaper in the world.
108 The successor to the Havas agency, which became the Office Frangais de l'Information during the
Occupation, the Agence Frangaise de Presse was established by an order dated September 30, 1944, which
stipulated that “conditions [will be set] under which a cooperative news agency will replace the A.EP” But
Roger Stéphane, writing in Combat in 1947, remarked that this still had not been done and that the A.EP.
was operating as a state agency. In 1957 a new law was approved.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

57

publish one-third as much. It is a mistake to believe that we wouldn't devote to
the war all the attention it deserves, if we had the opportunity. The war is still
the public’s chief interest, and even from a purely professional standpoint we
aren't so blind as to fail to see the implications of that.
That brings us to the matter of domestic political coverage. It is true that this
is the original sin of the French. It is true that our press does not always discriminate between lucid criticism and sterile polemic. But our English friends
mustn't forget that the French have good reason to put so much energy, and at
times vehemence, into their domestic demands. England did not experience, as
we did, the phenomenon of official treason.
For four years that treason poisoned national life in France, and it continues
to distort the issues we find most painful. England has not had to deal with
shame. No Englishman has been forced, as we have been, to refuse his hand to

another Englishman. In Great Britain contempt is not obligatory.
No other nation has had to deal with treason such as we have endured, which
is unique by virtue of its duration, its extent, and its efficiency. Obviously this
creates certain problems, and there would be no point in postponing dealing
with them until later. Indeed, some of us remain vigilant in regard to domestic
problems precisely because we are thinking about the war. We know from sad
experience that a country cannot wage war without being certain of its health.
We were very sick. It isn’t reasonable to think that convalescence is now a foregone conclusion and that we can wage democracy’s war without simultaneously
making democracy itself a reality.
Allan Forbes concludes his article with a plea for understanding between the
two countries. We would not be so presumptuous as to speak on behalf of a
majority of Frenchmen. But those we know feel a desire for an understanding
with England that is deep and warm and without ulterior motives. To that end,
however, we must admit our mutual weaknesses and make an effort to under-

stand them. Ours are the most glaring today. We have no particular reason to be
proud of them. But we have no reason to be ashamed of them either. All anyone
can ask of us is to make a good-faith effort to remedy them. We have that good
faith. And we hope our colleague will be kind enough to see a proof of this in
the simplicity with which we have set forth our observations.
October 4, 1944!°”
It is no secret that the Underground Press Federation''® has protested the ordinances published in the Officiel concerning the publication and operation of
newspapers. The Federation has appealed to General de Gaulle against the Government. There are reasons for this seeming paradox.
109 Editorial. Typescript.
110 The Fédération de la Presse Clandestine protested on September 30 that it had not been consulted
about the decisions taken by the Council of Ministers. Since the new ordinances had not yet been published in the Officiel, the Federation expressed the hope that the texts would conform “to the plan already

58

CHAPTER

2

The public might find this baffling. But the problem is clear, and if we are
reacting so vigorously, it is because the problem is also serious. What is it? The
Officiel has just published the ordinances concerning the press. In regard to all
matters of direct concern to the journalists of the Resistance—to wit, the eventual publication of new newspapers (art. I, par. 3), the composition of the credentials committee responsible for excluding collaborators (art. IX), and sales

price, allocation of paper, format, and publication frequency of newspapers
(art. XIII) —these texts grant all power to the relevant ministries with no provision for consultation with the newspapers of the Resistance.
We oppose these measures. We are not keen to go to war against the Government. Indeed, we hope that the Government will avoid wars of this sort. We are
defending not a position but an ethos. And if those in official circles were willing to reason along with us, they would have no difficulty recognizing that ethos,
which is now hidden from them by too many intervening advisers.
Let us lay down a principle. The Government at the moment is forced by circumstances to govern without Parliament. Indeed, the only ones left who don’t
see that it is forced to do so are foreigners. We assume, moreover, that the Government does not wish to govern alone. Hence it must rely on something.
Would we appear naive if we proposed that, on every issue, it rely on specialists in dealing with that issue? What do we mean by “specialists”? Not just people who are familiar with the technical difficulties of a profession but those who
are familiar with both the technical difficulties and the ethical difficulties. What
we have just given is a definition of the journalists represented in the Underground Press Federation.
These are the journalists who denounced the treason of the French press and
the unworthiness of its representatives. They produced the underground newspapers. Today, resistance seems easy. Everybody resisted, as everybody knows. At
the time, however, it bears repeating that the journalists of the Resistance, no
doubt poorly informed, felt rather alone. In their solitude, they thought things
over. They noticed that the dishonor of the French press had as much to do with
individuals as with institutions. They changed things by taking steps that made
a veritable revolution in the press possible. The public is still not altogether aware
of these changes. But the action of the Underground Federation allowed our
papers to appear in the middle of the insurrection and allows them to thrive
today in complete freedom, without financial or moral servitude of any kind.
That is one concrete result. But we need to keep an eye on this young revolution. And we want to be consulted. Not for the sake of pointless prestige but
because of the thinking we did while underground and of the knowledge that came
to us in the night, which we are determined to put to use. If the Government does
not rely on us in this matter, it will rely on nothing. Or it will rely on a host of
eager counselors with advice to give, because they were among those who at first
adopted in clandestinity, which was dictated by one desire only, namely, to wrest control of the press from
the trusts.” It asked that “no decision concerning the press be taken without the prior agreement of those
who represented and still represent the French Resistance.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

59

shrugged their shoulders and said nothing would change anything and were then
dumbfounded to discover that something had been changed in the meantime.
We cannot believe that the Government wants to rely on nothing. But we do
not want to believe that it prefers those who are giving it advice today over those
who paid yesterday. We must therefore go over the head of those advisers to
appeal to another man, who was the first to pay and who showed that he, at least,
had a conception of honor. That is why, despite the seeming paradox, we appeal
to Charles de Gaulle against his government."”!
To be candid, we do so with no particular joy. We would rather not be obliged
to say no. But we act with determination because of the secret oath that each of
us took in the solitude of the resistance years and none of us can ever forget.

October 5, 1944'!”

We have said before in this space how much we owe to our Spanish comrades.'"’
This needed to be said, we believed, because when fascism began to spread its
oppressive doctrines throughout Europe in 1938, the Spanish were the first to
experience the desperate silence that ensued. We still believe that our fight is
their fight and that we cannot be either happy or free as long as Spain is brutalized and enslaved.
That is why we are astonished by the treatment that continues to be meted
out to men who never failed in their duty to liberty. If we talk about the
Spaniards, it is because we know them well. But the same treatment has been
reserved for many antifascist émigrés, and we wish to support the protest that has
been lodged with the appropriate minister by the Justice Committee of the
C.N.R."4 in regard to a particular instance of this treatment.'””
What is going on? By virtue of a few simple regulations, the government is once
again concentrating Spanish Republicans in a Parisian barracks or else shipping
111 See the text of that appeal: “The threatened press appeals to de Gaulle”: “The National Federation of
the French Press, deeply disturbed by the series of ordinances published in the Officiel on October 1 and 2,
1944, has decided to ask for an audience with the president of the Provisional Government of the French

Republic in order to submit to him its vehement protest against these measures, which it regards as
directly contrary to the spirit of the Resistance, the freedom of the press, and the honor of France.”
112 Editorial. Typescript.
113 See editorial of September 7, above, p. 29:
114 The Conseil National de la Résistance, or National Resistance Committee (C.N.R.), was established
in 1943 by Jean Moulin, whom General de Gaulle had assigned to federate and coordinate the various

resistance movements inside France. After Moulin’s arrest, Georges Bidault became head of the C.N.R.
On Bidault, see the editorial of October 8, 1944, p. 64 below.

115 Combat reported on the same day that “the Justice Committee of the C.N.R. is protesting the slowness of the purge [épwration],” referring to the purge of former collaborators.
“This Commission, received by M. de Menthon, is protesting the slow pace of prosecution and the fact
that certain ministers (Monzie, Prouvost) and business leaders (Hotchkiss) are still at large. Members of

the commission observed that these facts are all the more surprising in view of the fact that antifascist
émigrés are hunted down and arbitrarily incarcerated every day.”

60

CHAPTER

2

them off to the provinces, where they are in danger of finding themselves defenseless. Before saying how this has come to pass, we would like to refresh the memories of those without imagination. In 1938, people for whom we found the name
“refugees” (even though we still had no idea of how weighty a meaning this word
would eventually acquire) were mostly housed in concentration camps. During
the war, either they signed up voluntarily or we forced them into labor.
The Vichy regime did not stop at such noble tactics. It asked these men to
choose between slavery and death. Spanish Republicans had either to work for
Germany or return to Spain. Most of our comrades joined the underground and
fought for our freedom, which, with a tenacity deserving of a better fate, they
persisted in thinking of as their own. Others, in the cities, obtained false work
certificates. And still others worked for the occupier.
Today, all this is being sorted out. Republicans who used fake or real German
work certificates to regularize their situation are now being concentrated in the
Kellermann Barracks or shipped outside the département of the Seine. Meanwhile, those who fought with the underground find themselves in the most awkward position because they failed to apply for a place in the order established by
the Germans. As a result, they can be, and in some cases are, arrested at any time.
For six years they have been on the run. These men have endured not only
defeat and exile but also six years of humiliation and disappointment. Meanwhile, propaganda from certain quarters has harmed our comrades’ reputation in
the minds of some Frenchmen.
But we want to say as forcefully as possible that, on the contrary, these men
were the first to set an example of courage and dignity for us, and we ought to
be proud to reach out to them.
Against this elementary sentiment, bureaucratic arguments have been raised.
But the issue is not a matter of bureaucracy. It is a matter of the heart. And if the
bureaucratic regulations fail to correspond to these deeply felt desires, the solution is quite simple: the regulations must be changed before we forget one iota
of the debt of gratitude we owe to Spain.
These thoughts came to mind yesterday as we were leaving a showing of Sierra
de Teruel, [André] Malraux’s overwhelming film about the war in Spain.'!° We

would have liked everyone in France to see the faces of those warriors and of that

116 On the same day Combat published an unsigned review of this film, which Camus surely at least read
over. Its text reads as follows: “Sierra de Teruel, a film by André Malraux. Only a few viewers enjoyed the
privilege of attending a showing of Sierra de Teruel, the film that Malraux based on his novel L’Espoir
(Mans Hope). A still from the film appears on page 1. But what we cannot reconstitute for our readers is
the overwhelming truth of this film, which was shot with no resources other than poverty and courage.
The simple story of these few men who join a squadron and die on a mountaintop achieves grandeur
without any sense of effort or strain. For that, the note of truth was enough, along with the Spanish faces,
whose presence, naturalness, and pride grip the heart when you think about what fate held in store for
them. There is also the leitmotif
of the film, in which all these men, confronted with the most heroic tasks,

say simply that they will do what they can. And indeed, the whole world has seen what they could do.
This film will no doubt be shown to the public. It is a miracle, by the way, that the sole copy survived,
for the Germans thought they had burned it when in fact they only destroyed a copy of Dréle de drame.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

61

matchless people joined together in heroic sacrifice. If we are to lay claim to the
title of “great nation,” we must be able to recognize grandeur and salute it wherever it exists. And there isn’t a man worthy of the name who would not have felt
a twinge in his heart yesterday at the sight of those images of a battle that was
unequal from the outset yet never given up for lost.
We are well aware that it is impossible to receive Franco’s ambassador while at
the same time doing justice to the men he insults. We say that a choice has to be
made. In any case, it is not possible to evade an imperious duty by pretending to
abide by absurd regulations. And if the bureaucrats persist in ignoring this fact,
then the bureaucracy will have to be destroyed to prevent them from landing us
once again in the wretched situation of a country that extols republican freedom
while persecuting its proudest defenders.

October 6, 1944!”

There was plenty of noise in the night sky over France yesterday.''® The sound of
explosions and destruction, the very voice of death. At regular intervals the war
thus reminds those who would otherwise be quick to forget that it is still raging.
At the same time we are told that the Allies may some day be obliged to
announce an end to hostilities without having signed an armistice, because
Hitler wants no end to the war. And Dr. Goebbels'!? has declared that every
house in Germany will be defended to the death. At regular intervals the war
thus stokes otherwise deficient imaginations.
The point is that we can never have memory or imagination enough to rise to
the level demanded by the destiny that is now ours. To repeat what needs to be
repeated, liberation is not peace. It is only the hard-won right to deserve peace
by winning the war. We were forced to fight this war.'*° The whole world knows
that France did not want it and that the best of her sons were cut down while
dreaming of peaceful futures. Now that we are at war, however, we know who
our enemy is. In 1933, many Frenchmen measured only what we had to lose in
war. Today, we know what we have to gain.
Hence we must fight the war. And our first victory, won at such great cost, is

the knowledge that we can make war without giving up any of our past faith,
that we can win without hatred, fight while holding violence in contempt, and

choose heroism while retaining our taste for happiness. But this victory is only
the first. We need another, a definitive one, so that we can do something to make
people happy without making them shed blood.

117 Editorial. Typescript.
118 More than 7,000 bombers took part in a gigantic attack on Germany, and the city of Saarbriicken in

particular.
119 On Goebbels, see the March 1944 issue of underground Combaz, n. 2, p. 1 above.
120 Once again, Camus reverts to one of the major themes of Lettres a un ami allemand.

CHAPTER

62

2

But how are we to make war? Every country wages war as it can. The world
must not forget that France, in order to wage war, must liquidate treason. Some
say that we can make war only if we are united. That is true if people are willing
to understand one another. It is true that personal quarrels, sterile polemics, and
bad faith must be banished. But the experience of the war of 1939 teaches us that
one cannot wage democracy’s war abroad while suppressing democracy at home.
We have no personal quarrels to pursue, but we do have questions of principle to explore. That is where France must bring its youthful vigor to bear. Great
countries are those that can endure history's convulsions without abandoning
their efforts to solve their problems at home.
Great Britain has set an example for us to follow. To be sure, we must be sparing in our criticism. But we must also be that much more energetic in making
those criticisms that we judge to be vital. Strength of character lies in saying no
as clearly as we say yes, and strength of character is what we must aim for. This
country wants to wage its war in conditions of total transparency.
To wage war, France requires not only unity but also truth. There is now but
one war for all of us, and that is the war of truth. For many years to come, falsehood will make us feel weak, and only the harsh light of sincerity can give us

strength.
Only under these conditions, then, can we associate this country in its entirety
with a war that there is every reason to expect will go on for quite some time. If
the people of France are granted their full rights, they will acknowledge their
duties unbidden. No future is possible for this country unless it is capable of
striking a disciplined balance between force and justice, in which each compensates for and reinforces the other. We want no justice without victory. But we
have spent four years learning that a victory disdainful of all justice would be
only a mockery of victory.

October 7, 1944'7!
In Algiers on March 26, 1944, the Congress of Combat declared that the “Combat” movement subscribed to the following statement: “Anti-Communism is the
first step toward dictatorship.” We think it worthwhile to remind people of this
and to add that not a word of this statement needs to be changed today, as we
seek to explore with some of our Communist comrades certain misunderstandings that have arisen recently. Indeed, we are convinced that nothing good can
be done in secrecy. And today, in broaching one of the most difficult of all subjects, we want to try the language of reason and humanity.
The principle set forth above was not adopted without reflection. It was the
experience of the past twenty-five years that dictated this categorical proposition.
This does not mean that we are Communists.

But neither are the Christians,

'21 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actuelles, chapter entitled “Morale et politique.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

63

who are nevertheless prepared to countenance united action with Communists.
Our position, like that of the Christians, amounts to saying that while we are not
in agreement with the philosophy or practical ethics of Communism, we vigorously reject political anti-Communism because we know what inspires it and
what its unavowed aims are.
So firm a position should leave no room for any possible misunderstanding.
Yet this turns out not to be the case. Hence we must have expressed ourselves
awkwardly or just plain obscurely. Our task now is to try to comprehend those
misunderstandings and explain them. There can never be enough candor or clarity in dealing with one of the most important problems of the century.
Let us begin, therefore, by stating clearly that one possible source of misunderstanding is a difference in method. Most of our comrades’ collectivist ideas
and social program, their ideal of justice, and their disgust with a society in
which money and privilege occupy the front ranks, we share. But as our comrades freely recognize, their adherence to a very consistent philosophy of history
justifies their acceptance of political realism as the primary method for securing
the triumph of an ideal shared by many Frenchmen. On this matter we very
clearly differ. As we have said many times, we do not believe in political realism.'””
Our method is different.
Our communist comrades can understand that certain other people, not in

possession of a doctrine as firm as theirs, had a lot to think about these past four
years. And they did their thinking with an open mind, amid a thousand perils.
As countless ideas were swept aside and countless unblemished souls were sacrificed amid the ruins, they felt the need for a new doctrine and a new life. For

them a whole world died in June 1940.
Today they are looking for that new truth with the same good will and open-

minded spirit. It is easy to understand, too, that these same men, reflecting on
the bitterest of defeats and conscious of their own deficiencies, found that their
country had sinned by confusion and that in order for the shape of the future to
emerge, considerable effort must be devoted to achieving a new clarity and
vision.

That is the method we are attempting to apply today. We hope that others will
grant us the right to make such an attempt in good faith. The intention is not to
reinvent the country’s politics from top to bottom. It is to undertake a very
limited experiment: to introduce the language of morality into the practice of
politics by means of simple, objective criticism. What this comes down to is saying yes and no at the same time, and saying both with the same seriousness and
the same objectivity.
If you read us carefully, and with the straightforward goodwill that you would
accord to anyone who acted in good faith, you will see that we often give with one
hand what we seem to take away with the other, and more. If you concentrate
122 Recall that the notion of “political realism,” already denounced in connection with Spain, is here
opposed to the frequently repeated wish to introduce morality into politics. This text is particularly
important in defining the position of Camus—and Combat—with respect to the Communists in 1944.

CHAPTER

64

2

solely on our objections, misunderstandings are inevitable. But if you balance

those objections against our oft-repeated declarations of solidarity, you will see
clearly that we are trying not to give in to futile human passion and consistently
endeavoring to do justice to one of the most impressive political movements in
history.
At times it may be difficult to see what the point of our method is. Journalism is not noted as a school of perfection. It may take a hundred issues of a newspaper to state a single idea clearly. But that idea can help to clarify others,
provided that the same objectivity that went into formulating it is employed in
scrutinizing its implications.
It may also be that we are mistaken, that our method is utopian and impossible to apply. Nevertheless, we believe that it is wrong to decide this in advance,

before anything has been attempted. What we are doing here is conducting
an experiment as honestly as men concerned with nothing other than honesty
can do.
We ask our communist comrades only to ponder this as we ponder their
objections. At the very least we will both gain by clarifying our positions, and we,
for our part, will benefit by learning more about the difficulties inherent in our
project and its likelihood of success. That is why we address our comrades in
these terms. That, and our acute sense of what France would stand to lose if our
mutual doubts and suspicions were to lead us into a political climate in which
the best people in France would refuse to live, choosing solitude over polemic
and discord.

October 8, 1944!”
Yesterday,

the

National

Council

of the

Resistance

[hereafter:

NCR]

introduced itself to the people of Paris for the first time.'** Hence it was possible to hear at last the representatives of what M. Georges Bidault’” called
“the political and spiritual families that contributed to the grandeur of this free

country.”

123 Editorial. Typescript.
"24 On the National Council of the Resistance, see the text for October 5. On October 7, a press release
was issued announcing a meeting of the NCR at the Vél’ d’hiv’ (or Vélodréme d’Hiver, a bicycle race
track): “For the first time since the liberation of Paris, the members of the NCR are today going to meet
directly with the people.” In fact, the NCR had apparently lost some of its authority following the formation of a government on September 9. (It is worth noting that no newspaper at the time made the
slightest allusion to the fact that the same venue, the Vél’ d’hiv’, had been used as a temporary prison for
foreign Jews rounded up by the French police on July 16 and 17, 1942.)
25 Georges Bidault (1899-1983)

was a member of the “Combat”

movement

and president of the

National Resistance Council. After the arrest of Jean Moulin, he played an important role in relations
between the internal resistance and General de Gaulle. He became minister of foreign affairs in September 1944 and continued to serve in that capacity in several Fourth Republic governments. He was also a
founder of the Mouvement Républicain Populaire.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

65

We are not sure that all of France has a clear idea of what the Resistance was
and what role the NCR played in it. True, there has been a lot of talk about it
since the liberation. But it takes imagination to see beyond the words to the
everyday truth, the harsh suffering, and the feverish hours that filled these past
four years. Nor is it clear that all of France properly appreciates the intentions of
the men of the Resistance.
It is true that the NCR and the newspapers have often said that they felt they
had a right to be consulted. It would be a serious mistake, however, to conclude
from this that they wished to exclude others or that the Resistance entertained
an exaggerated notion of what it was due.
Some readers may have noticed that yesterday's speeches, taken together, outlined a firm and well-developed program that would have surprised many of its
defenders before the war.'”° But the ordeal of defeat and struggle proved decisive
for these men of honorable intention.
Some on the right, who had never given any thought to the social problem,
understood that a nation could not live cut off from its own people, and that
what was given to the people would in the end redound to the benefit of the
nation. Some on the left, whose ideal of justice transcended their native land,

realized that no ideal could be sustained in a subjugated country, and that whatever one did for an unjustly humiliated nation would ultimately redound to the
benefit of justice itself.
Here we touch on what is most significant about the Resistance. Through a
rebellion of the heart, it brought together certain truths of the intellect. Because
the men of the Resistance have a precise idea of what they have to teach, they felt

it was their duty to continue by way of speech and action what they began in
silence. That is why the NCR spoke yesterday, and why it daily asks to be consulted. But the very reasons for its action, the common understanding through
which so many ideas once thought to be hostile to one another have been reconciled for the sake of the nation’s grandeur, guarantee that the action of the
Resistance will continue to transcend personal prejudices and ambitions.
We here deeply believe one thing: the Resistance does not wish to impose itself
but wants only to be listened to. Many of us are conscious of having done no
more than what duty required. Doing one’s duty requires no reward or publicity
and need not result in special prerogatives.'”” If nothing else, maybe it gives the
126 Speaking to a crowd of some 15,000, one speaker after another protested against the Allies’ failure to
recognize the French government. They insisted on punishment of traitors and confiscation of the property of collaborators. They called for nationalization of important firms, denounced the insurance companies and large lending institutions, touched on social security, and declared that a free press was essential

for guaranteeing free institutions. They called on people to be wary of anti-Semitism and insisted on
equality for all citizens, including citizens of the colonial empire. Georges Bidault, minister of foreign
affairs and former president of the NCR, said, “We cannot isolate ourselves from all the political and spir-

itual families that contributed to the grandeur of this free country.”
127 At this point in the text, a line was omitted, replaced by another line that repeated a previous one. This
is true of both the published article and the typescript, which proves that the typescript was prepared from
the published article. It was not difficult to restore the few words that were omitted, however.

66

CHAPTER

2

right to do it again on occasion. The Resistance did what it could to restore this
country’s freedom. But that meant giving the people their sovereignty. The Resistance knew that, and that was the end it sought. It paid for what it did with suffering that is hard to contemplate and deaths that some of us will never be able
to forget. But that was the price that had to be paid so that the French people
could emerge from their silence. That has now been accomplished.
In a few months, perhaps, the people will decide what politics and what government they desire. No one can understand what the Resistance was and
remains until he has fully grasped the meaning of this gravest and most important of truths.
If the people of France are someday allowed to express themselves freely and
choose to disavow the politics of the Resistance, the Resistance would bow to
their will, and those men who believed it was their duty to continue their service to their country would return home to resume the private lives and enjoy the
less demanding gratifications on which they turned their backs for a while, in the
midst of defeat, because they felt, at the time justifiably, that there were things
to be done that could not be done without them.

October 11, 1944'7°

The situation of the press poses problems. Those problems have in fact been discussed in the press. And the public has tried to understand, at times impatiently,
at other times anxiously. Apparently the discussion looked a bit like a family
quarrel, and everybody knows we should be giving more space to dispatches
from our war correspondents, even though they still haven't been accredited. But
if newspapers are to deal with the war, one first has to have newspapers—real
newspapers, that is. Obviously the issue is still the same, since we are convinced
that what is at stake is the very existence of the new press.
Why not try to explain to the public, in measured terms, the reasons for our
worry? And why not say clearly, for example, that there will soon be a clash
between the new press and the old. There is in fact talk of reviving old names.
Having thought it over, we are generally opposed to this. Why?
What the public is not sufficiently aware of is that journalism is the only area
of our national life to have been fully purged, because during the insurrection
newspaper staffs were cleaned out from top to bottom. This purge was carried
out in one day. Its advantage over others is that it was more radical. The newspapers being published today may have their faults but at least they are supported solely by the proceeds from their sales. France now has a press liberated
from the power of money for the first time in a hundred years.
We admit that we're keen on this revolution. And, admittedly, we are generally suspicious of the old titles. There are distinctions to be made in this regard.

128 Editorial. Typescript.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

67

There are papers that saw nothing wrong with resuming publication during the
Occupation, whether in the northern zone after June 1940 or in the southern
zone after November 1942. As far as those papers are concerned, pardon us if we
say simply that we no longer want anything to do with them.
There are other papers that did not resume publication during the Occupation. Two cases need to be distinguished, however. There are those that coura-

geously scuttled themselves and never forfeited their honor. They include Le
Figaro'” and Le Progrés de Lyon.'*° They have their place among us, which they
occupy with such competence and dignity that we can always benefit from their
experience. What is more, we did not wait for any official decision to welcome
them back, and we did so gladly.
But there are other newspapers that did not publish during the Occupation
because they were not authorized to do so, despite their negotiations with the
German authorities.
And there are still others that did not resume publication but rented their
equipment and offices to the occupiers and profited from a situation from which
they could no longer derive prestige. We are on firm ground in saying that the
verdict in their case is a foregone conclusion.
Some say that these old names could resume publication with new personnel.
We see no point, however, in adding to the confusion. The reason given for this
proposal is that the public is used to the old names. The response to this is that
the public will get used to the new ones. If there are people who absolutely must
read a newspaper that did not originate with the underground, they can buy Le
Figaro, which is quite good. What is more, this argument starts from the premise that the public is naturally inert. That opinion was current before the war,

precisely in the old newspapers, but over the past four years it has gone out of
fashion. The first condition for becoming a good independent journalist is to
learn not to be automatically contemptuous of one’s reader.
Last but not least, there will no doubt be some who say that we take the position we do for fear of the competition. In this instance, in other words, we are
the ones who are supposed to be contemptible. Let us simply say this: we have
paid dearly for what we have won. We hope that the price paid by journalists in
the cause of freedom will earn them if nothing else the esteem of those who take
an interest in them. We know in the bottom of our heart that we will always
accept, and feel grateful for, the competition of talent. What we no longer want
is the competition of money. We are prepared to listen to reason, to whatever is

in the national interest. But we see nothing in the arguments that have been
raised against us worthy of anything other than regret and disdain.
129 Le Figaro abandoned Paris for Lyons in May 1940. It ceased publication in November 1942, when
the previously “free zone” was occupied. It surfaced again when Paris was liberated, with Pierre Brisson as
editor.
130 Le Progrés de Lyon ceased publication from November 1942 until the liberation of Lyons. Several of its
journalists, including René Leynaud, joined the Resistance. See the editorial of October 27, 1944, p. 90

below.

68

CHAPTER

2

If we cannot have understanding, then we ask to be shown a little patience.
Allow the new press time to prove itself, notwithstanding the faults of which it
is well aware. We make so bold as to point out that there is some basis for grant-

ing a reprieve in what the new press accomplished after June 1940.

October 12, 194417!

There is much talk of order right now. This is because order is a good thing, and
we have sorely felt its lack. The fact is that the men of our generation have never
known order at all, and the nostalgia they feel for it might make them do many
imprudent things if they weren't also convinced that it ought to be indistinguishable from truth. This makes them somewhat suspicious and careful when
it comes to choosing among the samples of order that have been proposed to
them.
For order is also an obscure notion. It comes in several kinds. There is the order
that continues to reign in Warsaw,’ there is the order that hides disorder, and
there is the order that Goethe loved, which stands opposed to justice.'*? There is
also the higher order of hearts and minds that goes by the name of love, and the
bloody order in which man denies himself, and which draws its powers from
hatred. We hope to distinguish the good order we have in mind from all of these.
Clearly the order under discussion right now is social order. But does “social
order” mean nothing more than quiet in the streets? There is reason to doubt it.
In the heart-wrenching days of August, in fact, we all felt that the first shots of
the insurrection marked the beginning of order. As disorderly as revolutions may
seem, they are pregnant with a principle of order. That principle can prevail if
the revolution is total. But if the revolution fails to come off or stops halfway,
years of oppressive and monotonous disorder follow.
Well, then, does order mean government unity? Unity is essential, to be sure.
But the German Reich achieved such unity, and still we cannot say that it
brought true order to Germany.
Maybe it would help if we looked simply at individual behavior. When do we
say that a man has put his life in order? When he is in accord with what he does
and his conduct is consistent with what he believes to be true. The insurgent who
dies in the chaos of passion for an idea he has embraced is in fact a man of order,
131 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actuelles, chapter “Morality and Politics.”

'32 There are several allusions here. The first is to statements made by Marshal Sebastiani to the Chamber
of Deputies in 1831 when a Polish uprising was crushed by the Russians. This led to the publication in
the newspaper La Caricature of a celebrated lithograph depicting a Russian soldier standing among bodies, with a caption that read: “Order reigns in Warsaw.” Finally, at the time Camus wrote, Warsaw was still
under German occupation; it would not be liberated until January 17, 1945.
'°3 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832). Obviously Camus is not attacking the author of The Sufferings of Young Werther, Faust, The Apprenticeship ofWilhelm Meister, or the Conversations with Eckermann,
whom he quoted frequently in his Carnezs. He is rather attacking the Goethe who said that he preferred
injustice to disorder.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

69

because he has organized his conduct entirely around a principle that he regards
as self-evident.
But no one can ever make us regard the privileged individual who all his life
eats three square meals a day and owns a fortune in blue-chip securities but locks
his doors whenever there is a disturbance in the streets as a man of order. He is
merely a man with fear in his heart and money in the bank.
If order in France meant fainthearted caution, we would be tempted to regard

it as the worst form of disorder, since indifference licenses injustice of every kind.
Which leads us to the conclusion that there is no order without equilibrium
and harmony. As far as social order is concerned, this means equilibrium between
the sole government and the people it governs. And harmony must be based on
a higher principle. For us, that principle is justice. There is no order without justice, and the ideal order lies in the happiness of the people.
Hence one cannot invoke the need for order to impose one’s wishes. To do so
is to tackle the problem the wrong way around. One mustn't insist on order as a
condition for good government; rather, one must govern well in order to achieve
the only kind of order that makes sense. It is not order that reinforces justice but
justice that bestows its certitude on order.
No one is keener than we are for the higher order characteristic of a nation at
peace with itself and its destiny, in which each individual shares in both toil and
leisure, in which workers can do their jobs without bitterness or envy, in which
artists can create without being tormented by man’s misery, and in which each
person is at last free to meditate in silence upon his own condition.
We have no perverse taste for a world of violence and tumult in which we
squander what is best in ourselves in hopeless conflict. But since the contest has
begun, we believe that it must be played out to the end. Thus we believe that
there is an order that we do not want because it would commit us to resignation
and mark the end of all hope for humankind. As determined as we are to help
found at last a just order, we are therefore equally determined to reject once and
for all the celebrated remark of a great man’* by declaring that we prefer disorder to injustice, eternally.

October 13, 1944!*

It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of the statements made by the
Minister of Colonies regarding the imperial problem. After remarking on the
important role the Empire played in the Liberation, M. Pleven'*° added: “The loyalty of the native populations places large responsibilities on our shoulders. . .
134 Goethe.
135 Editorial. Typescript.
136 René Pleven (1901-1993) joined the Free French Forces in London in July 1940. As Commissioner
for Colonies for the NLC, he presided over the Brazzaville conference of January 1944, which laid
the groundwork for political reform in Africa. In September 1944 he became Minister of Colonies in the

70

CHAPTER

2

A new phase of our colonial life must therefore begin. Our goal will be . . . to
conquer hearts.”
These formulas are of course still vague, but we think we perceive a clear
intention behind them. In any case, this statement deserves closer examination.
For those of us who were familiar with French colonial policy, it was dismaying to see how ignorant and indifferent most Frenchmen were to their Empire.
Not for the first time, a small elite of administrators and bold adventurers gave
its compatriots riches that they neglected. Today, though, France is too diminished in Europe not to attend to all her possessions. As we undertake a necessary
review of our gains and losses, it would be inexcusable to continue to overlook

our imperial territories.
Yet to do so is to raise any number of difficult and painful issues. These problems cannot be resolved unless we tackle them head-on. “The goal,” M. Pleven
declared, “is to give each colony as much political identity as possible.” That's
fine, and the question is relatively simple when it pertains exclusively to the
native populations.
But let us take a specific example, North Africa, where we find ourselves dealing with both a French population and a native population.'*” Now, while it
would be desirable to extend still further the political emancipation that the Provisional Government has granted to the natives of North Africa,'** one must bear
in mind that the most serious obstacle to this lies within the French population.
It would be stupid indeed to hide the fact that much of this population supported the policies of Vichy. And that they did so for precisely the same reasons
that caused them to oppose any form of political emancipation for native people.
What people there call, rightly or wrongly, the colonial spirit has always resisted innovation of any kind, even when the most elementary sense of justice
demanded it. And if the government wants to implement its policy of friendship
and protection for Algerians, it must first persuade or overcome this resistance.
This is of the utmost importance. We must not ignore the fact that our defeat
cost us prestige in the eyes of a virile people like the Arabs. Hence the French
might be tempted to make a new show of force in order to regain what they lost
through force.'*” No policy could be more blind. We will not find real support

Provisional Government and in November became Minister ofFinance, replacing Aimé Lepercq, who had

been killed in an automobile accident. He left the government in January 1946 and became one of the
founders of the U.D.S.R. He later served both the Fourth and Fifth Republics in several different ministerial positions, including two stints as prime minister. He sat in parliament as a deputy from the Cétesdu-Nord from 1945 to 1973.
'37 There is no need to emphasize the clarity of Camus’ thinking in this area. His commitments are known
from his support for the Blum-Violette plan in 1937 and his reporting on “Misery in Kabylia,” Fragments
d'un combat, |, pp. 267-335.
'98 In an order issued on March 7, 1944, General de Gaulle’s Provisional Government, then in Algiers,
abolished all exceptional measures applicable to Muslims, granted them access to all civilian and military
positions, and increased their representation in local assemblies (from one-third to two-fifths).

'3° A timely warning in view of the May 1945 riots in Sétif, which were followed by repression. See below
the articles on the “crisis in Algeria,” pp. 198ff.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

71

in our colonies until we convince them that their interests coincide with ours
and that we do not have two policies: one granting justice to the people of France
and the other confirming injustice toward the Empire.
The only purpose of these reflections is to underscore the enormous difficulty
of an issue that touches on so many national and international problems. Their
sole point is to remind ourselves that in the war especially there is an imperial
problem that we must first address rather than ignore and then resolve in the
spirit of generosity that should be ours.

October 14, 1944'“°
Mr. Churchill said in his most recent speech that he hoped at last to see the
French government recognized when our Consultative Assembly convenes.'*!
But it is true that he was speaking only for himself. His expression of hope stood
as proof that the decision was not solely his to make. That is why we have waited,
in a spirit of goodwill, for an American voice to confirm that hope in one way
or another. America has remained silent, however.
Faithful to our policy of sincerity, we will therefore address our comments to
the Americans. The point is not to lash out or to speak as if we wielded a power
we no longer possess. It is simply to reason.
We know exactly how things stand with us. What we are about to write may

be painful for a Frenchman to say, but we are well aware that with our economy
in ruins, our army without arms and without a munitions industry to back it,
our farms without machinery, and our good intentions without the means to
implement them, we are dependent on our Allies. Everything that we can place
on the other side of the scales—our sacrifices, our past grandeur, our resistance—
counts for nothing when it comes to the cold calculation of policy.
So today, at least, we must calculate coldly. We have already noted that American policy reflected an obvious wariness of General de Gaulle personally. And
we said that we stood in solidarity with him. So much for our position, but our
opponents in fact raise some rather different arguments, which seem to have

some merit.

The one we wish to take up today is the assertion that the French government
has not been recognized by the people of France and that recognition cannot be
granted until the people of France have made their choice. Let us first point out
140 Editorial. Typescript.
141 See the editorials of September 29 and 30 above, pp. 51 and 52. The Consultative Assembly, which
General de Gaulle set up in Algiers in September 1943 and which consisted at the time of representatives
of the various resistance movements, was to be expanded to include representatives of the various political parties. Churchill mentioned this in his speech of September 28. The composition of the assembly was
decided by a decree issued on October 12. It was to have 248 members, with 148 seats reserved for representatives of the metropolitan Resistance and 60 for members of parliament, pro rated among the parties represented in the National Assembly in 1939. All the parties would thus be represented along with
the various resistance organizations.

UL

CHAPTER

2

to our Allies that this argument presented no obstacle on their side when it came
to recognizing Franco.'** American diplomacy today finds itself in a paradoxical
situation. It is waging war against fascism while maintaining official relations
with the most dictatorial of regimes and refusing to recognize a government born
of the struggle against the Hitlerian oppressor.
Nor did the argument that the people must choose prevent the United States
from recognizing the government of Vichy.”
The paradox is even more glaring in view of the fact that the United States at
war recognized the government that collaborated with its enemy only to refuse
to recognize the men of that same country who helped to destroy that enemy.
The logic of this policy is thus intermittent. It is understood, however, that it
is a question not of logic but of realism. Some will say that America needed to
maintain relations with Vichy in order to lay the groundwork for the North
Africa landing and needed to stay in touch with Franco in order to keep him in
line. What better proof could there be, then, that it makes no difference whether
the government of France is recognized or not, supposing that French support is

no longer needed.
There is a temptation at this stage of the discussion to point out that France's
support was needed not so long ago and is still needed even now somewhere in
the neighborhood of Belfort. Apparently, these would not be arguments based
on reason. We might speak the language of reason, however, if we pointed out to
the Allies that they cannot afford to neglect a nation whose geographical position and desire to rise from defeat give it a place in Europe whose importance
cannot be denied. Others will respond that since the French people have yet to
declare themselves, it is not the French people who are being alienated.
On this point, it should suffice to point out that France is now a country in
which free expression is possible. The few conflicts that have arisen in regard to
domestic issues that we shall soon consider give proof of this. Indeed, the independent attitude of the press allows us to use the press as an example. It has been
unanimous in calling for recognition of de Gaulle’s government. Not a single
French voice has sought to oppose recognition. What America is hesitating to
recognize today is all of France.
'42 Francisco Franco (1892-1975) became a Spanish general in 1926 and was appointed head of the
Spanish Army in 1934. He made his mark by putting down a miners’ strike in Asturias in 1934 (this
became the basis of the play Révolte dans les Asturies, produced by Camus and his comrades at the Théatre
du Travail). He led a nationalist coup against the Spanish Republic in July 1936, and in January 1938
he became head of the Spanish state, government, and army. Following the nationalist victory in 1939,
he assumed the title of El Caudillo and established an authoritarian police state with backing from the
Church, the army, and large landowners. Having received support from the Germans and Italians during
the civil war, he declared his neutrality in World War II. Some thought that the Allies would intervene in
Spain after the surrender of Germany on May 8, 1945, but this did not happen, and the Franco regime
endured until 1975. Franco’s government was recognized in 1939.
'43 The United States did indeed recognize the government of Vichy. Diplomatic relations were not broken off until the Allies landed in North Africa on November 8, 1942. The United States did not grant de
facto recognition to the Provisional Government of the French Republic until July 11, 1944. De jure
recognition was not granted until October 23, 1944.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

73

This much needed to be said. Simply, without bluster or obsequiousness, free
Frenchmen are asking free Americans to treat them no less well than they treated
Franco's toadies or Vichy’s handmaidens. Free Frenchmen are assuring the people of America that political “realism” cannot be the future of Europe and that
America will lose the peace even if it wins the war. The language of free men is
the language of clarity. If our American friends are hiding their thoughts, let
them say openly what they think, and we will then have to take this into account.
That will do more for the world’s peace and honor than years of secret diplomacy
or calculated silences.
October 15, 1944!“4
We beg our readers’ indulgence for returning to the issue of granting recognition
to the government of France.'** We are indeed obliged to consider our position
in the world ourselves, since others remain silent on the matter. To be sure,
President Roosevelt'*° made a statement on Friday. But he failed to dispel any
ambiguities.
He did indeed note that the provisional government of France was a “de facto”
government. In precise terms, that means that it is not recognized as the “de jure”
government of France.'*” Mr. Roosevelt simply acknowledged that de Gaulle’s government exists in fact, that it is there, that it has, in short, a historical reality but
no juridical existence, and that, when all is said and done, it is not legal.
The situation is therefore unchanged, and we must return to cold reasoning
and to our argument of yesterday. If we must rely solely on ourselves and not on
the benevolence of others, we should at least demonstrate that we did nothing to
deserve our isolation before resigning ourselves to it.
De Gaulle’s government would be illegal only if the conditions for legality
existed and it had nevertheless ignored them. To be sure, it needs to be approved
by the people. But voting is impossible for millions of our fellow Frenchmen,

who are still in concentration camps or prisons, dreaming of their faraway homeland. We need to wait for them.'* It is out of respect for the heart—more legal
than the law itself—that we reserve their right to speak.
No legality is possible in French institutions in the sense in which the word
legality is understood by professors. We can't do anything about that. But there
144 Editorial. Typescript.
145 Continuation of the previous day’s editorial. Camus devoted several editorials to the question of recognition of the French government by the Allies (September 29 and 30; October 17 and 19; pp. 51, 52, 75,

and 78).
146 Franklin Delano Roosevelt (1882-1945) was elected president of the United States for the first time

in 1932. He played a key role in World War II, which the United States joined after the Japanese attacked
Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. Camus would devote two editorials to Roosevelt: November 9, 1944,
when he was reelected, and April 14, 1945, when he died.
147 See n. 143 above.
148 This insistence on awaiting the return of prisoners would be repeated when a date was set for elections.

74

CHAPTER

2

is a legality higher than any other in honor and rebellion, which for four years
formed the basis of our law and which the government of de Gaulle was the first
to define. This remains our law, and will so remain until popular sovereignty is
reestablished, the sovereignty of the people being the ultimate source of legality
in this country, as the French government has consistently maintained.
To say that we have no legal existence amounts to saying that we are wrong to
be in the situation we are in. This is tantamount to punishing us in our misfortune with indifference and disdain. If it came to that, however, might we not prefer such plain talk to the ostensibly legal argument that is raised against us now?
We are also told that there have been clashes between the French government
and various resistance organizations.
Some say that this poses the risk of a dual political authority and ambiguity of
command in regard to the army.
It is true that there have been conflicts. Indeed, they are the proof that this
country is now free and that it has the government it needs. Those conflicts have
been openly reported in the press and rapidly resolved. The enormous task we
have taken on cannot be completed in a day. It calls for both the power that
comes from unity and the power that comes from free criticism, both of which
are characteristic of strong democracies.
We have never believed that the war of words between Mr. Roosevelt and Mr.
Dewey!” was a sign of American anarchy. Yet the candidates express themselves
in terms never used in the French press. Such clashes of opinion are good and
healthy as long as they don’t become an automatic reflex. They are at once the
seed and the fruit of liberty.
Those who assert the contrary seem to be asking us to sentence ourselves to a
period of abject, quivering silence while submitting to a leader who, once cho-

sen, should be allowed to rule as a dictator. Our government would presumably
not be recognized until we renounced all freedom of expression. By means of this
stunning logic, the allied democracies would then recognize only dictatorial governments. The Franco and Pétain episodes might suggest that this is what they
want. But we refuse to believe this and prefer to ask our Allies to examine their
argument.
If none of our arguments proves effective, we will speak as General de Gaulle
spoke to the nation yesterday.” His language was superb. We cannot be suspected of indulgence, and we have already given proof of our independence. But
we must say frankly that it has been years since France has heard such lofty and
uncompromising language. In it we recognize a stubborn desire for truth and
honor, disdain for artifice, and lucid courage. Let our friends have no doubt: this

'49 Roosevelt, a Democrat, was running for reelection against John Dewey, Republican. The election was
set for November 7, 1944.
'50 Combat printed the complete text of the speech broadcast by General de Gaulle, in which he told the
French that they must rely on themselves above all and called upon them to work together and to forge a
real, sincere, fraternal” union to “beat the enemy, assert ourselves to other countries, and reconstruct and
repair our nation.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

75

voice is the voice of France. It is telling them, and we join in telling them, that we
will accept isolation if we must, but we cannot morally accept ambiguity. Let others tell France that they do not want her to participate in peace conferences, and
let them tell her why. Whatever people of other countries may think, we will then
prove that France is now strong enough to live without illusions, if nothing else.
October 17, 1944!”

We must return once again to the recognition of the French government.!”* This
will be the last time. But there is no truth without a little obstinacy, and sound
reasoning is nothing if not accompanied by stubborn determination. Since we
began by being frank, we have no choice but to persist in our candor.
We may be wrong; indeed, we hope we are wrong. If the nonrecognition of

the provisional government stemmed from a deep commitment to the logic of
democracy, we would accept it, even though we have shown how absurd the consequences of that logic are in this case. We believe, however, that behind the logic
lurk certain ulterior motives.
Ulterior motives are common in any political climate, but they make it impossible for humans to breathe. For four years now, we have been learning that our
chief desire in life was to be not just voters but human beings. As Lawrence put
it, we want a revolution not to give power to a class but to give human life a
chance.’ So we don’t like ulterior motives. What can we do about them? It will
suffice to speak plainly.
The ulterior motive that concerns us right now is the following: it appears that
some people do not want France to participate in the conferences that will lay
the groundwork for peace and shape the future. Or at any rate they do not want
France to have more than a consultative voice. In framing this thought, are we
giving in to bitterness and a sense of persecution? Apparently not. For what we
say is not presumption but fact.
There have in fact been two conferences, one at Dumbarton Oaks,’™ the
other in Moscow.'”? We were not present. Yet the question of peace was discussed
at both. At Dumbarton Oaks, Germany was discussed without consulting the

151 Editorial. Typescript.
152 Continuation of the two previous editorials.
153 Thomas Edward Lawrence (1888-1935), also known as “Lawrence of Arabia,” fought to establish an

Arab empire and created a literary oeuvre that includes The Seven Pillars of Wisdom. Camus quotes him
several times in his notebooks and lectures; the phrase in the text is similar to one quoted in Carnets J,
p. 183: “Lawrence: ‘The Revolution should be made not to give power to a class but to give life a chance.”
154 An important conference involving American, British, Chinese, and Russian representatives was held
at Dumbarton Oaks near Washington, D.C., from August 21 to October 7, 1944. It laid the groundwork
for international institutions to replace the League of Nations and culminated in the creation of the
United Nations in June 1945.
155 Immediately after the end of the Dumbarton Oaks conference a meeting was held in Moscow on
October 9, with Churchill himself and American representatives in attendance.

76

CHAPTER

2

only nation with full knowledge of the German problem. As we have said on
several occasions, moreover, the Moscow conference was a peace conference as
much as a war conference.
This is where we see the true magnitude of the problem of nonrecognition.
For according to the official argument, it was only our government that was not
represented. But this is a silly argument. It is obvious that those who excluded
the French government have it in mind to exclude the entire French nation from
the future of Europe.
We are not megalomaniacs. It is quite possible to imagine a peace from which
France would be excluded. For various reasons for which we do not bear sole
responsibility, our strength is sufficiently diminished that others may refuse to
hear our voice. But the question remains: What kind of peace is being sought?
On this point, we are uncompromising.
It is not possible to opt for a democratic politics at home while engaging in
action that denies the very principles of democracy abroad. In other words, to fight
a democratic war, one must seek a democratic peace. And our point is simply this:
a democratic peace cannot do without our vote, any more than it can do without
the votes of any of the other nations that will constitute the Europe of tomorrow.
The League of Nations that some are seeking to revive will be a League of
Peoples if it is to be anything at all.'°° We say this without exasperation or anger,
because we have no doubt that eventually it will become clear to our allies
themselves. But they will take their time about it, and in the meantime it is they
and not we who will be judged. France is not all of Europe, not by a long
shot, but there surely can be no Europe without France. That is why we remain
unperturbed.
As the months go by, moreover, we are losing interest in this question. France
and its government can live perfectly well without recognition. We are satisfied
to have demonstrated the absurdity of the policy that has been adopted toward
us and to have made clear the logic and justice of our position. That is enough
to secure our continued peace of mind and allow us to pursue our recovery with
determination.

October 18, 1944!”

Let us say a few words about the purge.'”* We have dealt with this subject often.
This is not only because it is a difficult one but also because it calls for sangfroid,
and sangfroid in such matters is not always possible.
'6 This concern can be seen in Camus’s support for Garry Davis, as is attested by the positions he took
in November and December 1948.
157 Editorial. Typescript.
158 The purge (¢puration) of collaborators would be the subject of long and passionate polemics, not only

in the immediate postwar period between proponents of justice such as Camus and champions of charity
such as the writer Francois Mauriac but also today, among historians, who argue about its legitimacy and
extent. Camus here lays down principles to which he would frequently revert later on.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

77

Let us begin by saying that the purge is necessary. This is not as obvious as it
may seem. Some people in France would like to leave things as they stand, and
those who feel this way do not always do so for disreputable reasons. The only
answer to this objection is the following: if we are to leave things as they stand,
we must know that everything that needs to be done has been done. In fact,
however, some of what needs to be done has been done, but not everything.
The point is not to purge a lot but to purge well. But what does it mean to
purge well? It means to respect the general principle of justice without failing to
make allowances in individual cases.
What is the general principle of justice in this case? It lies in proportion. It is
ridiculous to make an example of some bureaucratic department head who
remained faithful to his habit of obedience while leaving important industrialists
and opinion-makers untouched.
To every privilege correspond certain duties, and that is why the purge of government bureaucracies, which can be left to local committees,'” cannot proceed
without a purge at the national level, to be conducted in strict accordance with
certain well-defined principles.
The state is bound to punish those functionaries who forgot that before being
servants of the state they were servants of France. It must also judge the guilt of
state agencies whose prestige derives from the prestige of the nation.
To purge the government may be a good thing, but the instruments of justice
should also be applied to other institutions such as the banks and major industries. The only way to do this, moreover, is to clarify the notion of proportional
responsibility to which we alluded earlier.
As inclined as we may feel to show indulgence to the feckless Frenchmen who
acted with no clear idea of the national interest in mind, we are just as inclined
to show no mercy to those responsible for this country’s leading interests.
The case of M. Sacha Guitry can easily be settled by banning him from the
stage for life.'°° People should be punished by striking at their most vital
interests—in this case, vanity. But such mild measures will not do in dealing with
men whose lives were based on the respect and privilege they were accorded by
the nation. To put it bluntly, the notion of “consorting with the enemy” (indignité nationale) is useful.'®! Or, rather, it must be put to use. Furthermore, if it is

indeed the case that the application of this higher moral law involves the assertion of principles of punishment incompatible with the spirit of democracy, a
corrective is nevertheless available: namely, to impose a temporal limit on the
exercise of what might be called moral justice.
Hence if the purge is to be short-lived, it is a good idea that it be rapid and
judicious. When General de Gaulle recommended indulgence for those who
159 By an order of October 10, 1944, departmental liberation committees under the National Resistance
Committee were granted the power to establish investigative commissions and juries. In May 1945, how-

ever, they were barred from taking part in the purge of the economy.
160 Sacha Guitry (1885-1957) was a writer and actor who continued to perform during the Occupation.
161 In his editorial of September 28, Camus had already remarked on the importance of the offense of
“consorting with the enemy,” which was instituted on August 26, 1944.

78

CHAPTER

2

made mistakes, he was right in principle.’ But the applications of this principle need to be examined closely. There are social situations in which error is possible. There are others in which it is simply a crime.
If the law cannot cope with these subtleties, the law must be modified when
appropriate, and for a precisely delimited duration. As difficult as this may be for
souls that cherish justice and liberty, we must resign ourselves to it for a brief
period. If we are resolute in this decision, its dangerous consequences will be
eliminated, and its effectiveness at the national level will be maintained.

October 19, 1944'%

France’s participation in the allied military government that will occupy Germany
until peace returns is incontestably great news.’ One of our most legitimate
expectations has been answered. We are now, in regard to this issue, in exactly
the position we wanted to be in. But now that our rights have been recognized,
our duties begin. And we must be as careful in gauging the latter as we were
persistent in defining the former.
Readers can learn from other sources what the occupation of Germany will be
like.!® Suffice it to say for now that it will be harsh and pitiless. For an indefinite period the German people will be ruled by a foreign military government
and deprived of all means of expression. Their cities will be isolated from one
another and forced to submit to rigid laws laid down by the conquering powers
in order to ensure as total a victory as possible. Hence increasingly large swaths
of German territory are about to be subjected to the darkness of occupation,
which so many European nations endured at the hands of the Third Reich. Only
the Germans will have to do without something we never lost, not even in the
darkest days of defeat, namely, hope.
The extreme harshness of the coming occupation therefore seems justified
by the responsibility that Germany must bear for Europe’s woes. The law of
162 In a speech delivered on October 15, de Gaulle called for unity among the French and said: “Many
may have made mistakes at one time or another. . . . Who has never committed an error?” Mauriac fully
approved this remark in his article of October 17, entitled “Straying from Honor.”
163 Editorial. Text most likely by Camus.
164 This was the form of recognition that Camus had advocated in his editorials of October 14, 15, and
17. But the news was premature. On the following day, October 20, Combat published a correction: “An
official bulletin from the Ministry of Information states that ‘no agreement has yet been reached between
the French government and allied governments or between the French government and the joint allied
military command.’” Combat went on to state that it had received its information from the Agence
France-Presse.
'65 The documents reveal that until Germany is finally defeated, it is to be ruled by a military government
under the command of General Eisenhower. This government will be in charge of maintaining law and
order, dealing with prisoners and deportees, and rooting out the Nazi Party. Germans engaging in guerrilla actions against Allied forces are to be subject to the death penalty. Any interference with the progress
of the Allied armies through Germany is a “capital crime.” Civilian activities are to be limited and monitored, postal and telephone service interrupted, and newspapers banned.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

79

occupation will be harsher than that to which France was subjected in 1940,
though less harsh than that imposed on Poland. Indeed, the Third Reich will be
in much the same position as Poland was in 1940. Germany will become a “General Government” administered by the Allies.
The difficult task of overseeing this occupation is what we have been invited
to participate in. Our real duties begin with the work of government. At least
two of those duties seem essential to us. First, we must never forget that while
Germans ruled France with an outward show of tolerance, the occupier con-

stantly violated his own laws. Indeed, what was so revolting about the occupation was the incessant contrast between the courteous language of the Germans
and the abject cruelty of their actions. We must never forget this German example so that we are never tempted to imitate it.
It is just that the law imposed on Germany should be harsh. In any case, it can
never compensate us for the moans and the silence of our tortured comrades. But
once that harsh law has been clearly set forth, we must observe it strictly in order
to show the misled Germans that strength can indeed be joined with justice.
Temptations will arise that might be understandable but cannot be excusable.
The German people allowed their masters to mutilate and degrade men’s souls,
but for that very reason we must respect what is left of the German soul.'®° Not
out of an idea of weakness or empty charity but in order to give the Germans
another chance to do something someday for the good of humankind.
Our second duty is not to forget that this military government is provisional.
We mustn't get used to it. Of course the occupation may be lengthy, and four
years of such a regime can be difficult to bear, as we are well aware. But no reasonable person in Europe can believe that millions of individuals can be held in
servitude indefinitely. Germany must one day resume its place. We can well
imagine the look of defeat and bewilderment she will wear on that day. It is nevertheless for that moment that we must lay the groundwork.
We have shown that no defeat is definitive. Let us have the wisdom to foresee
that no victory is definitive either.” We must never think of the occupation of
Germany as our vengeance. We must use it to come to know the German people better and to reawaken in them whatever may still serve the interests of
Europe. It would in any case be pointless to have insisted that we be given this
challenging role unless we intended to bring to it a clear awareness of what we
potentially represent, namely, justice.
We have never advocated a sentimental policy toward Germany. The goal for
us has never been to answer insults with smiles. It was rather to employ all the
energy needed to repair the insult of defeat and to begin with a show of strength
so that we might be in a better position later on to show our generosity. When
one who is weak cries out for justice, no one will believe that he does so for
166 In the fourth of his “Letters to a German Friend,” written in July 1944, Camus wrote: “We want to
destroy your power without mutilating your soul” (Essais, p. 243).
167 Cf. the final thoughts of Rieux at the end of La Peste: “But he knew that this chronicle could not be

one of definitive victory.”

80

CHAPTER

2

disinterested reasons. We needed to be stronger before others would believe in
our sincerity. Today we have that opportunity. If France in Germany lives up to
the spotless standards of the mission it has taken upon itself, something at least
will have been saved in a Europe torn apart by murder and madness.

October 20, 1944'%

We are not in agreement with M. Frangois Mauriac.’ We can say this without
embarrassment because we have supported M. Mauriac in the past, whenever we
thought our support was warranted.
Many things in his article in Le Figaro warrant our approval now. We do not
believe that it is necessary to gun down our fellow citizens at street corners or to
diminish the authority of a government that we spontaneously recognized. But
these justifiable feelings do not incline us to disparage our own actions or
renounce our most cherished hopes.
Many Frenchmen surely are troubled, but not for the reasons that M. Mauriac
believes. There may indeed be people in our country today who are afraid. If
they are afraid for a few months, let us say simply that their anxiety won't
amount to much and may even contribute to their salvation in this world. But
there are also other people who worry that France may not yet have understood
that it cannot resurrect itself unless it mercilessly destroys those interests that
betrayed it.
Contrary to what M. Mauriac believes, this malaise, which stems from a variety of causes, has surfaced in the press that he complains speaks with a “unique”
voice. This is the point on which we truly part company with him, because one
can read of both fear and indignation in that press, and the voice of the selfrighteous is louder than we in our ingenuousness would have believed. It is in
any case to avail oneself of a dubious logic to accuse the new press, after two articles, of wasting its effort in pointless quarrels while at the same time alleging that

it speaks with only one voice.
That voice is not as unique as it may seem. M. Mauriac complains that it
represents only the Resistance, but we were foolish enough to think that the
Resistance was identical with France. If we need a paper to represent something
other than the resistance of the French people, what should it represent?
In other words, M. Mauriac’s argument comes down to saying that there is
something in France other than the Resistance. We had no doubt that this
was the case back when our comrades, assembling for battle at the appointed
hour, contemplated the lines outside the movie theaters and stared as the
168 Editorial. Typescript.
‘© In Le Figaro of October 19, Mauriac published an article entitled “Justice and War” in which he argued
that the French were uneasy and “increasingly resistant not to the demands of justice but to a system”
characterized by “disorder,” “confusion,” and “arbitrariness.” He added that the French could not be
enlightened by the press, which was reduced to a “unique” voice, “that of the resistance.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

81

stewards of their government passed in their automobiles. We assume, however,
that M. Mauriac was not suggesting that we heed the voices of those who
enjoyed themselves or betrayed their country while others faced enemy bullets.
Let no one accuse us of exploiting the Resistance. We have repeated
often enough that the Resistance has more obligations than it has rights,
and someday it will judge its own actions. Nor can anyone suspect us of complacency toward our press. We have a predilection for the truth, even when it
goes against us. Nevertheless, we are certain that truth was not on M. Mauriac’s
side yesterday.
To be sure, there are things that are not right in the way the politics of this
country is being conducted. Yet the sins are as much sins of weakness as of excess.
Our duty is to denounce both simultaneously and to point the way to the right
path, where the force of revolution joins with the light of justice. M. Mauriac
speaks only of the excesses of the revolution. Our effort here has been to point
out its weaknesses at the same time. This constitutes proof that the press is not
as uniform as has been alleged. But that is not the important point. The important point is to maintain objectivity, and usually M. Mauriac has a keen sense of
this, as he has demonstrated lately through his persistent and honorable concern
with peace at any price.
Regardless of our desires and reactions, there can be no doubt that France has
a revolution to make as well as a war.'”° That is indeed the drama it faces. But
we cannot escape from this drama by evading the questions it raises. We can
escape only by enduring it to the bitter end and drawing from it whatever truth
it contains. We are convinced that there are times when each of us must argue
with himself and sacrifice his emotional tranquillity. This is one of those times,
and it is pointless to contest the terrifying fact that we will be obliged to destroy
a living part of this country in order to save its soul.’7!

170 Camus and Combat had made this essential point about the political and moral future of France several times since August 21.
171 Mauriac replied to this editorial at length in an articled published in Le Figaro of October 22-23 under
the title “Response to Combat.” In particular, he wrote: “I would not swear that the editorial writer who

refuted my recent article on ‘Justice and War’ in Combat really understood my thinking. I am even less sure
that I understand his. . . . And since I have reason to believe that the author of the article is a younger colleague of mine for whom I feel the utmost admiration and sympathy, and whose faultless style I usually like
a great deal, I find myself in an embarrassing position, which I avow with my usual simplicity and naiveté.”
After quoting the previous two sentences, Mauriac notes: “There is not a word here that does not wound

me... . May the gentle not deprive the world of their gentleness! . . . There will always be enough cruelty
in this world. . .. Would the legal revolution be impossible if there were no more innocents in French prisons? Does my naiveté make you smile? What can I do? My generation grew up in a Europe anxious and
divided because a Jewish officer was serving time for a crime committed by another man.
“But I am well aware that the judicial system that has wrought havoc in France for the past two months
probably won't disturb a man resolved “‘to destroy a living part of this country in order to save its
soul.’ .. . My young colleague is more spiritualist than I imagined—more than J am, in any case. . . . The
young masters of Combat have yet to flush certain scraps of Christianity entirely out of their system.”
Declaring himself unable to understand “what this theological language conceals,” Mauriac asked this
opponent to “kindly light his lantern.” Which Camus did in his editorial of October 24, p. 86.

82

CHAPTER

2

October 21, 1944!”

Yes, the drama that France faces is to be obliged to make a revolution while it
simultaneously makes war.'”? We are not inclined to take this situation lightly.
Some would like to devote all our resources to waging war, while justice is suspended. Others would like to pour all our resources into the revolution, so that
justice is served while force is starved. But we cannot forget either the power we
have to restore or the purity we must recover. In reality, moreover, we know full
well that the two must coincide. But we also know that their reciprocal requirements may be contradictory.
Nor can we forget that in both cases the lives of Frenchmen are at stake: the
best of us will have to die in the war, and we will have to destroy the worst of us
in the revolution. One cannot be nonchalant about such a terrible drama, which
will demand still more blood from a country that has already given of its marrow in two wars. And how can the best of us fail to ask themselves at times
whether they have the right to add to this nation’s pain and to the dreadful misery of this war?
We do not approach this matter lightly. This the whole world must know. To
approach such a matter lightly would be to approach it with doubts. It is good
for us to experience doubt from time to time, because this lends the appropriate
gravity to our task. We are wary of judges who never have doubts and of heroes
who never have the shakes.
When doubt is pushed as far as possible, however, a choice has to be made.
We know full well that on the day the first death sentence is carried out in Paris,
we will feel repugnance. At that moment we will need to remember the countless other death sentences imposed on men who were pure and will have to recall
so many cherished faces now buried in the ground and so many hands we once
loved to shake. When we are tempted to prefer the generous sacrifices of war to
the dark duties of justice, we will need to remember the dead and the unbearable
image of those whom torture turned into traitors.!”* As hard as that will be, we

will know then that some pardons cannot be granted, and some revolutions are
necessary.
But conversely, when we find ourselves exasperated by the spectacle of an
entertainer acclaimed again by the very people who ought to despise him, or we
are driven to inconsequential rebellion by the sight of mediocrity and stupidity
honored anew, or we feel at times tempted to confound thoughtlessness with
crime, as any just man might, we must remind ourselves of the exhausting daily
effort that the quest for victory entails. We will know then that some violence
leads nowhere and that some wars are inevitable.
What does all this mean? It comes down to saying that a nation that has chosen to live with such wrenching contradictions can save itself only by openly
172 Editorial. Typescript.
'73 Continuation of the previous day’s editorial, from which these key terms are borrowed.
'74 Camus returned to this idea several times. See, in particular, his article of December 30, 1944, p. 155.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

83

dealing with those contradictions, only by making the immense effort required
to balance justice with force, only by making the revolution and making war
together, with equal lucidity and courage, because it can no longer distinguish
between the two. A great nation is one that rises to confront its own tragedies. If
this country is incapable of achieving victory and truth at the same time, if it
agrees to make war while consecrating cowardice and treason at home, or, on the
other hand, if it gives in to the violence of its passions by neglecting its position
in the world and its duties in the eyes of others, then we would have no choice
but to conclude that we are lost. We must do everything at once or accomplish
nothing at all.
Is this harsh, impossible, and inhumane? Yes. We are aware of this. That is why
we do not approach the matter lightly. Yet we have faith that no human task is
beyond man’s reach. What we need, purely and simply, is men. Men: in other
words, hearts accustomed to boldness as well as prudence, souls that are sensitive
and wills that are firm and minds that are capable of selflessness as well as commitment. And if someone were to object that this, too, is inhuman, our answer

would be that for that very reason we must make the attempt, we must seize the
last hope we have of restoring this country’s grandeur.

October 21, 1944

Money versus Justice'”°
A monetary problem exists in France. Without being an expert, the average

Frenchman can detect that something is wrong in this area at the present time.
He knows that the value of his hundred-franc note varies considerably depending on whether he spends it on the black market or the white market. In a
broader sense, this same Frenchman is unfortunately well aware of the dizzying
rise of some prices compared with the relative stability of his wages. In other
words, France is currently suffering from a gross injustice, which allows a few
privileged individuals to thrive while starving and draining the majority.
The magnitude of the injustice makes this an urgent issue. The monetary
problem is one of the first that needs to be resolved. We have touched on it
before, but since then nothing has been done. To be sure, reasons for this inaction have been given. But the public does not understand them. We are neither
financiers nor ministers. But we may be able to do something for the country by
raising the issue and for our readers by attempting to clarify it.
In economics there exists a law of supply and demand, the effects of which
were never more obvious than during the four years of occupation. A product for

175 The signature on this article, “Juste Bauchart,” is one of the pseudonyms that Camus used in the Resistance. Hence it is more than likely that he wrote the article or at any rate participated in drafting it.
Although he was not an expert on economic issues, the opposition between the rule of money and the
rule of justice is one of his themes. The pseudonym allowed him to adopt an unaccustomed style.

84

CHAPTER

2

which there is little demand will decrease in price in order to attract buyers. But
it will increase in price if demand is heavy. So much is obvious. But when all
commodities become scarce throughout a country, all are demanded with
increasing urgency, and all prices rise with the implacable regularity we have
come to know. Add to that the massive quantity of unbacked banknotes placed
in circulation by the government of Vichy, and the purchasing power of money
falls to absurd lows as prices soar. This economic phenomenon, with which we
are forced to cope, is called inflation.
Are there remedies for inflation? An obvious one would be a rapid increase in
the quantity of goods offered for sale to the public, but in the short term that is
unrealistic. In any case, the large quantity of paper money in circulation means
that there is too much cash chasing too few goods, so prices will remain at their
current unreasonable levels. Hence what needs to be curtailed is the circulation
of banknotes.
Where are those banknotes? More or less everywhere, of course, but above all
in the hands of those who had scarce commodities to sell, to whom money
flowed. The problem of monetary circulation thus leads directly to the problem
of scandalous fortunes.
We at Combat indicated what urgent measures needed to be taken to identify
these illicit profits without delay. All banknotes needed to be marked, and securities should have been registered, so that all French wealth could be monitored.
These measures were not implemented. Material difficulties were part of the reason for this. Problems of communication apparently made it impossible to
impose these measures throughout France. But political reasons also played a
part. The most publicly discussed of these was the fear of alienating farmers, who

are currently holding large numbers of banknotes.
It is not our place to resolve these questions, but it is appropriate for us to say
that these measures cannot be effective unless they are implemented rapidly. For
some time now, people with illicit profits have been trying to regularize the status of their wealth. If one were to consult the Registry, we imagine that it would
emerge that many banknotes were converted into real estate in recent years.
Today they are being transformed into collectibles. The only way to stop this further fraud is to move quickly, and in the meantime all sales of real estate should
be prohibited.
In any case, the responsible ministry must be convinced that the issue is
urgent. It is because the circulation of money has not been regulated that price
increases have not abated. It is because scandalous fortunes have not been confiscated by the state that the price of bread has risen. A quintal of wheat now sells
for 450 francs instead of 410. The British magazine The Economist informs us
that this is double what it would cost to import Canadian wheat into France.
And that is not all. At that price, bread should sell at 6 francs per kilo. The actual
price is only 4.9 francs. The reason for this is that the government makes up the
difference, which costs it, and costs all of us, 5.3 billion francs per year.
Thus mere delay in the implementation of these measures in the public interest is a disservice to both the government and the people of France, while it

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

85

simultaneously consolidates the position of a few privileged individuals and
places a seal of approval on their criminal maneuvers. The situation is so absurd
that it undermines the calls for amnesty that have been raised in various quarters. Neither justice nor liberty is possible so long as cash is still king. And one
cannot speak to people of forgiveness when nothing has been done to assure
them of their daily bread. If it is true, as Francois Mauriac says, that there is no
justice in opposing France,'”° we want to assure him that there is no justice,

either, in opposing the people of France, and yet it is this unjust justice that is
now being consecrated owing to the lethargy and distraction of the ministries.
Juste BAUCHART

October 22, 1944'7”

The Daily Express'’* has just published a commentary on General de Gaulle’s
speech that is nothing short of stupefying.'” This is the first time since the Liberation that a newspaper has taken this tone with us. It is of course not the first
time that we have been criticized, as is only proper. But it is the first time that
France and its representative have been impugned so vehemently and with such
unparalleled crudeness of style and thought.
The Daily Express, which sees nothing in de Gaulle’s October 14 speech but
“inopportune nonsense,” believes that the general was motivated solely by a
desire to make himself popular in France by displaying anti-British sentiments.
The paper points to Great Britain’s wartime efforts, remarks that France lived
comparatively well through the past four years, adds that French forces are of little use in the battle for Aachen,'*° and ends thus: “Some people think that the
only hope for France is for Allied troops to continue to occupy the bulk of its
territory until tempers have cooled.”
It is hard to know whether France lived better or worse than its Allies during
this war. But it is not possible, if one wishes to remain within the bounds
of decency, to assert that it lived well. To be sure, it enjoyed a full ration of
shame, and for four years not a single morning passed without the crack of some

firing squad’s rifles. In that respect we had more than we asked for. But we swear
to our British colleague that all this still was not enough. For some Frenchmen,
the only way to live well was to do what had to be done to obtain the boon of
dying well.

176 Mauriac ended his article “Justice and War,” to which Camus replied in his editorial of the day before,
by stating that “there is no justice in opposing France.”
177 Editorial. Typescript.
178 The Daily Express (British) is a conservative, mass-circulation daily newspaper that was founded in

1900.
179 On de Gaulle’s October 14 speech, see Camus’ editorial of October 15, p. 73, which was full of praise.
180 There had been heavy fighting around Aachen. The offensive, which began on October 1, continued
for several weeks.

2

CHAPTER

86

It is also true that we are not useful in Aachen, although we may be in the
Vosges.'*! But since we are speaking sincerely, we have to add that our twentyfive-year-old soldiers are still waiting for the weapons that would enable them to
hasten into battle and that, not having received them, some have turned their

efforts to living well again in the sense to which our colleague alludes. Those
young men are fighting in Metz with their bare breasts and what few weapons
the Germans were kind enough to give them during the Battle of Paris.
As to the need for Allied troops to occupy France, we would like to think that
in putting the matter this way, our colleague was simply unaware that he was
insulting this country while insisting on its greatness.
We know what an occupation is, as the reporter for the Daily Express, who had

the good fortune to live badly these past four years, does not. We know this so
well that we want no more of it, and the very word is enough to arouse our deepest wrath.
Allied troops in France are in a friendly country that has been willing, for the
sake of our common victory, to lend them various bases temporarily. They cannot claim to maintain an order in France that is being maintained without them,
and the mere supposition that they might have a political role to play represents
a serious insult both to France and to her allies.
It is hard to say whether General de Gaulle would be popular if he exhibited
anti-British and anti-American sentiments. In any case, the suggestion is somewhat

at odds with the assertion in the same article that “the British are almost idols for
the people of France.” What is certain, however, is that General de Gaulle will
always be popular for insisting as he has that France be respected as a country that
did not acquire a taste for servitude as a result of her misfortune. In any case, we
wholeheartedly accept the idea that we can be judged and criticized and simply ask
our friends, whoever they may be, to make sure that their texts and speeches never
forgo the restraint and respect that we believe we have a right to insist on.
The Daily Express, which is so prompt to point out our uselessness, may then
see that, if nothing else, we are useful for reminding it of the rules of polite society and the true law of friendship.

October 24, 1944'*?

We wish to protest here in a firm and measured way against the methods of press
censorship.'*? Our protest will be measured in its language but firm in its deci.

18

.

.

.

.

.

.

sion to publish our political commentaries, and this editorial if need be, against
the wishes of the Censorship Office.

'81 In the Vosges, where the fighting was also heavy and protracted, the French First Army fought under
the command of General de Lattre de Tassigny, as did the Alsace-Lorraine Brigade commanded by
“Colonel Berger,” also known as André Malraux.
182 Editorial. Typescript.
'83 On censorship, see the editorial of September 22, p. 44.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

87

Relations between the press and the Censorship Office have been governed
since September 24 by an edict acknowledging the legitimacy of censorship in
regard to military operations while declaring that all other matters should be
exempt from oversight.
We subscribed to this agreement and respected our obligations under it. But
the Censorship Office has failed to honor this basic commitment. We therefore
declare that the censorship is illegal if it violates the agreement to which both
parties have freely subscribed. And we believe that illegality in this instance is
equivalent to nonexistence. In other words, we will ignore the decisions of the

censors whenever they deny the very principles that define their right to exist.
In our Saturday issue we commented on news from a Francoist source concerning the activities of Spanish Republicans at the border.'** Our commentary
displeased the censor. For the reasons we have just indicated, we are going to
reformulate it, but this time in even stronger terms than before.
Yes, there is a Spanish problem, even if there are some who are not happy
about it. We warned our readers to be wary of news stemming from a Francoist
source. This news in fact did a disservice to the French government in the eyes
of foreigners by suggesting that the south of France was in chaos. It also sought
to prod that government into taking steps to restore what is commonly called law
and order. Reports in the Madrid papers alleging that Franco proposed to General de Gaulle that Spain send troops into southern France to restore order stem
from the same motive.
With respect to the situation in our southern regions, these reports risk reinforcing deliberately spread rumors that our provinces have been plunged into
anarchy—rumors that have impressed even some distinguished minds. On this
subject, we are today publishing the first article by a British journalist who has
visited the regions in question and who has favored us with an objective account
of her journey.'®”
In other respects, we want our readers to be aware that the problem is even
more serious than they may be aware. The case of Spain is not of interest to us
solely because we owe the Spanish Republic an infinite debt. It also interests us
because France’s war effort is in danger of being compromised by Franco's policy.
What people in France still do not know, and we are determined to say
whether the censor likes it or not, is that a large number of Germans (which we

184 On October 22, an article originating in Perpignan indicated that Radio Madrid had reported that fighting had broken out in France between the army and the “reds,” that is, Spanish Republicans who had

managed to infiltrate France, and that the weapons used had been taken from the French underground.

In a violent diatribe against the Republicans, Radio Madrid claimed that “Perpignan and Pau are under
the control of a committee dominated by Spanish Republicans.” A note from the editor added: “This
news should be greeted with caution. Its source is the Franco-controlled radio. In other words, it is dubious.” This was followed by a blank: “Political commentary censored.”
185 Under the title “An English journalist discusses the men of the Resistance and what they did in the
region of Toulouse,” Vera Lindsay noted that, contrary to “gossip” in Paris and London about “a sort of
revolution” supposedly taking place in Toulouse and the Languedoc region, and despite the activities of
members of the Milice [the Vichy paramilitary militia] still at large, order and calm prevailed.

88

CHAPTER

2

estimate to be around 40,000) who came to Spain as refugees have now been

organized into a veritable army of fully equipped soldiers. These are the people
who are pressuring Spain to adopt the policy we have described, and these are

the people whom Radio Madrid wishes to help with its slanted reports.
We ask one simple question. What would happen if these troops attempted to
relieve the German garrisons in the southwest and came up against unarmed
units of our REI.? Such an attempt might appear desperate, but it would not be
irrational, because it would allow Germany to buy a little time. It would aid
Hitler’s policy of resistance at any cost, of merciless struggle, which the dictatorships hope will delay their ultimate defeat. An operation of this kind would give
the German resistance the time it is asking for while increasing the likelihood of
bloodshed in some parts of France.
To recap, then, Franco is trying to convince the world that part of France is
in chaos. We are today publishing information needed to contradict that propaganda. In doing so, we are doing our duty as journalists. The Germans in Spain
are a threat to France, and all we have to stop them is the courage of our people's
army, which includes some Spanish Republicans among its ranks. The democratic governments must therefore do their duty.
And that duty is not to blindfold and muzzle the press or conceal the truth. It
is to arm the troops who will guarantee security and order in our départements.
What we said on Sunday we will repeat today despite the obstacles that have
been placed in our way: the war policy of France and the Allies carries an obligation to arm our units in the Pyrenees. In the present case, the political problem is perfectly clear: it is Franco who must be silenced, not the French press.
October 25, 1944!°°

We hesitated to respond to the invitation courteously extended to us by
M. Mauriac in Sunday’s Le Figaro.'*’ The issues he raised seemed less urgent to
us than some others. But many letters from readers have persuaded us that these
concerns are shared by many Frenchmen and that the discussion could benefit
from some additional clarity.
We might as well begin by admitting that the editorial challenged by Le Figaro
was written with some irritation. Frangois Mauriac’ allegations against the resistance press wounded us because we considered them profoundly unjust. That is

the real disagreement. And we regret that M. Mauriac said nothing about this
problem in his response. But he did so because he preferred to go straight to the
essential issue, which is the matter of justice. So let us deal with that.
186 Editorial. Typescript.
'87 Continuation of the polemic with Frangois Mauriac. This editorial replies to Mauriac’s “Response to
Combat,” published in the October 22—23 issue of Le Figaro (see Camus’ editorial for October 20, p. 80
above, and note 171, p. 81). This polemic, which focused initially on the resistance press, had since turned

to the concept ofjustice and the purge.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

89

What shocked M. Mauriac was our assertion that today we must learn to deny
a part of ourselves. Obviously this doesn’t mean that we should say things we
don't believe. Nevertheless, it is true that the problem of justice essentially comes
down to silencing what M. Mauriac calls “mercifulness” when public truth is at
stake. This is difficult, to be sure, but one doesn’t have to be a Christian to believe
that sacrifices for justice are necessary.
Let's talk about a specific case. It is easy to get lost in abstract debate and the
calculus of responsibilities. Some look for cases where judgment was arbitrary,

while others cite cases where legal forms were respected. But this just creates confusion. So let’s look reality in the face: this discussion began because a head was
about to fall. On Monday, the first death sentence was issued in Paris.’®® It is
with this dreadful precedent still fresh in our minds that we must take a position.
Will we approve of this sentence or won't we? That is the heart of the issue, and
it is a terribly difficult one.
M. Mauriac will say that he is a Christian and that his role is not to condemn.
But we, precisely because we are not Christian, have decided—and here we ask
him to pay close attention to what we say—to face the problem squarely in all
of its ramifications. How do we propose to do this?
We have no taste for murder. The human person embodies all that we respect
in the world. Our instinctive response to this sentence is therefore one of repugnance. It would be easy for us to say that our business is not to destroy men but
simply to do something for the good of the country. In fact, however, we have
learned since 1939 that we would betray the good of the country if we acted on
this impulse. France bears within herself, like a foreign body, a small minority of
men who were the cause of her recent woes and who continue to be the cause of
her woes at the present time. They are guilty of treason and injustice.
It is therefore their very existence that raises the problem of justice, since
they form a living part of this country, and the question is one of destroying them.
A Christian may believe that human justice is always supplemented by divine
justice, hence that indulgence is always preferable. But we invite M. Mauriac to
consider the dilemma of those to whom the notion of divine judgment is foreign
yet who retain a taste for man and hope for his grandeur. They must either hold
their peace forever or become converts to human justice. This cannot take place
without distress. But after four years of collective suffering in the wake of twentyfive years of mediocrity, doubt is no longer possible. And we have chosen to

188 The death sentence was meted out to the journalist Georges Suarez, a member of the Parti Populaire
Francais (Doriot’s fascist party), who headed the collaborationist newspaper Aujourd hui. He was accused
of consorting with the enemy and treason. During his trial, sentences from his editorials were cited.
“Denunciation is a duty,” he wrote, or this, on the execution of hostages: “Those responsible for these executions are not occupying troops but killers in the pay of Jews and communists.” Despite depositions in
his favor attesting to his interventions with the Germans to save arrested resisters, he was sentenced to
death and executed on November 9, 1944. In Le Figaro Wladimir d’Ormesson wrote, “We lose no sleep
over the execution of the likes of Georges Suarez.” Camus refused to comment on this execution (see editorial of October 31, p. 94).

90

CHAPTER

2

embrace human justice, with its terrible imperfections, while seeking anxiously

to correct it by clinging desperately to honesty.
We have never called for blind or precipitous justice. We detest arbitrary judgment and criminal stupidity, and we would prefer that France keep her hands
clean. But to that end we want justice to be prompt, and we want all prosecution for crimes of collaboration to end at some fixed date. We want the most
obvious crimes to be punished immediately, and then, since nothing can be done
without mediocrity, we want the errors that so many Frenchmen have indeed
committed consigned to carefully considered oblivion.
Is this language as dreadful as M. Mauriac thinks? To be sure, it is not the language of grace. But it is the language of a generation that grew up as witness to
the spectacle of injustice, alienated from God, in love with man, and determined
to serve mankind despite a destiny that so often seemed devoid of reason. It is
the language of hearts determined to assume their full duties, to live with the
tragedy of their century, and to contribute to man’s grandeur in a world of foolishness and crime.
As for the soul of this country, which has intrigued M. Mauriac, he knows it
too. He saw it in the eyes of some of our comrades during the marvelous days of
the insurrection. It is to keep that bright ardor burning in the faces of young
Frenchmen that we must renounce that part of ourselves that would prefer the
consolations of forgetfulness and tenderness. Four years ago we were forced to
harden some parts of ourselves. Maybe that was unfortunate. But we do not see
why tenderness should not be virile and why firmness should not be allied with
clemency. In any case, this is the only chance we have left to prevent France and
Europe from becoming a desert of mediocrity and silence in which we no longer
want to live.

October 27, 1944'*°

It was difficult for us to speak, as we did yesterday, about René Leynaud.'”
Readers who may have seen the brief notice that a resistance journalist answering to that name had been shot by the Germans will have passed over quickly
what was for us a dreadful, shocking piece of news.
189 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter “La Chair” (with erroneous date of October 28).

190 On October 26, Combat published a short article about René Leynaud:
“Our friend René Leynaud, who was one of the first militants to join the ‘Combat’ movement, was shot
dead by the enemy.

“Yesterday, the Agence Frangaise de Presse published the following information, which dashed all
remaining hope of someday finding one of our dearest friends, René Leynaud.”
Lyons, October 25.
Last June, nineteen men held prisoner at Fort Montluc in Lyons were taken to Villeneuve near Trévoux
(Ain) and shot in a field.

Yesterday their bodies were identified. Among them was René Leynaud, a reporter for the Progres de Lyon.
After fighting valiantly in Norway and France, this young journalist joined the Resistance. Arrested and

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

91

Yet we must speak of him. We must do so in order to keep the memory of
resistance alive, not in a nation that may well succumb to forgetfulness, but in
those hearts capable of being moved by the character of a man.
He joined the Resistance in the first months of the war. The elements of which
his moral life was composed—Christianity and truth to his word—drove him to
take his place, silently, in the shadowy battle. As his nom de guerre he chose a
word that spoke of the purity in his heart: to all his comrades in the “Combat”
movement he was known as “Clair” [meaning clear, transparent].
The only personal passion to which he held fast, apart from modesty, was
poetry. He wrote poems that only two or three of us knew. They possessed the
quintessential quality of the man himself: transparency. When it became necessary to devote himself full-time to the struggle, however, he gave up writing,
indulging himself only to the extent of buying the most diverse books of poetry,
which he then set aside to be read after the war. Otherwise he shared our conviction that a certain style, an obstinacy in righteousness, would once again make
the country whole. For months now we have held his place at the newspaper
open, and with all the stubbornness of friendship and love we refused to believe
the news that he was dead. That is no longer possible today.
The style that he believed essential can no longer be his. In this terrible misfortune the absurd tragedy of resistance can be seen for what it is. For men like
Leynaud joined the struggle convinced that no man had the right to speak unless
he was willing to pay with his life. Sadly, the war fought by those not in uniform
lacks the awful justice of the other war. At the front, bullets strike everyone indiscriminately, the worst as well as the best. For the past four years, however, it was
the best who volunteered and who fell, the best who won the right to speak but
lost the power.
In any case, the man we loved can speak no more, yet France needs more
voices like his. This most stouthearted of men, who for so long remained silent
wounded in a sweep by police and militiamen, René Leynaud was transferred to Fort Montluc, from
which he and eighteen fellow prisoners were sent to Villeneuve and shot.
René Leynaud leaves a wife and child. This young journalist enjoyed the esteem of all his colleagues
and all who knew the quality of his heart and the ardent patriotism that animated him.
“If René Leynaud had not fallen into the hands of the enemy, he would have been a member of this
newspaper's team of journalists, since he had been one of the most loyal, ardent, and courageous militants

of the ‘Combat’ movement since 1941.
“The article we quoted mentions the quality of his heart. And it is true that Leynaud was the most loyal
comrade one could possibly have, but it would be to mistake the man to see only his heart. What made

his friendship so precious was above all his absolute, uncompromising honesty, as well as a delicacy that
hid gifts as a writer and moralist that made him blush whenever they revealed themselves.
“One of his friends, who had hoped to write about Leynaud in this morning's paper, was unable to do
so. We are deeply saddened.”
Obviously the “friend” was Camus, who was probably not the author of the editorial of October 26,
about a speech of General de Gaulle’s, even though the ideas contained in it are ideas about which
he wrote elsewhere. He knew Leynaud in 1943 and recalled their friendship in the introduction to a
posthumous edition of Leynaud’s poetry (Essais, pp. 1471-1479), René Leynaud: Poésies posthumes (Paris:
Gallimard, 1947).

92

CHAPTER

2

in obedience to faith and honor, would have found the words that were needed,
but now he has been silenced forever, while others, unworthy to speak in his
place, talk of the honor that was his, and still others, whose reliability cannot be
taken for granted, invoke the God he had chosen.
It is possible today to criticize the men of the Resistance, to note their shortcomings and indict their failings. Perhaps that is because the best of them are
dead. We say this because we deeply believe that if we are still alive, it is because
we did not do enough. He, at least, did enough.'”! And today, returned to this

earth which for us is without a future and for him was but a fleeting home,
diverted from the passion to which he sacrificed everything, we hope at least that
he will find consolation in not hearing the words of bitterness and denigration
that now envelop the miserable human adventure that brought us together.
Fear not: we will not use him, who never made use of anyone. He left the
struggle as unknown as he entered it. We will keep him where he would have
wanted to be kept, in the silence of our hearts, and cherish his memory along

with the terrible sorrow of irreparable loss. But since we have always tried to banish bitterness from these pages, he will forgive us if we indulge bitterness for one

moment with the thought that perhaps the death of such a man is too great a
price to pay to restore to others the right to forget in word and deed what the
courage and sacrifice of a few Frenchmen meant in the four years just past.’””

October 29, 1944!”

The day before yesterday, the minister of information delivered a speech of
which we entirely approve.'”* One point deserves further attention, however,
because it is by no means commonplace for a minister to address the nation in
the language of virile morality and remind people of the essential duties of
conscience.'””
M. Teitgen has analyzed the mechanism

of concession that led so many

Frenchmen from weakness to treason. Each concession made to the enemy and
191 In Actuelles this sentence has “Leynaud” in place of “he.”
'92 Mauriac took this last sentence as an attack on him and responded vehemently in Le Figaro of
October 29 under the title “Mise au point.”
193 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actwelles, in the chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
'4 Camus and Combat appreciated the fact that Pierre-Henri Teitgen, a resister from the very early days
of the war, was minister of information (see article of September 10, p. 182). They nevertheless kept a
close eye on his decisions. In November 1944 Teitgen became one of the founders of the Mouvement
Républicain Populaire, or MRP, a coalition of Christian Democrats. The minister had announced the banning of collaborationist newspapers, which had previously only been suspended, with these words: “What
is serious is that from failure to failure, concession to concession, surrender to surrender, and repressed
remorse to repressed remorse, they brought the country to the point of being unable to make the elementary distinction between good and evil. . . They deformed the country’s conscience.” Asserting that
a free press “independent of the great oligarchies of money” was essential, Teitgen concluded by insisting
on the need for “structural reforms.” It is easy to see why Camus approved without reservation.
195 In Actuelles, the phrase “of conscience” is absent.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

93

each decision to follow the path of least resistance led to another. The second
offense was no worse than the first, but the one combined with the other
amounted to an act of cowardice. Two acts of cowardice added up to dishonor.
This is the tragic dilemma the country faces, and if it is difficult to resolve, it
is because every aspect of human conscience is involved. The problem it raises
has the incisiveness of yes or no.
France used to live by shopworn maxims, which explained to younger generations that life required compromise, that one had to know when to make con-

cessions, that enthusiasm was short-lived, and that in a world where craftiness
was always right, one had to make an effort not to be wrong.
That was the way things were before the war. And when the men of our generation reacted against the injustice, they were told that it would be passed on to
them. So, little by little, the morality of least resistance and disillusionment
spread. Imagine the effect in such a climate of the discouraged and quavering
voice that called upon the French to withdraw into themselves.!”° It’s always a
winning formula to appeal to others by asking them to do what comes most easily and telling them there’s no need to put themselves out. To pursue the path of
honor means making terrible demands on oneself and others. It is exhausting, to
be sure. And some number of Frenchmen were already worn out in 1940.
Not all were, however. It was astonishing to discover that many who joined
the Resistance were not professional patriots. This is of course because patriotism is not a profession, and there is a way of loving one’s country that consists
in not wanting it to be unjust, and in saying so.'”’ But it is also because patriotism was not always enough to mobilize men for the peculiar kind of war they
needed to fight. A certain delicacy was also required, a refusal to engage in any
kind of compromise, a pride that did not count among the bourgeois virtues, an

ability to say no.
What is great about the present age, which in other respects is so wretched, is

that the choice became pure. This is because intransigence has become the most
imperious of duties and sanctions have at last been imposed on the morality of
concession. If the cunning were right, it was necessary to accept being wrong.
And if shame, lies, and tyranny determined the conditions of life, it was necessary to accept death.
It is this power of intransigence and dignity that we must today restore
throughout France at all levels. People must understand that every embrace of
mediocrity, every surrender, every choice to take the easy way out harms us as
much as the enemy's guns. After four years of dreadful ordeals, an exhausted
France has come to know the extent of its tragedy, which has deprived it of the
right to indulge its exhaustion. The first prerequisite for our recovery, the first
condition of our country’s hope, is that the very men who found a way to say no
yesterday will tomorrow just as firmly and selflessly say yes, and that they will
196 The allusion is of course to the voice of Marshal Pétain.
197 Cf. the first of the Lettres a un ami allemand (Essais, p. 221): “I would like to be able to love my coun-

try and love justice at the same time.”

CHAPTER

94

2

ultimately find a way to extract from honor its positive virtues, just as they previously drew from it the ability to refuse.

October 31, 1944/8

We can discuss the case of M. Stéphane Lauzanne'” because he did not receive
the death penalty, whereas in the case of M. Suarez it was hard to be anything
other than silent.?””
Lauzanne in himself is without interest, however. Although he dishonored an

entire profession, he was not the only one to do so. Nevertheless, his case is
instructive in that it can be taken as a symbol.
As a journalist he had no talent: you can take our word for it. He had no
morality, either: this you can take on faith. He was nevertheless the editor in
chief of a major newspaper, and what he wrote sometimes appeared in the foreign press. To some extent (and it is impossible to write these words without
quaking with rage), he spoke for France. He spoke for France precisely when
France ceased to speak for herself. Today, if everyone knows that France is in
decadence, it is thanks to men like M. Lauzanne, who worked hard to accredit

the idea.
Who should be put on trial, then? The man who involved himself in cowardly
accommodation and compromise of every sort, or the society that allowed a
journalist devoid of talent and utterly without scruples to guide public opinion
and speak on behalf of his country?
To put it bluntly, society’s responsibility is enormous. A world in which jobs
can be had without competence or at the very least some kind of virtue is a world
that carries within it the seeds of its own destruction.
But the individual’s responsibility begins where society’s ends. Even if we
assume that it was a matter of course for a man of mediocre or debased intelligence to participate in the reporting of news, which ought to be a scrupulous and
thoughtful business, it was the individual’s responsibility to recognize the responsibility inherent in his position the moment he was appointed to it.
We may open ourselves up to ridicule by saying what we think, but we'll say
it anyway. A journalist who rereads his published article and does not ask
whether he was right or wrong, who experiences no pangs of doubt or scruples,
and who on some nights does not despair of being equal to the absurd but necessary work that he does week in and week out—in short, a journalist who does

198 Editorial. Probable text.
199 According to Georges Altschuler, who reported on his trial in the same issue of Combat, Stéphane

Lauzanne, the editor in chief of Le Matin, was a “man without character,” who had been successively proEnglish, pro-American, and pro-German. Seventy years old, he was accused of having advocated active
collaboration in his editorials and broadcasts on Radio Paris between 1940 and 1944. He was sentenced
to twenty years in prison.
200 On Georges Suarez, see the editorial of October 25, n. 188 above, p. 89.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

95

not judge himself daily—is not worthy of this profession and bears the heaviest
of responsibilities in his own eyes and in the eyes of his country.”°!
Now there is no denying that M. Lauzanne, a man who spoke on behalf of

France, never questioned what he was doing. The problem was not that he
lacked delicacy, for we know that when he was criticized for taking money from
the Germans, his excuse was that it was paid to him in French francs. Clearly,
that took care of any problems, and M. Lauzanne’s patriotism remained intact.
Meanwhile, however, certain other Frenchmen came to believe that additional
requirements were in order, and today their wish is to see in every important post
men who accept their responsibilities and who weigh carefully the consequences
of what they say and do.
The day this country demands as much of its children as they demand of
themselves will be the day on which a revolution more profound than any previous upheaval begins. It is truly unfortunate that Frenchmen are today obliged
to try one of their own for the crime of mediocrity and spinelessness, but it is the
harsh law of the day that requires us to condemn mediocrity invested with the
privileges of virtue and talent.
To put it succinctly, M. Stéphane Lauzanne was sentenced to twenty years at
hard labor for overlooking one subtle point.””” Otherwise he would have known
that the nationality of money is determined not by the color of the banknote but
by the hands that distribute it. In June 1940 the reign of subtle distinctions
began, but those subtle distinctions covered the entire gamut of conscience and
had the power to kill or dishonor. We beg pardon for thinking that they are still
a matter of life or death for this country today.

November 2, 1944°”
The Council of Ministers has just established a High Court of Justice, which is

to judge the members of the Vichy government.” It should be noted that not
all the members of that government are currently in custody, so that the council’s decision amounts to asserting their guilt before issuing the arrest warrants

201 Cf, Camus’ statements to Caliban: “The profession of journalist is one of the finest I know, precisely
because it forces you to judge yourself.” Essais, p. 1565.
202 Cf. the first of the Lettres 2 un ami allemand: “We are indeed fighting over subtleties, but subtleties as
important as man himself.” Essais, p. 224.

203 Editorial. Typescript.
204 Camus had already dealt with the problem of the purge on October 18, p. 76, and October 25, p. 88.
In the first days of the Liberation, military tribunals and later juries established by departmental committees judged collaborators. Special courts—Cours de justice, Chambres civiques, and finally the Haute
Cour de justice—were established subsequently. The High Court of Justice, “intended to judge the members of the organism known as the ‘Government of Vichy,” comprised five magistrates and twenty-four
jurors drawn by lot from a list of one hundred names provided by the Consultative Assembly. Those one
hundred names included thirty-three deputies, thirty-three senators, and thirty-four resisters not drawn
from the parliament. This was the prelude to the trials of Pétain and Laval, among others.

96

CHAPTER

2

they deserve. Note, too, that the government has taken a clear lead over the
Académie Francaise, which continues to look upon Marshal Pétain as a writer
and a great Frenchmen, thereby committing two errors. Some may object that
the government’s advantage over the Académie is slim. We would agree.
The task of a High Court of Justice is generally to judge crimes of treason. To
establish such a court to deal with the government of Vichy thus amounts to
declaring the entire government guilty of treason. The general terms of this
statement may fail to make an impression, but if we look beneath the surface, we
see that it comes down to saying that Marshal Pétain is a traitor, along with
Prime Minister Laval and his other collaborators.
We wish to make one simple point: the people who are loudly applauding the
government’s decision with respect to the Patriotic Militias*” today are the same
people who will shrink from the blunt assertion that Philippe Pétain was a traitor. This is doubly instructive. It ought to instruct the government as to the value
of some of the approval it has received, while at the same time it ought to
instruct those who are applauding the dismantling of the militias that even if the
Provisional Government sometimes seems overly punctilious about maintaining
order, it has yet to demonstrate that it is inclined to blur basic distinctions.

To insist that the decision of the Council of Ministers amounts to accusing
Philippe Pétain of treason is to highlight the true meaning of that decision. Our
task, however, is to substantiate that charge with all due care. Indeed, some

Frenchmen still believe that Pétain’s intentions were good and that he was not
responsible for the atrocities committed under his government. All that further
reinforces an old theme of Vichyite propaganda, namely, that Vichy was pursuing a double policy. _
The answer to this is simple. Even assuming that Vichy’s policy was double, it
was still a crime. And the very fact that it sometimes seemed to be double made
it a crime worse than ordinary treason. Today we are sill suffering the consequences of the vast confusion that the Vichy regime sowed throughout France.
Even after the regime chose to decamp to Germany” in order to go on speaking about France, the equivocal situation it created perpetuates itself at home.
The fictional legality that Vichy created is forcing us to substitute moral justice for legal justice and supplying arguments to people who ought to hold their
peace forevermore.
The period that began in 1940 was one in which it was no longer acceptable
to play a double game. It was either fight or bend the knee, but it was impossible
to imagine fighting on one’s knees. If Pétain believed that, the results are clear
for everyone to see. French heads rolled as a result of laws that he signed. Perhaps,

205 The government had just decided to disarm the “patriotic militias” created by the C.N.R. early in 1944
to ensure law and order during the liberation of Paris. The C.N.R. argued that the militias ought to be
converted into civic and republican guards, but General de Gaulle insisted that “no group should be
allowed to subsist outside the army and police.”
206 Under German control the Vichy government (in the person of Pétain, Laval, and others) left Vichy
for Belfort and then Sigmaringen in August 1944.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

97

in signing them, he never imagined what would follow, but if he himself lacked
imagination in that regard, others imagined the consequences for him. He has
had to assume all the consequences of acts that he regarded as merely clever. His
policy of realism, his feeble cunning, his old man’s half-baked ruses, and, last but
not least, his diplomacy, which once might have seemed merely puerile and vain,
led to too many deaths and entailed too much suffering during the four years of
the Occupation for us to decorate them with any name other than treason.
People need to know these things. And they also need to know that if France
is prepared to pardon those who failed to notice that the halting speeches that
came their way via the airwaves betrayed the very voice of resignation and decadence, she has not decided to forget that responsible officials are indeed responsible and that a man who governs must be willing to submit to scrutiny what his
government does.
In any case, that is what the establishment of the High Court ought to signify.

But it must move quickly—more quickly than the Académie and so many others in this country who are slow on the uptake. If there are some cases in which
our duty is not clear or justice is difficult to define, in this case we take our stand
without hesitation. The voices of the tortured and humiliated join with ours in
calling for justice of the most pitiless and decisive kind.

November 3, 19447”
Governing is good. But it calls for method. Good principles are sometimes
compromised by the way in which they are applied. We have just had an example of this, and it may be useful to point this out for the sake of the government
itself.
To come straight to the point, the government’s arguments for dissolving the
patriotic militias were at least worth discussing.”°® And they were discussed in a
lively debate, which saw the clash of a wide range of opinions. So far nothing out
of order. It was possible to believe that the government was right or that it was
wrong, and we expressed our point of view in these pages. In any case, one was

dealing with a government decision framed clearly in terms of two or three
principles that were worth considering closely.
After this discussion, in any case, the government maintained its position. By
the same token, those who had criticized the steps taken by the Council of

Ministers held to their main argument, which hinged on the existence of a fifth
column and the need for a “people's police.” Again, attitudes were clear, and the
government’ position, though contested, was certainly not disparaged.
Now, however, there have been incidents in Paris. There were warnings, and

then some railway cars filled with munitions exploded, causing deaths and
207 Editorial. Typescript.
208 Camus had already touched on the problem of the dissolution of the militias in the previous day's
editorial.

98

CHAPTER

2

injuries. All this has stirred emotions. And since these incidents may well have
some bearing on the issues in contention in the recent public debate, all who

were involved have had to reflect on the implications for their positions.
As things currently stand, it is impossible to say whether the explosions were
the result of an accident or an attack. Some hold that an attack took place. Others are awaiting further information before making up their minds.
What should the government's policy be in this situation? Whatever sages and
skeptics may think, the only wise policy for any government is always to tell the
truth. The government, we assume, never denied that attacks were possible. It
knows better than most that a minority of collaborators and miliciens*® remain
in this country.
What is still more symptomatic is the fact that the government never rejected
the argument put forward by its adversaries. It simply said that if a fifth column
exists, it is up to the government to root it out.
The government could therefore choose to fully inform the public today by

releasing all information in its possession, excluding matters of military security,
and it could admit that an attack was just as likely the cause of the explosion as
an accident. Instead, it has chosen to release contradictory communiqués and to
censor any indication that an attack might have been involved.
This, to put it mildly, is not a rational method of government. We will not
insist on the principle of truthfulness, according to which the government
should always be open about what it knows, or on the foolishness of believing
that incidents that took place so close to Paris could be covered up for long. But
we would like to point out to the government what the results of its policy have
been. In effect, it has allowed people to believe that the government knew there
was an attack, that it recognized the power of its adversary’s principal argument,

and that it suppressed the publication of any information that might have supported that argument because it felt uneasy about its own position, which it saw
as threatened.
Such a policy makes no sense. It does not strengthen the government's position at all but in fact weakens it. It casts doubt on its motives, which previously
there was no reason to regard as anything but pure. Finally, it discredits what
many were prepared to praise.
This is unfortunate in every respect. By contrast, what we want is for ministers and government bureaus to adopt toward domestic policy the attitude that
General de Gaulle inaugurated in foreign policy with his diplomacy of truth.
France needs to speak with one voice, and it must be clear. It needs one government, but it must be truthful. It was asphyxiated by lies and needs to breathe the
very air of truth. The minute that air is lacking, the very life of the nation is at
risk. This is a principle to which all governmental offices ought to adhere, and if
it were ever to become clear that they will not embrace it, then it might become
necessary to force them to do so.

209 That is, members of the Milice, Vichy’s paramilitary militia.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

99

November 3, 1944

Pessimism and Courage?'®
For some time now, articles have been appearing about works said to be pessimistic by critics bent on showing that this leads to servitude of the most abject
kind. The argument is simple: a pessimistic philosophy is in essence a discouraged philosophy, we are told, and those who do not believe that the world is
good are destined to serve tyranny. The best and therefore the most effective of
these articles was the one by M. George Adam, which appeared in Les Lettres
frangaises.”"' In a recent issue of L’Aube,*’* M. Georges Rabeau responded to this
indictment in an article whose title is impermissible: “Nazism Not Dead?”
I see only one way to respond to this campaign, which is to do so openly. The
problem is not just mine, for Sartre, Malraux, and others more important than
I am have been targeted, yet it would be hypocritical of me not to speak in my
own name. I will not deal with the central issue of the debate, however. The idea
that a pessimistic philosophy is necessarily a discouraged philosophy is silly, but
it would take too long to refute it. I will therefore confine my discussion to the
philosophical method that inspired these articles.
Let me begin by saying that it is a method that ignores the facts. Each of the
writers under attack has proved in his own way that even without philosophical
optimism, he knows his duty as a human being. An objective observer would
therefore agree that a negative philosophy is not incompatible in practice with a

210 Article signed by Camus and published under the rubric “Letters and Arts.” Reprinted in Actuelles, in
the chapter on “Pessimisme et tyrannie,” with the erroneous date of “September 1945.”
211 Les Lettres francaises was established underground by Jacques Decour, whose execution delayed its pub-

lication. It reappeared in September 1944 under the leadership of Claude Morgan. It welcomed writers
from the Comité National des Ecrivains, or National Writers Committee, of which it published a list,
which included Camus. On October 7, 1944, under the title “Out of Season,” George Adam published
a critique of Jean Anouilh’s Antigone. He showed that Antigone’s desire for purity had led her to scorn men

and life and culminated in what was nothing less than suicide and concluded that Anouilh’s “individualistic pessimism” was “out of season.”
212 The article by Gaston (not Georges) Rabeau (the error is repeated in Actwelles) appeared in L’Aube on
October 21, 1944. L’Aube was a Christian-Democratic paper born before the war, which ceased publication from June 1940 until August 23, 1944. With Francisque Gay as editor, it frequently published
Georges Bidault and in fact became the official organ of the M.R.P. Rabeau argued that insufficient notice
had been taken of Nazi ideology and that the universities had even contributed to its spread. He took
philosophical ideas that interested Camus and caricatured them in a way to which Camus obviously could
not remain indifferent: “It was our own universities that taught Nietzsche, and Nietzsche was one of the

earliest sources of Nazism. . . . Then came the doctrine of nothingness and despair. This philosophy of
nothingness and despair in the face of the world’s absurdity and the futility of existence came from
Martin Heidegger. With great originality and depth M. Sartre quite recently planted it in French soil [with
the success of Being and Nothingness]. But many novels and plays have been spreading nihilist doctrines
for some years now. . . . Ihope that the celebrated authors I have mentioned will not continue their deadly
work in this country.” He ended with an appeal to readers of L'Aube to save France from the abyss into
which these writers threatened to plunge it. It is worth noting that Sartre was mentioned by name but not
Malraux.

100

CHAPTER

2

morality of freedom and courage. He would simply see an opportunity to learn
something about the human heart.
That objective observer would be right. For the fact that a philosophy of negation coincides in some minds with a positive morality actually points up the
great problem that has caused such painful intellectual upheaval in recent times.
To put it succinctly, it is a problem of civilization, and the question is whether

man, without help from the eternal or from rationalist philosophy, can create his
own values.”!> This project is larger than any one of us. What I believe is this:
France and Europe today have either to create a new civilization or perish.
But civilizations are not made by rapping knuckles with a ruler. They are made
by the clash of ideas, by blood and spirit, by suffering and courage. Themes that
have been discussed in Europe for a century cannot be judged in an instant, in
L’Aube, by an editorialist who does not hesitate to call Nietzsche lustful or say
that Heidegger believed that existence is futile. I do not much relish the all too
celebrated existential philosophy, and, to be blunt, I find its conclusions false.”
Existentialism is nevertheless a great philosophical adventure, and it is difficult
to see it subjected to criticism of the most constricted and conformist variety by
M. Rabeau.
The problem is that existentialism’s themes and projects are not now being
judged in an objective manner. They are judged not according to the facts but in
the light of a doctrine. Our Communist and Christian comrades lecture us about
doctrine in lofty terms, and we respect them. Their doctrines are not ours, but it
has never occurred to us to speak of them in the tone in which they have just
spoken about us or with anything like their assurance. Let us continue with our
experiment and our philosophy. M. Rabeau criticizes us for having an audience.
I think he is exaggerating. What is true, though, is that the malaise that preoccupies us is the malaise of an entire era, from which we do not wish to separate
ourselves. We want to think about our history and to live in history. We believe
that the truth of this century cannot be discovered unless its tragedy is explored
to the bitter end. If the age is afflicted with nihilism, it is not by ignoring
nihilism that we will discover the morality we need. True, not everything can be
summed up by the words “negation” or “absurdity.” We know this. But negation
and absurdity must be posited as ideas because our generation has encountered
them and must learn to live with them.’"”
213 In an interview with Servir on December 20, 1945, Camus put it this way: “What interests me is to

know how I ought to behave. And more precisely, how one can behave when one doesn't believe in God
or reason.” Essais, p. 1427.
214 Camus was of course often called an “existentialist,” a judgment based more on a misleading comparison with Sartre than on his own writings and despite his repeated denials. See “No, IAm Not an Existentialist,” an interview published in Les Nouvelles littéraires on November 15, 1945 (Essais, p. 1424).

Nietzsche was an important source of Camus’ thinking. He devoted a chapter of The Rebel to “Nietzsche
and Nihilism.” Although he was less familiar with Heidegger, he clearly was not unaware of his ontological reflections or his phenomenology.
215 These sentences shed historical light on the shift in Camus’ thinking between The Myth of.Sisyphus and
The Rebel.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

101

The men attacked in these articles have tried diligently to resolve this problem
in their work and in their lives. Is it so difficult to understand that one cannot
dispatch in a few lines a question to which others have devoted their entire lives
without any certainty that they have found a satisfactory answer? Shouldn’t they
be granted the patience that we accord to any project undertaken in good faith?
Shouldn’t we address them more modestly?
I shall end this protest here. I hope to have dealt with it in a measured way.
Yet I hope that readers will sense the indignation in these paragraphs. Objective
criticism is something I prize, and I have no difficulty accepting the idea that
work can be dismissed as bad or a philosophy as not good for the destiny of
mankind. It is just that writers should be responsible for what they write. It
makes them think, and we all desperately need to think. But to draw from such
principles judgments about this or that intellectual’s willingness to accept servitude, especially when one has proof of the contrary, or to conclude that this or
that philosophy must inevitably lead to Nazism, is to paint an image of man that
I prefer not to characterize, and it offers precious little proof of the moral benefits of optimistic philosophy.
ALBERT CAMUS
November 4, 19447!°
Two days ago, Jean Guéhenno””” published a fine article in Le Figaro, and we are
loath to let it pass without saying that it ought to inspire sympathy and respect
in all who are concerned about man’s future. The article is about purity, a diffi-

cult subject.
To be sure, Jean Guéhenno probably would not have taken it upon himself to
write about purity had a young journalist not reproached him in another article,
intelligent but unjust, for his moral purity, which the writer feared Guéhenno
conflated with intellectual detachment.’’® Guéhenno very properly replied by

216 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actyelles, chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
217 Jean Guéhenno

(1890-1978) edited the review Europe and later Vendredi, whose cessation Camus

deplored in an article he published in Alger-Républicain in November 1938. A humanist and
pacifist convinced that culture could contribute to man’s progress, he wrote an essay on Michelet and a
journal of the Popular Front years, entitled Journal d’une révolution. In 1946 he published his Journal des
années noires, 1940-1944. His modest background only increased Camus’ sympathy for the man and
his ideas.
218 In an article entitled “On Purity,” published in Le Figaro on November 2, Guéhenno responded to criticism from a Communist journalist named Gilbert Mury, who had attacked him for his “noble soul,” his

“purity,” and his “taste for eternity.” These are reminiscent of the criticisms that would be directed toward
Camus after The Plague and The Rebel. In particular, Guéhenno wrote: “The highest form of purity is to
be pure among the impure, in the world, at the head of a great newspaper or at the podium of an assembly; it is to challenge men, sects, and parties, to conceive at every moment of what is possible and to
undertake to do it, and yet to remain on the straight and narrow path. And that purity . . . is neither ineffective nor futile. There can be no doubt that the ends do not always justify the means.”

102

CHAPTER

2

arguing for purity maintained in action. And of course the problem of realism
came up: the question was whether the ends justify the means.
We are all in agreement about ends but differ as to means. Rest assured that
we all bring a disinterested passion to man’s unachievable happiness. But there
are some who think that any means of achieving that end are proper, while others disagree.”'? We belong to the latter group. We know how quickly means can
be mistaken for ends, and we do not want just any kind of justice. This attitude
sometimes provokes realists to irony, as Jean Guéhenno has just found out. But
he is right, and we are convinced that what seems mad in his position is in fact
the only wisdom open to us today. For what is at stake is indeed man’s salvation.
And this is to be achieved not by taking a position outside the world but through
history itself. The point is to serve man’s dignity by means that remain dignified
in the midst of a history that is not. The difficult and paradoxical nature of such
an undertaking is clear.
Indeed, we know that man’s salvation may well be impossible, yet we say that

this is no reason to stop trying and, furthermore, that it is not permissible to call
it impossible before making a genuine effort to prove that it isn’t.
We have that opportunity today. This country is poor, and we are poor with
it. Europe is miserable, and its misery is ours. Lacking wealth and a material her-

itage, we have perhaps acquired a freedom that allows us to indulge in that folly
called truth.
On a previous occasion we stated our conviction that we have been given one
last chance. We truly believe it is the last. Deception, violence, and blind human
sacrifice have been tried for centuries, and the experience has been bitter. Only
one thing is left to try, and that is the plain middle course of disillusioned
decency, scrupulous fairness, and steadfast support for human dignity. We
believe that idealism is futile, but our idea, simply stated, is that as soon as
some men are willing to serve good with the same stubborn and indefatigable
energy with which other men serve evil, the forces of good will be in a position
to triumph—for a very short time, perhaps, but still for a time, and that triumph
will be unprecedented.
Some may ask, Why pursue this debate? There are so many more urgent issues
of a pragmatic sort. But we have never shrunk from discussing such practical
matters, as is obvious from the fact that when we do discuss them, not everyone
is happy.’”°
In any case, the debate has to be pursued because no other item on the
agenda is more urgent. Why pursue the matter? So that when realist thinking
once again rules the world, men like Guéhenno will remember that they are not
alone and know that purity, regardless of what others may think, is never
deserted.

219 This idea is central to The Rebel and the play The Just Assassins (Les Justes).

220 In Actuelles, the final clause was reworded to read, “we don’t please everyone.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

103

November 5, 19447”!

The Officiel has published the text of an executive order requiring newspapers to
reveal their production figures” and inform the Minister of Information of their
sales so that their paper allocations can be decreased or increased as needed.
This order is inspired by logic. The publication of circulation figures will
someday be a way of allocating resources among newspapers, and clearly the
workings of the press should be open to public scrutiny. As for the statements of
circulation, certain difficulties arise, and some injustice may result for some of
our sister papers, which do not sell all the papers they print and may not be
allowed to try their luck much longer, yet it is obvious that the requirement was
instituted in a spirit of fairness and rationality. Our point is simply that the logic
of the measure must be pursued to the end.
Indeed, the order states that in case of fraud, the paper allocation for the subsequent two-week period will be reduced by an amount corresponding to the
number of undeclared or concealed copies. We believe that this brief paragraph,
which deals with a seemingly minor matter, poses a problem of political morality of the highest importance.
What does it literally signify? That fraud is to be tolerated, and that its only
sanction will be a reduction in the quantity of paper allotted equal to the amount
wasted in the previous allotment. This is not a punishment but an adjustment,
a bargain struck between the thief and his victim.
That being the case, this brief text rests on untenable principles. It is tantamount to admitting that fraud is both inevitable and venial. If it is true that
every punishment is proportionate to the crime, then this measure amounts to
granting fraud a pardon or indulgence that in the end bestows upon it the status
of a natural custom.
This is not the way to begin. If we want to establish new relations among citizens, if we want decisions made in a spirit of fairness like this one to bear their
fruit, then we must call a spade a spade and punish fraud for what it is.

We will not say much about the danger of such a policy for the new press. It
is not a good idea to tempt people to do wrong, and if the only risk of cheating
is to have one’s fraud rewarded rather than punished, that is a great temptation
indeed. There is no need to point out how quickly the virtuous would at first be
left in the dust and eventually dismissed as naive.
What is more, to accept fraud so calmly and benevolently is in fact to legitimate it. We are not proposing to erect virtue as a principle. Virtue seldom rules
in human affairs, and no one should make the mistake of assuming that we are

naive. Nevertheless, fraud should be punished diligently and severely enough to
make it clear that we will no longer tolerate it. A newspaper that tampers with
its books in the hope of achieving a larger circulation has no right to speak to the
221 Editorial. Typescript.
222 Combat regularly stated its circulation figure, which was roughly 180,000.

104

CHAPTER

2

people of France: that much is clear. The least fraud in this regard should be punished by cancellation of the entire paper allocation for a period of time long
enough to ensure that the benefits of honesty become clear.
We beg the indulgence of the minister of information’ for taking up his time
with an issue that may well be looked upon as minor. Our duty, however, is to
ensure that values are restored to their proper place and to point out that the very
idea of fraud is invariably among the causes of national decadence. If the Officiel
neglects to treat this matter as seriously as it ought to, it is up to the press to do

so and to uphold the necessary principles of firmness and dignity.

November 7, 1944774

For several weeks, some in France have been waiting with apprehension, others
with eagerness, for draconian decisions to be made in regard to various financial
matters. On Friday it was learned that the Government was about to act.” That
evening, a bulletin of the Agence Frangaise de Presse?”° announced a bond issue

paying 3 percent in perpetuity. This bond issue was presented as an important
financial initiative and a political act of real importance. To put it bluntly, we
refuse to look upon this as a creative initiative, though we readily admit that it
is an instructive political act. We cannot, however, subscribe wholeheartedly to
the policy it represents.”””
We beg our readers’ indulgence if we say once again what is in our hearts, and
say it unambiguously. The principal objective of this bond issue seems to be to
prove to those with capital that their fears are unfounded and that the Government intends to reinstitute the so-called “politics of trust.” In financial matters,
this means assuring the moneyed interests that they will not be threatened and
that the government seeks their support. In other words, the Government is proposing a “pause”—to use a term that is not easy to explain in regard to an area
where it is impossible to say that much work has yet been done.
The bulletin mentioned above confirms this suspicion when it says that “the
country will approve the decision to forgo any coercive measures. . . . There can
be no doubt but that this appeal, which is in keeping with the French democratic
tradition, will resonate well among peasants and other strata of society.”
What this means is clear to us, but we are not sure that everyone understands
it. It is indeed surprising that there has thus far been no reaction in quarters from
which a reaction might have been expected, and especially from the editorial
pages of our newspapers.
Make no mistake about our intentions: our point is not to criticize the bond
issue but to point out its true political significance. No one will be upset if the
223 Pierre-Henri Teitgen.

224 Editorial. Typescript.
225 The announcement was made on Friday, November 3, 1944.
226 On the AFP, see n. 108 to the article of October 3, p. 56 above.

227 Camus’ observations are more moral than economic in nature.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

105

Government feels the need to float a bond issue. But at least refrain from presenting as a bold initiative a measure of the sort that has allowed French governments to avoid taking the kind of energetic decisions in regard to finances that
the country has awaited for so long. In politics as in finance, measures are not
good or bad in themselves. But they must be adapted to the situation and the
time. And in the current period of dissension and chaos, the idea that so many
ills due to the moneyed interests can be remedied by adopting a policy of confidence toward those same interests is either foolish of misbegotten.
In any case, the Ministry of Finance should know that it does not have our
approval. We will do what needs to be done, on our part, to make sure that the
bond issue is successful.*** But we want to say in advance that we deem this measure to be insufficient and that it has all the earmarks of a shortsighted policy,
which, if pursued, will ultimately destroy the very interests it is meant to defend.
Oe

November 8, 1944°””

The Consultative Assembly met yesterday for the first time.”*° There was every
reason to stress the symbolic charge of this day and the consolations it afforded.
Even in the most difficult moments, we ought not to neglect the grounds for satisfaction that the world is still capable of giving us. Whatever else can be said,
France is today liberated from her shame. The value of that is beyond all measure.
But it would be a serious political mistake to suggest that the Consultative
Assembly is beginning its work in a climate of optimism. In every corner of
France, and in any number of scrupulous and disinterested hearts, worry and

anguish are obvious. The country has not been saved just because it has been liberated, and we are in danger of losing in liberty what we were so overwhelmed
to have discovered in nights of oppression.
The fate of France, and consequently the values that we respect, depend on its
politics. And knowing as we do the vileness and temptations of politics, we cannot write these words without apprehension. Indeed, little that we see around us
is comforting. The country is caught between two distinct approaches to politics, both equally regrettable. One is the politics of reaction, and the Government has just given two or three indications that this is the course it is in the
process of choosing. The other is the politics of outrageous demands, and the
editorial pages of our newspapers offer a sufficient number of examples.
As often happens, the very blindness of the politics of reaction reinforces the
demands from the other side, and the excessiveness of those demands serves as
an additional reason for pursuing the politics of reaction. Those in France who
wish to maintain the arduous dedication to human truth that became their hope
228 Like other newspapers, Combat published advertisements inviting readers to purchase bonds, and the

bond issue was in fact successful.
229 Editorial. Typescript.
230 On the Consultative Assembly, see the editorial of October 14, 1944, p. 71.

106

CHAPTER

2

during the four unforgettable years just past feel caught between these two contrary forms of irrationality, with only the lamentably inadequate weapons of
scrupulous language and obstinate objectivity to defend themselves.
For the best of us, this political climate, in which error and impatience lend
each other support, is difficult to endure. The first meeting of the Consultative
Assembly took place on the very day that Frangois Mauriac professed himself to
be tired of all politics and expressed his wish henceforth to address himself exclusively to men’s souls.”*' This coincidence is instructive because it is bitter.
It should at least inspire this country’s new representatives to think about what
they are doing.
We say this with no illusions, but it needs to be said: each member of this first
Assembly should reflect on this issue and ask himself whether it is possible to close
his ears to the clamor of special interests and the shouts of partisan groups in order
to find the words that France ought to speak if the country wishes to survive.
If the Consultative Assembly fails to steep itself in this essential spirit, its work
will come to naught. It begins its labors under the aegis of liberty, which is a
heavy honor to bear. It must know, however, that liberty does not exist without
freely accepted constraints, that there is no such thing as general efficacy without particular sacrifices, that there is more than one way of loving and serving
one’s country, and that not all ways of loving and serving it are good.

Nothing great or fruitful will be accomplished in France or in the world if we
do not do what we must to contradict the bitter words spoken 150 years ago by
one of the purest lovers of liberty: “Everybody wants the Republic, but nobody
wants poverty or virtue.””°*

November 9, 19447°°
Mr. Roosevelt’s election is good news.”* For the sake of all it is best that the same
men who led the war effort reflect upon the problems of peace. The ideal would
be for peace to be made by the nations and individuals who suffered most from
the war. But that, of course, is an unrealistic notion.

31 In Le Figaro of November 7, Mauriac published an article entitled “Impure Politics”: taking up the
question of “purity” in the wake of Guéhenno and Camus, he said that the attempt to “introduce it into
what is most impure in the world, namely politics, amounts to a hopeless struggle against some very venerable lies.” He deplored the “ruse” and “fraud” by which the slogans of a party leader were passed off as
the voice of the people and added that “ultimately this is what drives people accustomed to the free
exchange of ideas (such as we had here with Combat) out of politics.” Mauriac concluded by recalling

Lacordaire’s statement that in the end the soul is the only object of interest.
232 The quote is from Saint-Just, about whom Camus would later write at length in The Rebel. It comes
from his “Speech of November 29, 1792, on the hoarding of food supplies.”
33 Editorial. ‘Text very likely by Camus. The attribution is indirectly authenticated by Roger Grenier’s
comments on the article of April 14, 1945 (see n. 461, p. 192) on Roosevelt’s death, which repeats a sen-

tence from this article.
Franklin D. Roosevelt had just been reelected to a fourth term as president of the United States.

234

|
AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

107

It is a good thing that America is now assured of being represented tomorrow
by the same man who was able to persuade it that the European conflict was also
its conflict.
Mr. Roosevelt's personality is not the issue. To be sure, he has an appealing
face. Compared with the anxious, proud, ravaged, or vacant faces of Europe’s
powerful men, his is the very image of happiness.”*’ Yet while sympathy can help
to achieve mutual understanding, it is not a sufficient basis on which to build an
alliance.
Evidence for this can be seen in the fact that Mr. Roosevelt’s personal policy
in regard to French matters has not always been well inspired. But then the
Atlantic is wide, and viewed from afar French politics are not always easy to
understand. It would take a great deal of love not to go wrong, and it is impossible to imagine love in relations between nations. The essential thing is to identify a few shared moral values along with a small number of obvious common
interests. In this respect our entente with the American people is perfect.
France is not the issue, moreover; the issue is world peace. We would not be
misrepresenting what the people of France think, we trust, if we said that our
country is prepared to do a great deal and to give a great deal to assure the world
of a peace that is finally just and therefore lasting. In this respect, the election of
Mr. Roosevelt satisfies all our desires.
Three years ago, Mr. Roosevelt proved himself capable of seeing that the war
in Europe was everyone’s business.**° It would be a great misfortune if, tomorrow, America failed to understand that peace, too, is everyone's business. The

man who recognized the first of these truths and who little by little persuaded
the vast majority of satisfied and happy Americans to follow him is in the best
position to understand the second and make it clear to his countrymen.
It is essential that the great issues of the future be dealt with by men of tested
mettle, men who will remember well the horror and cruelty inherent in all war

before they lay down the conditions for world peace. That is why it is good that
Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, de Gaulle, and the others will still be around tomorrow. They have been obliged to learn the value of things and of human life. They
must speak not only in the name of victory but also in the name of suffering.
That is why, despite our differences and mutual irritations, and beyond our
various reasons for anguish and doubt, we Frenchmen can without hesitation
salute President Roosevelt’s election to a fourth term. To him we offer our gratitude and friendship as a free people who, though unbowed by servitude, take
from the memory of their suffering and the remembrance of their misfortune a
terrible hunger for justice and peace.
France, too, voted for Mr. Roosevelt, not out of self-interest but out of con-

cern for the future of the world and of mankind.

235 This sentence would be repeated in the article of April 14, 1945.
236 This was of course a major theme of The Plague. “From that moment on, . . . the plague was everyone’s business.” Op. cit., p. 67.

108

CHAPTER

2

November 10, 19447°”

Yesterday, the Congress of the Socialist Party held its first meeting.”** To judge
by the texts of the speeches, much of the time was devoted to harsh self-criticism.
This was a promising beginning, and the upcoming sessions of the Congress

deserve the closest attention. The idea of socialism is a great idea. And the Socialist Party is one of the great hopes of the France of tomorrow, but only if it can
translate into reality the principles of renewal that were laid out before the
Congress yesterday.
Ultimately, the reconciliation of justice and freedom, the simultaneous pursuit
of a collective economy and liberal politics, the good of all combined with
respect for each—these ideas, which so many in France find urgent today, are
socialist ideas. Anyone who read carefully the basic tenets of the programs set
forth by the Christian Democrats or the Movement of National Liberation
would see clearly that any socialist activist could have subscribed to them. Why
then did those who came out of the resistance without belonging to any party
not immediately join the Socialists?
We put this question frankly because it is a question that many of us have
been asking. Let us try to answer it just as frankly, encouraged to do so by the
courageous way in which the Socialists themselves confronted the issue at their
Congress.
What no doubt prevented many new people from joining the Socialist Party
was its past. Its image was not an appealing one. We knew it when it was weak
and helpless, more prodigal with words than eager for action, and as estranged

from the socialist values of unselfishness and self-denial as religious bigots are
estranged from true Christianity. In short, we were deterred by some of its adherents and most of its methods.**”
Although any number of sentiments and ideas drew us to the party, to us it
never seemed quite up to the challenges of these difficult times. In the past,
moreover, the Socialists sometimes confused the realization of their doctrine
with the winning of a majority in the National Assembly.
Our critique of socialism also included, and still includes, an element of nostalgia and regret born of seeing a great idea reduced to petty practices and a calling practiced as if it were a trade. We lost our confidence.
It would be misleading to suggest that all these doubts have evaporated. But
the underground existed, and Socialists played their part in the struggle—a good
and important part. Today, they speak with firmness and energy. Their loyalty
seems resolute, and that in itself is of the utmost importance. There is no denying that if the Socialists are able to renounce individuals and methods that are
today discredited or outmoded in order to rebuild a great party, they will be the
237 Editorial. Typescript.
38 Many members of the Combat staff, including Camus, were close to the Socialist Party in their
thinking.
239 Camus frequently gave voice to his wariness of the men and methods of the Third Republic.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

109

major political force in the France of tomorrow and will become the focal point
of much of the energy stemming from the resistance. But they have a great deal
of work to do, work that calls for determined effort and clear thinking. They
have to do the impossible, which is to overcome the force of habit. They have to
find a new style and a new inspiration born of purity. They have to recover their
youth. How difficult this will be becomes clear when one compares Daniel
Mayer’s™° excellent presentation to the Congress with Félix Gouin’s”*" speech to
the Assembly.
Gouin’s eloquence strikes us as unfortunate. No member of the resistance
would have taken any pleasure or felt any emotion at hearing the resistance celebrated in such a pompous tone. We need truer, more direct language. We are
tired of repeating that what we need is the truth and nothing but the truth. If we
are certain that M. Mayer has a better understanding of this devouring hunger
for the truth, it is because he, at least, has no habits to overcome.
Nevertheless, for all these reasons the Socialist Party Congress is an important
event. We who serve only this country and a few overarching human values hope
that socialism will find its expression among the Socialists and not be forced to
look elsewhere and exhaust itself in the process. For if France needs men to serve
it and it can be served only by those who are disinterested and armed with a few
clear ideas, it also needs to be served very quickly, and the best road to the country’s rebirth is also the shortest and straightest.

November 11, 19447
Our friends from Défense de la Francé® are troubled by the editorial in which
we denounced the damage done by a reactionary government policy in combination with extreme demands issuing from the public at large.”“*
They ask us not to use the word “reactionary” and to take a less negative attitude. Although they warn us of the danger of sowing discontent in people's
minds, when we were merely revealing the discontent that is in our hearts, and

240 Daniel Mayer, an early resister, was a close associate of Léon Blum’s. He was the editor of the under-

ground newspaper Le Populaire, founded Socialist Action Committees, and in 1942 advocated establishing a Council of the Resistance. After Léon Blum was deported to Germany, Mayer served as head of the
S.EL.O. in his absence and was in fact the party leader at the time of this Congress.
241 Rélix Gouin (1884-1977) was a Socialist deputy and one of eighty deputies who refused to grant full
powers to Pétain in 1940. He joined Free France in 1941. In 1943 he helped to set up the Consultative
Assembly in Algiers and continued to preside over it in Paris in November 1944. He later served as president of the Constitutive Assembly from November 1945 to January 1946 and as head of the Provisional
Government after the resignation of General de Gaulle.
242 Editorial. Typescript.
243 On Défense de la France, see the editorial of October 1, 1944, n. 104, p. 54. Camus is responding here
to an editorial by Robert Salmon on “The Political Future of the Resistance,” which was published on

November 9, 1944.
244 See the editorial of November 8, p. 105.

110

CHAPTER

2

against the possibility of reviving partisan conflict, when the parties are already
in conflict over a wide range of issues, we know that their criticism is offered in
a fraternal spirit, and we will respond in the same tone. In so doing we will avail
ourselves of the opportunity to clarify our position.
Since our use of the word “reaction” followed our criticism of the recent bond
issue, it was clear that the reactionary policy we had in mind was the government’s financial policy.?” On this point, we hope our friends will forgive us if we

stick to our guns. We regret that no other paper except Le Populaire has yet taken
a position on this issue.“° Whether the Government likes it or not, a policy of
trust in the moneyed interests at a time when those interests ought to be held in
check serves interests which are not those of the nation. We call this policy reactionary because reactionary is the word for it. As everyone knows, we make it our
business to call a spade a spade.
Our friends would also like us to go beyond criticism and offer some constructive proposals. But Combat was the first paper to take up the issue of scandalous fortunes, and we pointed out in a series of three fundamental articles what
basic steps we thought needed to be taken.”*”
Our friends deplore the fact that we publicly questioned the Government's
methods. It therefore behooves us to state our position with respect to the
Government one more time. We have said in no uncertain terms that the Goyernment has our confidence as a matter of principle. That is our loyal and considered judgment. But we believe that without frankness there can be no
friendship and that sympathy cannot thrive on misunderstandings. We are therefore determined to remain vigilant and to speak out with equal clarity when we
see things of which we disapprove and when we see things of which we approve.
We do not know whether such an attitude will, as our friends claim, add to the
countrys malaise. But we are certain that that malaise would only grow deeper
if we were to engage in a conspiracy of silence, ulterior motives, and concealment
of our true concerns. Furthermore, the fact is that we make little use of our right

to criticize.
When we do criticize, our friends can take it for granted that we have weighed
our words carefully and that our comments are based on solid information.
In the end, Défense de la France wonders what we are after. But our friends
know the answer perfectly well. We are trying to maintain the fragile truth that
they and we have defended for several long months in the streets of Paris. To the
freedom that we have already reconquered we are trying to add a justice not yet
within our grasp. We won that freedom by dint of obstinacy and intransigence.

245 See the editorial of November 7, p. 104.
246 Tn a series of articles Le Populaire called for a financial policy that would free the state from trusts and
man from capitalism.
247 On September 11, Combat published an articled entitled “Scandalous Fortunes Should Be Confiscated,” which indicated a number of measures to be taken immediately. On October 21, under the pseu-

donym Juste Bauchart, Camus published an article entitled “Money versus Justice,” see p. 83 above.
Frangois Bruel commented several times on the need for a rigorous financial policy.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

111

Justice cannot be had in any other way. No one should lie to the country, and no
one should speak of political revolution while proposing reactionary measures.
France can no longer stand for falsehood. We tell our friends this: it is time to
call a spade a spade.”“* That is our job. The Government, the Assemblies, will
deliberate as they see fit. But it is impossible to add silence to the falsehood that
still lingers in France.
We know that a reactionary policy will be fatal both to the nation and to the
interests that policy claims to defend. We know that he who blindly embraces
the lesser evil ends up facing the greater one. And we know that he who refuses
to give up any of his privileges ends up relinquishing them all, but only when it
is too late. For all these reasons we insist that the government adopt a clear and
decisive policy to organize the socialist economy that France needs and to shore
up the political liberty without which France can no longer breathe.

November 14, 19447?

It is worth noting that the first issue to be debated in the discussions between
France and Britain was the arming of French troops.’”’ Other issues are no less
important, and we shall have more to say about them in due course. But this one
calls for a number of comments.
The production of weapons in a nation at war is indeed the primary problem.
There is of course no other way to assure victory. But there is also no other way
to minimize bloodshed among the nation’s defenders. Modern warfare is so
lethal that no country, no matter how numerous its population, can allow itself
to go to war half prepared.
Modern war has greatly diminished the importance of courage compared to
that of matériel. No matter how bold or determined a nation may be, it can be
subjugated with a sufficient number of machines. And if it persists in fighting,

its very flesh disappears along with it. Thanks to some notorious examples, the
whole world now knows that it is impossible for a nation to sacrifice its youth
and its elite without risking decadence of every variety. That is why the nations
of the world have devoted so much effort to the production of weapons. They
have learned to make war by sacrificing material wealth while economizing on
men to the maximum extent possible.
This is even more true for France, which counts as one of the sad examples
that give the world pause. France does not have enough men, for many reasons,
no doubt, but primarily because it lost a great many. It has sacrificed the best of
its men in the course of this long thirty years’ war. At every level of our national
248 Camus would use this phrase again in his editorial of November 30 and in The Plague, p. 45.

249 Editorial. Typescript.
250 Winston Churchill and Anthony Eden, the British minister of foreign affairs, came to Paris on
November 11 to take part with General de Gaulle in a celebration of the 1918 armistice. The equipping

of French troops by the Allies did indeed pose serious problems.

CHAPTER 2

112

life we can measure the cruelty of their loss. Hence we must muster the courage
to say that our young men must be spared.
In another respect, however, defeat has imposed unimaginable duties on us—
this is the French tragedy. We have to regain our place, and we have to conquer
and occupy Germany. We did not want this war, but we must wage it until it
is won.

The violence that we detest has today become a necessity for us.
But we can no more throw unarmed men into battle today than we could during our four years of resistance. We have no war industry. We can produce only
courage and sacrifice, with which we are restoring the honor of France even as
we threaten what is most precious in French life. Every Frenchman who falls in
the Vosges adds something to the country’s grandeur but subtracts one unit from
its most vital strength.
No crueler or more wrenching conflict can be imagined. Though it is hard for
a nation to beg foreign powers for arms, France, faced with a choice between life
and death, must save its life by asking repeatedly for what it needs to arm its soldiers and make use of their courage while preserving as many as possible of the
lives it so desperately requires.
Of course anything that can be done to get our factories working again should
be done. But everyone knows that this will not be enough. The problem would
remain unresolved. If victory finds France exhausted and passive, the war will
have achieved nothing for us or for Europe. Our Allies need to understand this.
France is not asking for compassion; it is asking for arms. And if it asks for arms
with feverish urgency, it is because it wants to be in a position to do its duty and
save its future, and it knows that arms alone will enable it to resolve the most
tragic dilemma that any nation has ever faced.

November 15, 19447!

There is something irritating about the many

news

reports that describe

Mr. Hitler as either ill or dead. Some papers insist that these reports are true, and

foreign news agencies fuel the flames with a spate of dispatches out of Stockholm
that contain more question marks than credible information.
Given that a lid has been clamped on Germany, and given how difficult it is
to get any accurate information, one wishes that the French press were less hasty
to print reports that may be well-intentioned but are nevertheless of dubious
authenticity.”
To be sure, it is impossible not to be struck by the fact that ordinarily prudent
sources such as the Home Service broadcasts out of London are asking the question with increasing urgency. Nor can there be any doubt that Himmler has
251 Editorial. Typescript.
252 Camus discussed the need for vigilance in the reporting of news on several occasions. See the editori-

als of September 1, p. 23, and December 10, 1944, p. 137.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

113

assumed an increasingly important role in Germany.”*? On that subject, clandestine German broadcasts, most notably the Volkssender, whose reports are
never unreliable, have provided interesting details. When all the reports are
examined carefully, however, the only things that seem certain are that Hitler has
been keeping quiet and that Himmler is playing a central role in a Germany
under siege.
Does it follow, as some frivolously maintain, that Hitler has been immobilized
by madness or illness and that Himmler has taken his place? These reports may
be true, but we have no way of knowing. What we do know is not enough to
draw any conclusions. Hitler has been silent for a long time now, and for all that
time Germany has fought with determination. Besides, when a country is under
siege, police powers always increase in proportion to the danger. Hence Himmler’s
importance will continue to grow, but that in no way implies that Hitler has
been sidelined.
If Hitler should be removed from the picture, we would rejoice. But given the
current state of our information, we are not about to announce any such thing.
In any case, whether or not the reports are true, our duties remain the same.

The constant circulation of these kinds of reports serves no purpose. Our
morale needs no bucking up. These frivolous items serve only to distract.
If the point is to get Germany’s attention, though, the effort is wasted. Germany
is at a point where the morale of its people is of no consequence. A machine—
devoid of soul, wound up as tight as can be, and set blindly on its way in a desperate last-ditch effort—has no need of morale. It keeps running until it is
destroyed. And in fact the goal is to destroy it.
Finally, we want to put in another-word in favor of serious news reporting. We
want nothing to do with hypothetical dispatches or mysterious attributions. We
need factual news, even if the facts are unpleasant. The French want to fight, and

they know they can fight without sensational reporting. Indeed, they feel that
some journalists have no idea of the change that has come over them and forget
that this is now a different country. So they feel a bit neglected, and this may
make them cross, because they no longer want to be neglected.

November 16, 194474

The Government has decided to confiscate the property of Renault S.A.”” Readers may recall that the Renault factories were initially requisitioned pending the
disposition of charges against Louis Renault.”*® Louis Renault is now dead.
Human justice has nothing more to do with him.
253 On Himmler, see the editorial of August 30, 1944, note 26, p. 20. Camus had previously mentioned
Hitler’s silence in his editorial of September 20, p. 43.

254 Editorial. Probably by Camus.
255 On December 24, 1944, the Renault factories became a “national enterprise.”
256 On Renault, see the articles of September 26 and 27, 1944, pp. 47 and 48.

114

CHAPTER

2

Yet the financial power that was his remains, and it was a power that could not

be put to use for the benefit of the nation until the courts stripped Renault of
his civil rights. Now that the courts can no longer do this, must that power
remain in the hands of Renault’s former stockholders?
The Government does not think so. It came to the conclusion that Renault's
wealth had given rise to an abundance of privileges without corresponding
responsibilities and must now serve the good of all. It thus rendered a moral verdict from which there is no appeal. We have given our views on this topic often
enough that no purpose would be served by repeating them now. What needs to
be pointed out, however, is that the Government, in coming to the conclusion
it reached, publicly pointed to the responsibility of Renault’s shareholders. It
thus held responsible not only privileged individuals such as Renault but also
money as such, in its most anonymous form.
A society based on money cannot lay claim to either grandeur or justice. 257 It
has even less of a claim, however, when money retains all its privileges without

accepting any of its responsibilities. By contrast, yesterday's decision signifies that
money has duties, which are all the greater because its prerogatives were once so
exorbitant.
We want to be clear. If the nation calls for confiscation of Renault’s properties,
it does not do so for reasons of envy. In some ways it is a matter of indifference
to us that some people are wealthy and enjoy all the things that go with wealth.
If our personal feelings are of any interest, we would add that the glittering lives
of the wealthy strike us as impoverished and not terribly enviable.
Four terrible years have taught us the rudiments of a certain morality, however. We know now that those who have chosen to live for money can have no
excuse unless they prove that they are willing to accept the responsibilities that
go along with their privileges.
In 1940, French industrialists and their stockholders were called upon to
measure the full extent of those responsibilities by paying the highest price. They
were called upon to resist the enemy. They preferred to be paid instead.
When we discussed the Renault problem some time ago, some readers pointed
out to us that certain workers also volunteered for work in Germany in exchange
for high wages. That fact does not change our position in the slightest. True,

these men were also guilty, but their leaders were more guilty, for the simple reason that they had been materially fortunate beforehand and lost their sole opportunity to justify the all too isolated good fortune they had previously enjoyed.
That is why we feel bound to say once again that we approve of the decision
taken by the Council of Ministers. We have said enough about our opposition
to, for instance, the Government's financial policy”® to lend weight to the
approval we offer today. We wish to add only one thing, namely, that while we
are equally determined to criticize what needs to be criticized and to praise what
deserves to be praised, we find the obligation to criticize a bitter one and would
257 See “Money versus Justice,” October 21, p. 82.
258 See editorial of November 7, p. 104.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

115

much rather be able to approve decisions such as the one taken today, which
make our young democracy truer and stronger.

November 19, 1944°°°

We need to look closely at what has happened in Belgium. There are lessons to
be drawn from any conflict between the government of a free country and the
Resistance in that country, especially when the risk of Allied intervention looms
on the horizon.?
It is clear that M. Pierlot favors a conservative policy.”*! More precisely, he is
trying to maintain Belgium's traditional political face while making only those
concessions that he believes are inevitable.
It is no less clear that, just as is the case in France, years of resistance in
Belgium have produced men, and a body of opinion, hostile to any kind of conservative politics and eager to consolidate the liberation of the nation by introducing bold, just reforms.
Conflict was therefore likely. It has come about in connection with the
disarming of resistance groups and in short order has grown serious. An already
distressing state of affairs was brought to the boiling point by General Erskine’s
statement that he would intervene if disturbances posed a threat to military
security."
It is clear that initially M. Pierlot was opposed by the entire resistance, led by

the Communists. Yesterday, the Socialists for all practical purposes disavowed the
Communists by agreeing to remain in the Government. It is true, moreover, that
the three ministers who have resigned, two of whom are Communists, joined
General Erskine in signing a joint communiqué that has calmed things down
somewhat.
It therefore seems likely that the crisis will be resolved, at least temporarily,
and we are glad about this. We say “temporarily” because the resolution comes
not from an agreement between the parties but from external constraint. The
Pierlot government, which clings to power as a result of this compromise, finds
259 Editorial. Typescript.
260 Combat followed the Belgian crisis closely. It was perhaps not so much a matter of taking an interest
in foreign policy for its own sake as one of seeking to draw lessons applicable to French politics.
261 Hubert Pierlot (1883-1963)

formed a Catholic government in a coalition with socialists. After

Belgium’s surrender, King Leopold III withdrew from public affairs and looked upon himself as a prisoner
at Laaken (from which he would be deported to Germany in June 1944), and Pierlot went to London to

head the Belgian government in exile. Upon returning to Belgium in September 1944, he formed a
“national union” cabinet that was essentially a continuation of his London cabinet. Liberals, socialists, and

Catholics had to cope with a strong Communist presence in the country, and Pierlot had to take Communists into his government. On September 30, the king’s brother became regent. The royal question

proved difficult to resolve, because Belgians reproached Leopold for meeting with Hitler in November
1940 and for his not very combative attitude during the war. Pierlot supported the idea that the king's
powers ought to be restored once he was liberated. He resigned on February 7, 1945.

262 General Erskine of the British army was in command of the Allied troops that liberated Belgium.

116

CHAPTER

2

itself in a false position. Indeed, its weakness is now manifest, and it remains in
power only because it has force on its side.
In other words, it governs with the threat of Allied intervention, which is the
most distressing situation imaginable for the government of a country that has
only just been liberated.
If a lesson must be drawn from this crisis, it seems fair to say that a government that places itself in such a position suggests that its policy lacks foresight.
Some ofM. Pierlot’s ministers have taken some very bold steps. By contrast, others have dragged their feet. This unbalanced approach has been the worst failure
of what is supposed to be a government of national union, although the union
is due only to circumstances and has not been internalized. It is an approach that
has only alienated all classes of society and satisfied none. In politics, one has to
choose.
For instance, the Pierlot government adopted a financial policy that was destined to meet with opposition from important private interests. The right thing
to do was to destroy those interests first with the support of the nation rather
than stop halfway to the goal and then take steps to disarm the popular militias,
thereby incurring the people's hostility. As things now stand, those powerful
interests remain intact and hostile to M. Pierlot, who has also managed to alienate popular support.”® This outcome is unpleasant to say the least.
In conclusion, we should add that the Belgians showed less discipline than we
did in a similar matter.** The Allied viewpoint is readily comprehensible. Had
M. Pierlot taken the trouble to explain his more clearly and more nimbly, he
could have gotten his point across. The viewpoint of the resistance also has its
legitimacy. Nevertheless, through political missteps alone, the Belgians today
find themselves in an intolerable and scarcely imaginable predicament. We prefer not to think of what position we would have taken if the Allied armies had
been obliged to turn against the French resistance. It is the painfulness of this situation that allows us to say that even if everyone involved in this matter behaved
reasonably, M. Pierlot made an unforgivable mistake in putting his country into
such a situation.

November 21, 1944°°

It is once again time to update the situation in Spain.°°° Franco is still in
power. He hopes to remain there, and since he no longer expects to do so with

263 The government had issued orders to disarm resisters. In reaction to this measure, three ministers
resigned: two Communists and one former resister. They also demanded an investigation into collaboration by Belgian industrialists and called for nationalization of giant trusts.
264 On the disarming of the patriotic militias in France, see the editorials of November 2, p. 95, and
November 3, p. 97.
265 Editorial. Typescript.
266 See articles of September 7 and October 5 and 24, pp. 29, 59, and 86.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

117

his traditional friends, he is trying to do it with the support of the world’s
democracies.
To that end he has made certain advances.” He has spoken of Phalangist
Spain as an “organic democracy” and floated the idea of a “Catholic bloc” with
Spain as one of its members. With these proposals he believes he has made
enough concessions to claim a place at the peace conference. He argues that
nations that were able to remain at peace are better suited than others to deal
with the problems of peace.
Meanwhile, negotiations are under way to create a transitional government in
Spain. Franco himself has made offers to the monarchist party, but to date these
have gone unanswered. In Paris, a M. Maura says that he has been sent by republicans in Spain to enter into talks with El Caudillo. But the Unién Nacional,
which has its headquarters in Paris, has just denied this report, though without
mentioning M. Maura by name.
Franco's opposition includes the Spanish Republicans and the Allies. The
Allies have adopted an ambiguous policy. They maintain diplomatic relations
with Spain. Msgr Spilmann”® has used his credit in favor of Franco, and British
conservatives waited until the dictator made his most recent proposals before
rejecting his claim to a moral right to participate in the peace conference.
At the same time, the Allies have been encouraging the republican opposition.
They greeted the notion of a “phalangist democracy” with incredulity. Governments have left it to the press and commentators to point out that Spain was
never at peace, because its policy of nonbelligerence tied up several French divisions at its border, it fought against Russia, and it took advantage of the difficult
situation in which Great Britain found itself to alter the status of Tangier by
force.”
The Spanish Republicans, for their part, are on the road to unity but have
not yet arrived. The most active organization is surely the Unidn Nacional
Espafiola, which met recently in Toulouse.””” But broad segments of republican
opinion, including parliamentarians, movements of the democratic left, and
especially union federations (the C.N.T. and U.G.T.), object to granting it

the right to speak for all. Their chief complaint is that the Unién Nacional,
though supported by the Communists, included prominent members of the old
regime such as Gil Robles, who was involved in the repression in Asturias in
1934.77"
267 On November 16, Franco recognized the Provisional Government of the French Republic.

268 Francis Joseph Spellman was the archbishop of New York. [Camus’ “Spilmann” is a misspelling of his
name.—Trans.]

269 Under the terms of a 1923 agreement, Tangier was an international zone. France occupied it from 1940
to 1945.
270 During this meeting, the Unién Nacional called for restoration of the Republic, a meeting of the Cortés
in France, and constitution of a provisional government.
271 Gil Robles was the leader to the extreme-right Ceda party, and it is true that his joining the government in 1934 paved the way for the bloody repression of the Asturian miners. In 1936, Camus and his
comrades at the Théatre du Travail wrote a play entitled Révolte dans les Asturies about these events.

118

CHAPTER

2

Republican unity is more likely to be achieved, in any case, around men
such as Prieto,””” who is currently in Mexico, or Negrin,’” who is in England.

None of this prevents the republicans from working wholeheartedly together to
bring about the downfall of Franco's regime or to deplore the ambiguities of
Allied policy.
Clearly, the Pyrenees still exist, and while we are bound to hope that someday
they will no longer stand in our way, that will not be possible until Spain is once
again our friend. But we need to do something to make that happen. Some readers have asked us why we are taking sides in Spanish politics. The reason is that
there are some situations in which one has to take sides, and if France must now
wage war against fascism, it ought to wage war against all fascism or not wage
war at all. We are doing everything possible to make sure that our reporting of
the news remains objective. But when it comes to a conflict in which the honor
of free peoples coincides with their interests, we should not remain neutral.
We do not have to intervene in Spanish politics. Indeed, we feel that the
republicans ought to wait until the moment is ripe in order to ensure the success
of their action. But we know that Allied diplomatic pressure would be enough
to bring Franco down and avoid bloodshed among one of the most generous
peoples in Europe. It would be cowardly not to do what needs to be done in
order to bring that about by stating our urgent conviction here and now.
France will lose nothing by doing so. The only friends we have in Spain are
republicans. But they are in the majority. There are 640,000 of them whom we
will never forget. Six years ago they languished without hope in Franco's prisons.
Like us, the Spanish Republicans have known misfortune and desperate combat.

Like us, they forged a community of heart and spirit that will endure forever. We
want no friends of whom we cannot be proud. And their friendship honors us
as much as it obliges us. Republican France cannot have two policies, because it
has only one voice.

November 22, 19447”4

It is time for some self-criticism. A profession that involves daily judgment of
breaking news in order to discern what common sense and basic intellectual
honesty require is not without dangers. Wanting the best, you spend much of
your time judging what is worst or even just what is less good. In short, you

adopt the systematic attitude of the judge, the schoolteacher, or the professor of
ethics. In this business, it is but one step from the presumptuous to the foolish.
272 Indalecio Prieto y Tuero, who served as a minister in republican governments in 1936 and 1937, was
sent on a diplomatic mission to South America and remained there after Franco’s victory.
273 Juan Negrin (1886-1956) served as minister and then head of the republican government during the

civil war. In 1939 he sought refuge in France and later went to England, where he headed the republican
government in exile until 1945. He died in Paris.
*74 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actuelles under the title “Autocritique” at the end of the chapter entitled
“Le journalisme critique.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

119

We hope we have not crossed that line. Still, we aren’t sure that we have always
avoided the danger of implying that we can see the future more clearly than
others and never make mistakes. Of course we don’t believe anything of the sort.
We sincerely hope to participate in the common effort while abiding by certain
rules of conscience that in our view have not been widely applied in matters of
politics.
That is the extent of our ambition, and if we point out the limitations of certain ideas or political actions, we are naturally aware of our own limitations as
well, and we try to make up for them by adhering to two or three basic principles. But reporting the news is a demanding business, and the boundary between
morality and moralism is never clear. Sometimes one crosses it owing to fatigue
or negligence.
How to avoid this danger? By means of irony. Alas, these are not ironic times.
This is still an age of indignation. If only we can maintain our sense of the relativity of things, come what may, everything will turn out all right.
Of course we cannot avoid a certain irritation when we read, the day after the
capture of Metz*” and knowing what that victory cost, a story about Marlene
Dietrich’s arrival in the city.’”° Indignation about such things is always reasonable. But that does not mean that we believe our newspapers have to be boring.
It’s just that in wartime we don’t think that the doings of movie stars are necessarily of greater interest than the suffering of peoples or the bloodshed of soldiers
or a nation’s determined effort to find its own truth.
All of these things are difficult. Justice is both an idea and a passion of the
soul. We must learn to take what is human in it without transforming it into the
terrifying abstract passion that has damaged so many men.””” Irony is no stranger
to us, and what we take seriously is not ourselves but the unspeakable ordeal that
this country is going through and the bracing adventure upon which it has been
obliged to embark. In the light of this distinction we can take the true measure
of the daily task we face, as well as its relative importance in the great scheme of
things.
We felt the need to say these things today for our own sake as well as for the
sake of our readers, so that they may know that in everything we write, day in
and day out, we are mindful of the duty to be thoughtful and scrupulous, which
all journalists should adopt as their credo. In short, we do not omit ourselves
from the critical scrutiny that we believe is needed at the present time.””*

275 Metz was liberated on November 20 after a hard-fought battle.
276 Marlene Dietrich, the actress made famous by Josef von Sternberg’s film The Blue Angel, left Nazi
Germany for the United States in 1933. She put on a number of shows for Allied troops during the war.
277 This would become the theme of Les Justes.
278 According to Roger Grenier, Camus wrote the lines that follow his article on Synge’s play The Tinker’
Wedding under the heading “Stage and Screen”: “Editor's note: the length of the column our critic has
devoted to the work of Synge obliges us to postpone until next week a review of Turgenev’s very fine comedy, The Provincial Woman, intelligently interpreted by Paul Oettly and Maria Casarés.” [Casarés was
Camus’ mistress.—Trans.]

120

CHAPTER

2

November 23, 1944”
To judge by what one reads in the Paris press, everyone in France is socialist,

a phenomenon we've noted previously. From Le Figaro to Le Populaire, the collectivist economy enjoys a good press. M. Mauriac speaks of “socialist faith.”**°

M. Jurgensen, writing on behalf of the M.L.N., characterizes the movement as
“laborite.”*®! The Christian Democrats use the same vocabulary.
This is less surprising than it may appear. And despite what some say, it is not
only because France’s slide to the left has accelerated. It is above all because in

four years of forced meditation the men of the old right came to recognize that
the social problem was real and that a nation could not enjoy youthful vigor
without ensuring the welfare of all its children.
It is not this near unanimity that is surprising, then. For what is it, finally, that
prevents such substantial segments of the public from joining together to form a
powerful majority party capable of quickly enacting the structural reforms
needed if France is to be reborn?
It certainly isn’t the parochial quarrels that occasionally surface in the press.
The idea that religious differences are somehow preventing the formation of a
coalition of men of good will is silly. When the Socialists choose to focus on
Voltaire’s anticlericalism to the exclusion of everything else, they are simply being
frivolous. And when M. Mauriac scolds them for it, he loses patience too
quickly.
The problem that needs to be resolved is so important that all of us need to
work at it. With the future of so many at stake, it is inconceivable that our efforts
should founder on disputes about such an intimate matter as religion.
The real obstacle lies elsewhere. To begin with, it seems likely that not everyone is using the word “socialism” in the same way. What is clear is that everyone
has a more or less confused intuition of the urgent need for social justice.
Progress toward that end has already been considerable.
It is not yet enough, however. We need to clarify the political situation, which
is at once so encouraging and so disquieting.

279 Editorial. Typescript.
280 As Camus had done in November, Mauriac wrote quite favorably about the Congress of the Socialist
Party (“Le bilan de quatre-vingts jours,” November 12). On November 16, he published an unusually
long article on “Socialists and Christians,” in which he expressed his hope that the two might join forces,

with Christians giving up their opposition to secular education and freedom of teaching and socialists

moving beyond their anticlericalism. On November 22, in a postscript to an article on “Criminal Cash”
(the gist of which Camus would not have disavowed), Mauriac took exception to a sentence in Le Populaire, which hailed Voltaire as “the destroyer of primitive superstitions perpetuated in these climes by the
Christian religion,” and acknowledged that “I feel my socialist faith flagging in the face of this Himalayan
peak.”
*81 Jean-Daniel Jurgensen was one of the regular editorial writers for France Soir (Défense de la France). On
November 14, under the title “Entente Cordiale,” he published an article in which he pointed out “how
much closer England and France had become as both evolve toward socialism.” He discussed the British
Labor Party and hoped that France would take England as its model.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

121

Our view is that it is possible to distinguish at least two kinds of socialism in
the political philosophies that are currently seeking expression: a traditional
Marxist socialism, represented by the old parties, and a liberal socialism, generous in spirit but not clearly formulated, which is reflected in the movements and
personalities that have come out of the resistance.
The latter form of socialism, insofar as one can make out its content, tends to
invoke a French collectivist tradition that has always made room for individual
freedom and that owes nothing to philosophical materialism.”** This is in fact
what appears to prevent it from merging with the older socialist formations at
the present time.
What we are witnessing, then, is a confrontation of two socialisms, and the
problem of the moment comes down to figuring out whether this confrontation
will result in a compromise doctrine and a broad coalition or simply force resistance socialism to clarify its program and find a novel form of expression. In our
view, France has something to gain from this confrontation. But it seems that
most people today want to move a little too quickly. Rather than seek quick
unity, it would be better if people in both camps tried to clarify what it is they
want to unite. Socialism is not a fashion; it is a commitment. Hence it is desirable that each of us try to understand what he is committing himself to. You can’t
be socialist in principle but conservative in finance, for example. Socialism is a
permanent engagement on all issues.
If everyone who is sincerely seeking the formula that best sums up his or her
aspirations were to ponder this matter carefully, a French socialism fueled by
freedom’s energy and uncompromising on matters of justice might at last emerge
for the good of the country. It must be said, however, that there will be nothing
new in this development, which will merely give historical reality to ideas already
adumbrated by one Jules Guesde.”*”
November 24, 19447°4
The more one thinks about it, the more convinced one becomes that some sort
of socialist doctrine is beginning to take hold in a broad segment of the public.

We briefly touched on this subject yesterday.” The subject is important enough,
282 Isn’t this what would decades later be called “socialism with a human face”? Camus’ analysis is remark-

ably lucid, a rarity for the period.
283 Jules Guesde (1845-1922), was a republican journalist who went into exile to escape imprisonment
for supporting the Commune. Tempted by anarchy, he became an active participant in the creation of the
Workers Party, which later became the Socialist Party of France and then the Section Francaise de I’Internationale Ouvriére, or S.EI.O. He played an important role in making Marxism known in France and
wrote many texts on collectivist themes. As a rival to Jaurés, he is seen as the leader of the revolutionary

socialists, and, since his vision of socialism was essentially theoretical, he was regarded, rightly or wrongly,
as the embodiment of socialist values in their purest form.
284 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actuelles in the chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
285 This editorial expands on the topic broached the day before.

122

CHAPTER

2

however, to warrant exploring it in greater detail. For in the end, nothing in all
this is very new. Hostile critics might well express astonishment at the fact that
the men of the resistance, and many other Frenchmen along with them, went to
such lengths to arrive at this point.
But first let us say that it is not absolutely necessary for political doctrines to
be new. Politics has nothing in common with genius (action is something else).

Human affairs are complicated in detail but simple in principle.
Social justice can easily be achieved without an ingenious philosophy. It
requires only a few commonsensical truths and such simple qualities as foresight,
energy, and unselfishness. In such matters, to seek to innovate at any price is to
work toward the year 2000, whereas we in France need to put our affairs in order
immediately, tomorrow if possible.
Second, it is not novelty that makes political doctrines effective but rather the
energy they embody and the sacrifices they inspire. It is hard to know whether
the theoretical socialism of the Third Republic moved its adherents deeply, but
today many yearn for a socialist politics because it gives their burning desire for
justice a concrete form.
Finally, some may be tempted to believe that socialism won't accomplish
much because their idea of socialism is a rather limited one. There is a certain
form of socialist doctrine that we detest, perhaps even more than we detest the
politics of tyranny. It is a doctrine that rests on optimism and invokes the love
of humanity to exempt itself from serving human beings, the inevitability of
progress to evade the question of wages, and universal peace to avoid necessary
sacrifice. This kind of socialism relies mainly on the sacrifices of others. Those
who preach it never commit themselves. In short, it is afraid of everything, especially revolution.
We have seen it before, and if all socialism meant was a return to that socialism, it is true that it wouldn't amount to much. But there is another kind of
socialism, a socialism that is determined to pay the necessary price. It is a socialism that rejects both falsehood and weakness. It does not waste its breath with
talk of progress, yet it is convinced that man’s fate is always in man’s hands.
It does not believe in absolute and infallible doctrines but in obstinate and
tireless if inevitably halting improvement of the human condition.?®° It holds
that justice is well worth a revolution. And if revolution is more difficult for it
than for some other doctrines because it does not hold man in contempt, it is

also more likely to demand only useful sacrifices. Can such an attitude of heart
and mind be translated into reality? That is a question to which we shall return.
Today we want to clear up certain ambiguities. It is obvious that the socialism
of the Third Republic did not meet the standards we have just set forth. Today
it has an opportunity to reform itself. We hope it avails itself of that opportunity.
But we also hope that the men of the resistance and those who agree with them
continue to insist on those standards. Because if traditional socialism wants to

286 This is one of the major ideas of The Rebel.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

123

reform itself, it can do so only by reaching out to the new men who are beginning to appreciate the new socialist doctrine. It will need to embrace that new
doctrine itself, and embrace it wholeheartedly. We now know that there can be
no socialism without a full and faithful commitment of one’s entire being.
Indeed, that is precisely what is new.

November 25, 1944°°”
Yes, our armies are on the Rhine, Strasbourg is taken, and Alsace is nearly
liberated.*** We are well aware that this is what needs to be discussed today. But
what words can describe a victory awaited for four years, anticipated in interminable silence, and heralded at last by the cannons’ stentorian voice? How can
we weigh our words properly when we speak of this moment, in which we cannot entirely rejoice, because it is a moment of joy only for the living and could
not have come to pass without the sacrifice of so many?
Yes, we are looking at victory. Can anyone appreciate what this means for a
generation that has never known anything but defeat? Now we must acknowledge, measure, and evaluate an overwhelming event that goes by a very different
name: “victory.” Of course some will say that this is the victory of equipment, of
strategy, or of time. Forgive us for saying so, but none of these things has any
very urgent meaning for us right now. What we see in all these banners, victorious communiqués, and outstretched hands is but one thing: the triumph of a

people.”*?
That alone has meaning for us. For the spirit that drove the young French
army to drive on past its assigned objective is the same spirit that made a success
of the Paris uprising, which the sages had declared in advanced to be doomed. It
is the same spirit that inspired a nation to refuse to give up, even in its most
hopeless hour.
That, at least, we can be happy about. We have many reasons to be bitter or

discouraged. It is not always easy to accomplish anything with human beings.
They are not always agreeable or easy to tive with. But a nation at war, a community in battle, our comrades determined to win because they know they are
right—these will justify our existence. Whatever the future may hold, there are
hours we will never forget.
By the same token, however, we must acknowledge that every victory wears a
somber face. Because it paves the way for other victories and because it must be
deserved, of course, but above all because no nation has ever won a victory without shedding the blood of its people. And because it took a long line of bodies
287 Editorial. Typescript.
288 Leclerc’s Second Armored Division entered Strasbourg during the night of November 23.
289 Camus has recovered the tone of his first editorials from the month of August, but the gravity—
and profundity—of his reflection is somewhat at odds with the shouts of victory that filled much of the
press.

124

CHAPTER

2

riddled with bullets in prison yards and along the walls of France and the roads
of Alsace before a cry of freedom hurled in the face of a German firing squad
somewhere in central France in 1940 could make itself heard today in a Strasbourg
draped with fresh new banners.
Yes, we must recognize that victory is not a happy word.
It is a word like all human words, which takes its meaning from sorrow as well
as joy. That is our reason for welcoming it today with both the gratitude of hearts
too long deprived of pride and the silence we owe to those who, from June 1940
to November 1944, justified the efforts of all who struggled to hold out for
so long.

November 26, 1944°”

This is what we have come to: Belgian blood has been shed in Brussels, even
though the city has been liberated.””’ It took no particular acumen on our part
to predict in our article on the Belgian crisis that the agreement, in place for only
a short time, could not be anything but temporary.””” It was reached under threat
of allied intervention, and lasting agreements can come only of freedom, not of
duress.
In any event, the arrangement worked out between the Pierlot government
and the party of the resistance could have been followed up with mutual concessions. This would have allowed Belgium to wait until allied strategy had
evolved to a less crucial phase. The country’s political problems could then have
been discussed in a climate of freedom, without which debate inevitably becomes
strained.
At the present time there is no practical way of getting at the truth beyond the
government’ official statements. Yet even those statements reveal the Pierlot government’s singular obstinacy in sticking to a policy based on force, which it is
difficult not to regret.
Indeed, the official statements tell us that the Belgian resistance has already
made significant concessions. The Socialists were unwilling to abandon M. Pierlot,

the three ministers who submitted their resignations signed an agreement with
General Erskine, and the various resistance movements urged their members to
turn in their weapons.
In return, the government authorized demonstrations within a limited
perimeter. At the same time, however—and still according to official statements—
the Minister of War was granted dictatorial powers. He had the right to ban any

290 Editorial. Typescript.
2°! On the same day Combat reported: “Bloody incidents in Brussels between police and demonstrators.
Thirty-six wounded, some seriously.” The demonstration was organized by the Independence Front, one

of the most important resistance groups. It was authorized, but the demonstrators entered the ministerial

zone, from which they had been prohibited.
292 See the article of November 19, p. 115.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

125

meeting, to censor or seize private correspondence, to impose administrative
internment, and, finally, to censor any printed material deemed likely to damage

the nation’s morale.
These powers, owing to their broad scope and to the very terms in which
they are expressed, recall realities still fresh enough in our minds that we can
easily imagine the effect they must have had on the people of Belgium. Try to
imagine a political situation in which M. Diethelm’ suddenly found himself
authorized to ban our meetings and open our mail and the press was prohibited
from voicing any opposition. People who have just emerged from four years of
struggle against tyranny might well lose their equanimity on finding themselves
governed in such a tyrannical way by the government of their choice. If the forces
of freedom are shooting at you, you begin to think you might have been better

off facing the forces of tyranny, because then, at least, there is no mystery
about why they are shooting at you. The actions of the Belgian demonstrators
are even easier to understand when we recognize that, for strategic reasons
they cannot fail to understand, they are condemned to silence, which leaves
them seething with rage, as though a lid had been clamped down on a boiling

cauldron.
Now the lid has been blown off. The police and the people have clashed. This
distressing situation is more than regrettable. And all the noble minds will of
course say that the people should have remained calm. Yet without resorting to
polemic and without invoking arguments that will have weighed upon the heart
of anyone who fought in the resistance at the announcement of today’s news, it

is nevertheless possible to think logically about what has happened.
What has happened is regrettable, yet we must grant that politics cannot be
conducted with the idea that people should behave like saints. For the Belgian
people to have chosen discipline and enforced silence, they would all have had
to be stoic saints and heroes. Governing consists in putting people in a position
where discipline does not seem beyond their capability. In this respect, the Belgian experience can serve as an example to any democratic government that forbids itself on principle to rely exclusively on force and must therefore limit itself
to firmness guided by a just idea of man.
On this view of the matter, it seems difficult to say that M. Pierlot governed.
Many of our comrades from the resistance will write that his policy was
simply criminal, and it would admittedly take some effort to prove them wrong.
But to keep our words measured, it will suffice to say that a policy condemns
itself when, by dint of blindness and stubbornness, its result is to force a nation
to resort to solutions that could not be more incompatible with its own
interests.?"4

293 André Diethelm, a military official in Algiers, was minister of war in the French Provisional
Government.

294 In December, Paul Bodin, Combats special correspondent in Brussels, reported that political agitation
had ended but dissatisfaction remained, and Pierlot declared that he intended to remain in power since
no one else wanted the job. He was forced to resign in February 1945.

126

CHAPTER

2

November 28, 1944°”°
We get word from many quarters that many Algerian soldiers”® have been made
uneasy by the ignorance and incomprehension with which they have been
greeted in the metropolis. Much of the misunderstanding apparently stems from
the fact that the French think they are dealing with a professional army, and
some go so far as to call the troops “mercenaries.”
Things therefore need to be clarified, and memories refreshed. The army
recruited in North Africa by the provisional government naturally includes some
professional troops. They have proved their worth, and it would seem only fitting to give them their due.
But the vast majority of this army consists of reserve units that, after being
mobilized, fought their way from Italy to Tunisia, Corsica, and the south of
France and have now reached the Vosges.
The fate of these North Africans, whether they be French or Muslim, is of
concern to all of us. Through two wars, these North African troops, fighting
thousands of miles from home, have played a most important role in our shared
battles.””” Algeria, moreover, has always had a proper appreciation of what
France owes it in this regard.
The people of the mother country would do well to keep this in mind. The
soldiers they encounter in the Vosges are mostly civilians, who left their homes
and families to defend a cause they have defended regularly. That should be
enough for France to give them the welcome they deserve in full awareness of
what they have done and are still doing.
No militant of the Resistance would think of slighting these men, because the
Resistance today knows the meaning of courage and sacrifice. It knows how to
recognize those qualities wherever it finds them. And we can attest that if there
is one place they have always existed, it is the army of Africa, whose true face
every Frenchman should know.

November 29, 1944778

Only just liberated, Europe is in turmoil. Belgium, Italy, Poland, and even, to a
lesser extent, Greece” find themselves today facing problems that seem beyond
their ability to deal with alone. And even if they could deal with them alone, they
would not be allowed to. The domestic policies of these governments have so

295 Editorial. Most likely by Camus.
296 Note that the phrase “Algerian soldiers” includes both “French and Muslims,” as Camus makes clear
later in the article.
97 See the article of May 13-14, 1945, “Crisis in Algeria,” p. 198, in which Camus points out that “hundreds of thousands of Arabs have just spent two years fighting to liberate our territory.”
298 Editorial. Typescript.
2 The Greek situation would quickly become critical. See the editorial of December 9, 1944, p- 135.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

127

much influence on the conduct of the war that the belligerent powers cannot fail
to take an interest in them.
Why close our eyes? The English high command is planning to take action
against the resistance in Belgium.**° England has laid down conditions for the
formation of a new government in Italy.*°' Russia and Great Britain are inter-

vening in the affairs of Poland, which the United States has abandoned to its
fate.*°* Let us therefore say openly that these nations are not yet sovereign,
though we should add that this state of affairs is temporary. Their servitude is
legitimated by the state of war, but it would serve no purpose to call it anything
but servitude.
When we look at the problem in this cruel light, we are better prepared to
learn from it. For in the end, all the European crises are similar. When the old
governing class regains power, it fails to adapt its policies to popular aspirations
born of misery and oppression, but the old governing class enjoys the support of
the Allied command. To put it succinctly, what we are witnessing in other countries is a latent conflict between the European resistance and the armies of liberation. That might seem a dreadful thing to write, but it is the truth.
Who, then, is right, and who is wrong? It is certainly possible to say that the
resistance has been in too much of a hurry, that war has its laws, and that the war

must be ended before undertaking a vast program of reforms. This is true. But
the problems raised by the liberation of each country cannot wait, and it is those
problems that are aggravating the conflict.
People need to eat right away, and the world needs justice now. The dilemma
for France and for all of Europe is to be obliged to wage a war and make a revolution at the same time.°
The whole problem is to achieve success at the lowest possible cost. Those
charged with running the world must never forget that this war is not a war of
conquest or glory.
It is a European convulsion, which raises as many social problems as strategic
ones. Anyone who wants freedom also demands justice. During the four years in
which freedom was the sole bread of starving peoples, their craving for justice
grew apace. Europe has exhausted its reserves of patience.
Europe must therefore be treated for what it is; its exhaustion and irritability
must be taken into account. And the surest way to increase its impatience is to
force down its throat men and methods it no longer wants any part of. Peacetime physicians cannot heal wartime ills. Victory is the primary goal but not the
only one. And victory without justice would strike all these nations as a vast joke.

300 See editorials of November 19 and 26, pp. 115 and 124.
301 The Allies opposed the appointment of Count Sforza as Italian foreign minister.
302 With the backing of the Soviet Union, the Lublin Committee had been established as a form of government in Poland, ignoring the existence of the Polish government in exile in London. See the editorial
of January 3, 1945, p. 162.
303 Starting with the very first articles he wrote in August 1944, Camus touched repeatedly on this key
notion.

128

CHAPTER

2

It is perhaps comforting to think that France has thus far avoided these pointless difficulties. But it would be dangerous for us to lull ourselves to sleep. France
is sovereign because it is fighting. Other nations speak to her as an equal because
Frenchmen are dying every day to win unmistakable victories. This is what
allows us to solve our problems as we see fit. Yet those problems are still not
solved, social justice remains to be achieved, and we can look forward to future

disappointments if we do not draw the appropriate lessons from the crises that
are tearing other countries apart.
The European resistance is expressing—at times ineptly to be sure—the hopes
and demands of the peoples of Europe. Today those demands are being turned
aside for reasons of military strategy. Since we are not subject to the same servitude as other nations, however, let us try to demonstrate, at least, that our
demands are not opposed for any reasons other than strategic ones. The privilege
we have won imposes an important duty on us, which is to give shape to the
hopes of all these impatient peoples and in so doing to set an example.

November 30, 1944°
The ministry of information is preparing a decree that will reduce the print runs
of Paris newspapers by 25 percent.
The threat of such a cut has been hanging over us for months now. And for
months the Press Federation has been presenting the minister with evidence that
his decision is unfounded. Shortages of pulp, coal, and transportation have all
been invoked as grounds at one time or another. The Federation pointed out to
the minister that there is pulp in Rouen, that mines in the north of France were
holding coal in reserve for us, and that the national railroad (S.N.C.E) has said

that it had the means to transport that coal. Now we are told that there is a production shortfall of a thousand metric tons per month, though no mention was
made of the five thousand tons purchased in Switzerland by M. Mendes
France®*” in a clearing agreement.
At the same time, authorization to publish has been granted to some newspapers, and it has been announced that Le Zémps is to return with a new name and

304 Editorial. Very likely by Camus. The next day’s editorial, which is a typescript, directly continues this one.
305 Pierre Mendeés France (1907-1982) was a Radical-Socialist deputy from the Eure who served as a secretary of state in the second Blum government in 1938. In June 1940 he was one of the French lawmakers who attempted to escape to Morocco on the Massilia. Treated as a deserter by the government of Vichy,

he was arrested but escaped and joined Free France in London in 1942, where he served as an aviation
officer. General de Gaulle appointed him commissioner of finance under the French Committee of
National Liberation and minister of finance under the Provisional Government in Algiers. In Paris he
became minister of national economy in September 1944, When his financial austerity plan was rejected
in January 1945, he resigned. When Camus resumed his work as a journalist with L’Express in 1955, it

was to support Mendes France's return to power in the hope that he might resolve the Algeria problem as
he had negotiated peace in Indochina and Tunisian independence when he was premier from June 1954
to February 1955. See Albert Camus éditorialiste a LExpress (mai 1955—février 1956), op. cit.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

129

mysterious sources of financing.°°° Meanwhile, the government has proved
incapable of regulating the provincial press. In Nice, the daily papers have ceased
to publish for lack of paper, while in Toulouse no limits are imposed on press runs.
Our readers know that Combat has taken a moderate line in regard to the
problems of the press. We have never competed for market share or cited our circulation figures to demand what the authorities did not wish to give us. We have
disciplined ourselves to work within the imposed limits. But the cuts announced
today threaten our very existence. And our moderation in the past entitles us to
raise our voices today and call a spade a spade.*””
Whether intentionally or not, such a measure amounts to depriving the resistance of its organs of expression. It can only have been recommended by interests
hostile to the resistance and its desire for reform. This we will not tolerate.
Some whose judgment we respect will say that we are merely defending the
interests of a faction. That is true. But we believe that that faction’s interests are
those of the country as a whole. A threat has been hanging over us for months, to
be sure, but we are not alone. In France as throughout liberated Europe, the offen-

sive against the resistance has begun. But that offensiveis also an offensive of the
forces of reaction against the people’s will to reform. The men of the resistance have
the bad taste not to want to be like those who fought in other wars, who returned
home too tired to protect what they had defended. The resistance has committed
the offense of ignoring its fatigue and taking an interest in a country from which
some would prefer that it avert its eyes. That is why it is being attacked.
That is also why it will defend itself. We do not always agree with all of our
colleagues, but on this point our solidarity is total.

To those who object that we are clinging to positions we have acquired, we
will not take the trouble to correct them with the truth, which is that we would
gladly give up those much-coveted positions to cultivate our own gardens. We
do not speak the same language as our critics. Yes, we are defending the positions
of the resistance, and we will do what we must to hold on to our means of expres-

sion until the people of this country have a chance to make their wishes known.
Our fight did not end on liberation day. It continues,** and no one—not the
forces of reaction, the moneyed interests, or the bureaucrats—will prevent us
from having our say. Only the people of France, expressing themselves freely on
election day, can tell us whether the time has come for us to keep silent. Meanwhile, we will indeed hold our positions, because that is the only way we can
make sure that the lessons of the defeat and the victory are not betrayed, dis-

torted, or falsified by interests we hold in contempt and seek to destroy.
If the Ministry of Information wants to break off relations with the press, it is

sure to succeed. As we have said many times, the resistance never claimed to have
exclusive rights. It’s time to stop exaggerating. And we are getting tired of all the
attacks on men who recognize no judges other than the people of France.
306 This would become Le Monde, the first issue of which appeared on December 19, 1944.
307 Cf. editorial of November 11 and n. 248, p. 111.
308 Cf. Camus’ first editorial, p. 11.

130

CHAPTER

2

The resistance has given every possible proof of its patience, discipline, and
moderation. It cannot go any further, however, without denying all that is purest
in it. There are principles we will not allow to be tampered with. And when it
becomes necessary, we will prove that objectivity is not incompatible with energy.
December 1, 1944°”

The problem of the press, which we touched on yesterday, is only one aspect of
the offensive against the resistance, which is something we cannot ignore. This

offensive is less obvious here than it is elsewhere. But it is no less dangerous.
It is true that the men of the resistance are not saints, and that is fortunate,

because we want nothing to do with a nation of saints. The resistance is open to
criticism, and here, at least, we have always listened to such criticism with the

respect that it deserves. When necessary, we have contributed to it, because we
believed that the duties of the resistance outnumbered its rights and that it had
everything to lose by becoming a sect.
What is at issue today, however, is not criticism, nor is it that exercise of mutual
correction whereby the members of a community maintain a steady course to
progress. It is a battle that is being waged at all levels against men and ideas whom
some have come to regard as posing a threat to a certain concept of order.
To be sure, many Frenchmen knew nothing about the resistance, especially
those who did nothing for it. When insurrection came to Paris, it is no secret that
the calm that prevailed in the so-called wealthy neighborhoods was a calm of
both ignorance and indifference. People who don’t like the world to change
when everything is in their favor were briefly of the opinion that the resistance
was nothing more than a group of French patriots who had mobilized on their
own. This brought smiles to their lips.
And indeed, the resistance was that. But it became something more than that:
a force for renewal, which imagined a just France even as it was forging a free
France.*!° People who don’t like the world to change today feel that they were
deceived. For them, the liberation of France meant nothing more than a return
to traditional menus, automobiles, and Paris-Soir.*!! Let freedom come quickly

so that we can at last be mediocre and powerful in comfort!
But the resistance insists that we mustn't rest, that everything remains to be
done, and that the fight is still going on. It says that we must agree to be poor so

that the country can be rich and agree to do without so that a people can at last
get what it needs. But the resistance also calls itself socialist. That has been a
source of misunderstanding.
Because of that misunderstanding, there are those who want to make the
resistance pay. They want to rest,*'” they want to hold on to their privileges: the
309 Editorial. Typescript.
310 This text reiterates the main ideas of “From Resistance to Revolution,” August 21, p. 11.

311 On Paris-Soir, see the editorial of September 1, 1944, note 1, p. 23.
312 Cf. the editorial of October 29, which drew a contrast between the desire for rest and “the thirst for

honor,” p. 92.

AUGUST

———

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

131

offensive has begun. We therefore have no choice but to fight. In fact, this
challenge comes at the right time. We were beginning to get tired of the constant
attacks on what some called “a faction,” forgetting what the country owes that
faction.
The resistance was beginning to get tired of hearing that it was doing too
much one day and not enough the next and that it was a monolithic party yet
crippled by divisions. It took all this criticism in good part, however, with a laud-

able desire for objectivity and youthful diffidence.
It was prepared to pardon mediocrity and self-interest, provided only that the
mediocre refrain from being aggressive and the self-interested recognize that it is
sometimes in their interest to keep silent and compromise when necessary. Little was required: we are not as eager to destroy as is rumored in certain quarters.
On the contrary. When you passionately seek unity, you have to resign yourself
to doing something for the mediocre and greedy, since everyone knows how
many of them there are. But if the greedy are blind enough and stubborn enough
to start a fight and stupidly try to stop what can’t be stopped, then they will have
to be crushed. We say that not as a matter of right but as a matter of duty, a duty
that has not ended.
This is what the resistance is beginning to understand. And maybe it is a good
thing that their adversaries have helped them to do so. Men who were passionate
about freedom and justice for four years have now been reminded that while giving thanks, they mustn't forget the revolution that has yet to be made. A head of
state who knew a revolutionary situation when he saw one had this to say after
scoring a great political success: “First, never sing of victory. Second, liquidate the
enemy, because he is only beaten, not exterminated. Third, never glorify yourself
until you've reached your goal, and when you do, it becomes unnecessary.”
We know now that the enemy must be exterminated, and we want to reach
that goal where victory needs no song to celebrate it.

December 3, 1944°!°

General de Gaulle has had talks with Marshal Stalin.?!* The press has been unanimous: the Russian alliance is vital for France, because it makes possible a solution of the German problem.*” All the commentators also approved the French

313 Editorial. Typescript.
314 Stalin (1879-1953) had been the uncontested head of the Communist Party and absolute master of

the USSR since 1929, following the death of Lenin and the elimination of Trotsky. Despite the GermanSoviet nonaggression pact (August 23, 1939), Hitler attacked the USSR in June 1941. Initial German vic-

tories ensued, followed by a long siege of Stalingrad (September 1942—February 1943), after which the
USSR won back the territory it had lost, and Stalin, whom Churchill and Roosevelt recognized as an
indispensable ally, participated in all the conferences concerning the postwar settlement.
315 The talks between de Gaulle and Stalin took place in Moscow between December 2 and December 6,

1944. Accords were signed by the ministers of foreign affairs of the two countries on December 10. See
Camus’ comments in his editorial of December 18, p. 145.

132

CHAPTER

2

foreign minister’s statement of opposition to the idea of a western bloc standing
in opposition to an eastern bloc.*'°
Some commentators even went so far as to say that France might serve as a
bridge between the USSR and the western democracies. But the Soviet press contradicted them, stating that the USSR needed no bridge to Great Britain and was
mature enough to maintain on its own any contacts it deemed necessary. From
this minor difference of opinion we conclude only that commentators must
weigh their words carefully, especially when it is good will and enthusiasm that

prompt them to write.
That aside, the situation is unambiguous. France has its own reasons for wanting the Russian alliance, since it has its own reasons for wanting Germany to be
watched on two borders. There are also more general reasons for rejecting a policy of blocs in favor of a policy of European entente that seeks to reduce national
rivalries as much as possible.
Despite all this, the Moscow talks do not seem likely to yield substantial surprises. General de Gaulle will express France’s desire to achieve a full and lasting
entente with the Soviet Union. If he returns home with elements of our future
foreign policy, which will be based on a double and perpendicular alliance with
the USSR and the western states, he will have solved a huge problem and thus
met our immediate needs. We will all be able to rejoice in this.
May we say, however, that we are hoping for more? We hope that beyond these
immediate successes, France will achieve other, more significant advances with
broader implications for the future. We reject the policy of blocs because we
repudiate the politics of balancing, of complicated interactions of alliances and
interests, which have never led Europe anywhere but into war. Given this attitude, it would be logical to talk to Moscow not about a European federation,

which will take time, but, more modestly, about the international aspect of the
European problem.
Politics is impossible today without economics, and there is not a single economic problem at the moment that isn’t international. In production as well as
consumption all the countries of Europe depend heavily on one another. We
know today that we are joined together in life as in death. We know that a neighboring people’s hunger is a threat to us, and excessive economic power may be as
well. An international economy cannot be dealt with by means of exclusively
national policies.
Although such national policies are inevitable as things stand today, future
European arrangements must reflect our newfound interdependence and
solidarity.
To take a concrete example, if, not only in Moscow but in all the conferences
at which the fate of Europe is being decided, it were possible to broach and then
clarify the issue of raw materials, leading ultimately to an agreement on the need
to internationalize them, it would mark a huge step toward world peace. Once

316 The French foreign minister at the time was Georges Bidault.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

133

the basis of an economic federation has been established in Europe, political federation will become possible.°'”
Of course these problems will not be resolved in a few hours of talks. But if
France and the USSR could be the first to utter the words that alert minds in
Europe have been waiting for so many years to hear, we would regard it as
grounds for pride and confidence.

December 5, 1944°'°

There is a sort of tacit agreement between M. Mauriac and us: we provide each
other with subjects for editorials. This may have something to do with the fact
that what he is doing is similar to what we are doing, while our temperaments
are surely different. In this, of course, we see nothing but advantages. Free debate
allows us to correct and clarify positions all too often expressed in haste. We can
all profit from this.
The question is whether exchanges of this kind are of interest to readers. Some
well-meaning people have told us in no uncertain terms that the answer is no. At
times we have doubts ourselves. Today, M. Mauriac’ article in Sunday's Figaro’””
has drawn a considerable volume of mail concerning the Resistance. We must
therefore explain our position.
M. Mauriac reproaches us for saying that an offensive against the Resistance
is under way as well as for contending that the measures taken by two of our
ministers are part of that offensive. In his view, we shouldn't be criticizing ministers drawn from the ranks of the Resistance. In contrast, we believe that we
should. Indeed, the point is precisely that we are offering criticisms and not, as
M. Mauriac maintains, making accusations.
Trust us: we will never stoop to allusions. If we ever conclude that M. Teitgen** 0
and M. Lacoste*”’ have become so intoxicated with power that they have turned
their backs on their Resistance comrades, we will spell it out for everyone to see.
We did not write that because we do not believe it. M. Mauriac should therefore
refrain from putting words in our mouth.

317 One cannot fail to be impressed by the lucidity of this remark, which remains current even today.
318 Editorial. Very likely by Camus, continuing the exchange with Frangois Mauriac.
319 In Le Figaro of December 3-4, Mauriac published an article under the title “The Vocation of the Resistance.” In it he cited “the editorial writer for Combat’ who saw the measures taken by the ministry of
information as “an aspect of the offensive against the Resistance,” a phrase taken from Camus's editorial
of December 1. Mauriac defended Teitgen and Lacoste by name, pointing out their recent past as resistance fighters, and he called upon the Resistance to trust statesmen recruited from their ranks.
320 To this point, the decisions taken by Pierre-Henri Teitgen as minister of information had been treated

quite positively by Camus and Combat. See the editorial of October 29, p. 92.
321 Robert Lacoste was minister of production. A resister and member of the SFIO and Administrative
Committee of the CGT, he would pursue a career in politics and serve as a member of several socialist
governments, including that of Guy Mollet in 1956, in which he served as resident minister for Algeria

from 1956 to 1958.

134

CHAPTER

2

Nevertheless, it is still possible for ministers drawn from the Resistance to take
measures that hamper the rebuilding effort that the Resistance has undertaken.
M. Mauriac cannot be unaware that the ministries are still burdened with men
whose only connection with the Republic is the posts they fill. These are the men
whose way is blocked by the Resistance and its press. After weighing things carefully, we decided to denounce this state of affairs.
In any case, MM. Teitgen and Lacoste will not be frightened of rude language.
They've heard it before. The knowledge that these harsh words are spoken by
their own comrades may give them food for thought, however. A minister cannot be everywhere. He cannot imagine or keep an eye on everything that happens on his watch, and sometimes he may simply sign a document that is laid
before him. So someone had better tell him what he ought not to sign. Comradeship in the Resistance was not a matter of mutual admiration. It had more
to do with what M. Mauriac himself has well described as “lucid love.” And it
speaks the language of lucid love, which is the language of truth.
It is important, though, to note that the question is actually far broader than
that. Simply put, the difference between us and M. Mauriac is that he believes
the government has done enough in domestic policy and we do not.
We would simply remind our contradictor that in domestic politics, in certain
circumstances, not doing enough leaves you vulnerable to the possibility that
someday someone else might do far too much. That is our reasoning. To put it
bluntly, if France, thanks to an energetic and farsighted policy, can avoid a Commune, M. Mauriac would agree with us that such a policy will have been for the
good.
If he were to consider the current crises in Europe, and if he were to think
about Greece,” he would recognize the threat we are attacking. Let him ponder
this stark fact: yesterday, resistance fighters were shot in Athens for having
protested against the government established by the Liberation. It was not to
meet such a revolting end that they sacrificed everything, and for so long. How
much more enviable the fate of their comrades killed during the occupation
must have seemed to them, for they, at least, did not die by the hands of their
friends.
We hope that M. Mauriac understands us better now. When we take up the
defense of the men of the Resistance, he would be wrong to think, as some of
our correspondents do, that we do so out of an exaggerated idea of their merits
and rights. There is Resistance and Resistance. We know that today anyone can
avail himself of the fact that the Resistance was clandestine to claim an impressive title and chase after a job. And we know that those in the best positions are
not always the most deserving. But that’s the way the world is, and mediocrity
must be given its due. It is true, moreover, that not all resisters were heroes or
saints. Is that a reason to condemn everything they did or to exaggerate their
flaws and mistakes?

322 Camus would return to events in Greece in his editorial of December 9, pelso:

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

135

We know that M. Mauriac will not think so. That is why we are defending the
Resistance not for what it did, which was natural, but for what it wants to do,
which strikes us as just and good. That is what we want to preserve, because that
is what will protect France from the worst misadventures. That is what makes us
so bold as to criticize. What are a few harsh words if someday they prevent precious and innocent blood from being shed? The youthful face of France, of which
M. Mauriac spoke with so much proper emotion, is one that we, too, know well:
let there be no doubt of that. Indeed, it is to keep France from sinking into chaos
and to protect it from wounds that cannot be healed that we call now for the
intelligent severity that will make it worthy of respect for a long time to come.

December 9, 1944°”°

Yesterday, before the House of Commons, Mr. Churchill expounded his views
on Greece.*** His questioners pointed out that the British intervention was not
justified either on strategic grounds or by concerns for constitutional legality.
British army supply lines do not in fact pass through Athens, and the Papaandreou [sic]*” government was not elected in a regular election.

Mr. Churchill answered these objections by categorically affirming certain principles. He said that the right to represent democracy could not be granted to “gangs
armed with lethal weapons who invade large cities and claim to lay down the law.”
He deplored the underground’s assertion of its intention to govern the country.
His speech was vigorous and unambiguous. To put it in context, one should
point out that it was in large part intended for American officials who have indicated their hostility to Britain’s interventionist policy in Europe. Nevertheless,
the principles affirmed by Mr. Churchill are applicable to all of Europe. We must
examine them carefully.
Let us begin by saying that it is not without hesitation that we state our
disagreement with a man who, for four years, was able to find the words that mil-

lions of oppressed people were waiting to hear. But the future of Europe is at
stake, and tomorrow’s history will depend on the principles adopted by the democratic countries today.

323 Editorial. Typescript.
324 After the evacuation of German forces from Greece (following the Russian offensive in Romania), the

left wing of the resistance, organized in a national front under Communist leadership, opposed the Greek
government back from exile and refused to lay down their arms. After declaring a general strike in Athens,
they engaged in a battle with British forces that landed in Piraeus on October 14 to support the repressive measures taken by the authorities. From December 5 to December 10 Combat carried lengthy reports
on events in Greece.
325 George Papandreou (1888-1968) was the founder of the Greek Social Democratic Party. Exiled by the

dictator Metaxas in 1938, he formed a government in exile in Cairon in May 1944. In October, in liberated Athens, he became prime minister in a national unity government. His decision to disarm the forces
of the Resistance led to a veritable civil war. He participated in a number of subsequent governments, until
he was forced to resign in the 1965 crisis that led eventually to the establishment of the “colonels’ junta.”

136

CHAPTER

2

If Mr. Churchill’s account of the state of affairs were accurate, much of his
argument would be persuasive, but we doubt that reality is as he formulates it.
He spoke in the name of a functioning democracy, a country without unrest or
conflict, in a world without immediate problems. For the first time, perhaps, he
did not speak for a continent devastated by four years of hunger and hatred and
bearing wounds that can only be touched with great care.
To be sure, the men of the underground have not won the right to do as they
please. Yet to tell them that they must wait at home for whatever reward the government deems wise to grant them is to give them a bitter pill to swallow. They
have no need of a reward; their only need is for justice, and that the state must
indeed give them. But it can do that only if it has a clear idea of what justice is.
British troops have fired on Greek citizens and killed men who only yesterday
were their friends.
Mr. Churchill declared that this will continue. Maybe there is something persuasive about such stubborn determination, but we would hope that the fate of
Europe could be decided in a less categorical fashion and that the whole issue
could be considered in a more prudent manner.
People talk of communism and popular rage. We have too little information
about the situation to debate its murkier aspects. But we know how easy it can
be in similar circumstances for people to call us terrorists or communists and
treat us accordingly. And, knowing this, we can imagine the situation of the
rebellious people of Greece more easily than Mr. Churchill can.
The nations of Europe want a social order that takes their past suffering into
account. Their demands are proportional to their miseries. The people of Greece
have suffered longer and more atrociously than most during the past four years.
The notion that they will be satisfied with the minister of a king imposed by two
dictators, and with measures aimed at disarming the resistance and maintaining
militias established by the Greek dictatorship is foolish.
But if that is difficult for some people to understand, there is also the importance that deserves to be attached to the demands of a people whose suffering
was rivaled only by its pride. All we are asking is that the matter not be treated
lightly and that the desperate cry that is being raised in Europe not be greeted
solely with disdain and bullets.
As for democracy, perhaps the time has come to discuss it in a suitable way.
Because the regime that rewarded a politician like Laval and gave power to a family like the Schneiders*”® is no more representative of democracy than the armed
bands of which Mr. Churchill speaks. In any case, the point is not to choose one
or the other. It is rather for those who govern the world today to adapt their
methods to the distress of their people.
Mr. Churchill has declared that he wanted to guarantee order before changing
the government in Greece. Mr. Cocks, who challenged him, suggested that
British troops should first be withdrawn from Athens and then a British minister

326 The Schneiders were a family of French industrialists, used here as a synonym for the power of money.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

137

sent out to meet with representatives of the parties. This difference of method
alone is instructive. We believe that true democracy means not allowing guns to
speak before the people. This order is not the right order, in every sense of the
word.

December 10, 1944°””
Yesterday, many newspapers rather too hastily announced the resignation of
General Franco.*?’ When it comes to the news, it is better not to substitute one’s

wishes for the facts. Last night, a Reuters dispatch authoritatively denied the
report. General Franco did not resign; he had gone hunting.
Nevertheless, the Phalangist regime on the peninsula is not on solid ground.
France cannot turn its back on this problem. We have already said that our hearts
and minds were on the side of the Spanish Republic.*”? Now that Spain is facing
a problem of government that international diplomacy cannot ignore, we would
like to add something to our arguments.
Many things in the Spanish situation recall our own. Tie big difference, however, is that Spain kept a constitutional government. The republican government
of France abdicated in 1940 in favor of Vichy and the German. It handed over
its powers and relinquished all its rights. By contrast, the Spanish Republic has
never ceased to exist in law. It was expelled by force, but for the democratically
minded, its legal existence has continued uninterrupted.
In theory, therefore, Spain should have no need of a revolution to form its
government. It exists. It is awaiting the moment when it may resume its activity.
Constitutionally, it would suffice for Sefior Martinez Barrio, president of the

Cortes, who is currently in Mexico, to return to Madrid and constitute the new
government in order for the Spanish Republic to become once again in fact what
it has never ceased to be in law.
If this war is indeed a war for democracy, the conclusion is obvious. We should
recognize only one Spanish government, decided by a regular vote of the people,
and this government should be the sole sovereign in peninsular affairs. If this war
is indeed a war for democracy, Franco never existed, and we should ignore him.
This is the principle we hereby lay down, and we intend to stand by it. We
wish that Mr. Churchill, who yesterday indicated his preference for regular governments, would also adopt this point of view. The day the Allies announce to
the world that the Spanish republican government is the only government that
represents Spain, a great malaise will be lifted, and the liberation of our neighbor will be halfway to becoming a reality.
327 Editorial. Typescript.
328 Camus had previously spoken out against the lack of vigilance in the reporting of the news. See his
editorials of September 1, p. 23, and November 15, p. 112.
329 Here again we see Camus’s interest in Spain and consistent support for the Republic, in his view the
only legitimate government. See his articles of September 7, October 5 and 24, and November 21, pp.
29, 59, 86, and 116.

CHAPTER

138

2

But we also need help from the Spanish Republicans. What they need to do
is to give substance to this legal government as soon as possible, so that the world
can recognize it. They can do so by convening the Cortes without delay and by
asking the Allies to respect and honor constitutional legality.
The Spanish Republic is not a work in progress. It exists. It survived defeat
because it had the dignity never to accept it. Now, by its own efforts and with
the help of its friends, it needs to claim the place it is due and bring the Spanish
people the justice and freedom they have never ceased to deserve.

December 13, 1944°°°

One reads almost everywhere that we are at war. This is a manner of speaking.
There are a hundred thousand Frenchmen fighting in the East; they are indeed
at war. And then there is the rest of the nation, which is waiting. It is waiting, in

fact, to go to war, and to finish it. It fully understands that there are no weapons.
But it knows that peacetime can be brought closer even by those who are not at
the front and that in modern war labor can help to avoid bloodshed.
Here, then, is a way of lining the rest of the nation up behind the troops at
the front and at last uniting France in a common fight. It would be enough if
France were producing again, if the factories were operating, and if the epic of
reconstruction were at last begun. But even a quick look at what is happening
makes us recoil in surprise and indignation.
Here are some facts. The glassworks of Courbevoie, Jéréme et Bonefoy, which
employs more than four hundred semiskilled workers and which can be put to
work on wartime electronics, is completely shut down. Although it has raw
materials, there is no gas, which the gas company is unwilling to supply because
the plant’s owners owe a substantial penalty for excess consumption. An important factory is thus neutralized because the gas company insists on collecting its
penalty, which the owners refuse to pay. Here, administrative obtuseness has
combined with private obstreperousness to the detriment of the general interest.
But that is not the worst of it. It has been announced that the coal mines of
the Nord will be nationalized.*’' The banks immediately dumped shares in these
mines, creating a situation in which trading in these shares on the Bourse had to
be halted.
What

is more,

the Ministry of Production

has sequestered

Francolor,

a

Franco-German consortium of chemical industries. The sequester administrator

330 Editorial. This is the first text signed with the initials A. C. (A typescript exists, as is the case for all the
texts signed with initials.) On December 8, Combat announced that it would publish editorials by different writers, who would sign their pieces. These include Henri Calet (H. C.) and Pierre Herbart (P. H.) in
addition to Camus (A. C.). These three writers continued to publish at irregular intervals until February
9, 1945, when Camus signed with his full name an editorial affirming the solidarity of the editorial board.

After that date, editorials once again became anonymous.
331 The order took effect on December 14.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

139

is unable to put the plant in operation, however, because the banks refuse to

extend credit—credit they did not deny during the Occupation. So two industries of fundamental importance to the French war effort are paralyzed because
capital is refusing to work with the nation in their exploitation.
Yet we will read again tomorrow that we are at war. No we aren't! For if we
were, the state would requisition the Courbevoie glassworks to make the electronic parts our army needs. If we were really at war, the special interests would
keep quiet and the banks would be held in check.
For that to happen, however, all the ministries must indeed go to war. When
the Ministry of Production requisitions and nationalizes, the Ministry of Finance

must not allow the banks to neutralize those measures. Everyone must feel
responsible for how long the war lasts and how many French lives are needlessly
sacrificed.
We would like to remain restrained and prudent. We are well aware that these
are useful qualities today. But what outrage one feels at the thought of the precious blood being spilled today in the East while people at home are calculating
what is in their own financial or political interest without worrying about what
their stupidity may yet cost us.
Waging war most definitely does not mean allowing Frenchman to die every
day because others suffer from a lack of imagination or a surfeit of greed! We
have neither the right nor the power to waste lives. Blindness and venality are
luxuries that we can no longer allow ourselves. There are interests that we must
destroy.
I> scarcely dare quote the terrible words of a soldier in one of our most
combat-tested units: “Here, at least, we are not immersed in lies.” I scarcely dare
quote him because it is impossible to accept that so much bitterness might be
justified. If the men who are fighting are enveloped in truth, that truth must be
extended voluntarily or involuntarily until it blankets the entire country, and
until it is no longer permissible for Frenchmen to die with the unbearable sense
that their deaths served no purpose.
fakes

December 14, 1944°*°

Two days ago, the Consultative Assembly*** opened debate on the constitution
of works committees.**? Although the subject is arid, the issue is of the utmost
importance. No one, for or against, can deny that a measure that involves

332 Camus allows himself to write “I,” which he does not do when the editorial is unsigned, with the

notable exception of his editorial of January 2, 1945, p. 159.
333 Editorial. Text signed A. C.

334 On the Consultative Assembly, see the editorials of October 14 and November 8, 1944, pp. 71
and 105.
335 The works committees (comités d'entreprise) represented the interests of labor in industrial firms.

140

CHAPTER

2

employees in the management of business is a reform whose repercussions are
potentially considerable. What the Assembly debated the day before yesterday
has significant implications for our social and political future.
We hoped that this would be obvious to everyone, and especially to our comrades in the Assembly. But an observer who tried to learn more about this difficult subject by sitting in the public gallery and carefully following the debate
came away with the impression that this was not the case. During the main portion of the debate, he noted the presence of only about 40 of the 225 delegates.
The rest were absent or wandering about the corridors.
Some will once again accuse us of asking for too much and of making a mountain out of a molehill. But in our current situation there are no molehills, or, to
put it another way, every issue requires us to move mountains. What is true of the
country at large is even more true of those who have taken charge of its politics.
To put it bluntly, when only a fifth of an assembly’s members bother to appear to
debate a matter of national interest, that assembly is failing in its mission.
The Consultative Assembly is a child of the resistance. It has performed great
services, and the work of its commissions is especially worthy of praise. We support it and believe that it serves a useful purpose. Its members have our sympathy and approval. Because they are our comrades, however, we cannot allow
them to follow the path of least resistance.
We know that long, dry debates are difficult to follow. But those debates deal
with our reality, a reality of rebirth tempered by heartbreak. No delegate is entitled to rest. The Consultative Assembly must not be an end; it is a beginning. It
is not a shelter in which those worn out by past efforts can seek rest or play at
being deputies; it is a place to engage in the only battle that matters to us today.
And that battle demands all our vigilance and all our energy.
The Republic we want needs ministers and deputies for whom holding a ministerial portfolio or a seat in the assembly is not the be-all and end-all. Rather,

each portfolio or mandate carries with it heavy responsibilities, which must be
fully embraced. And foremost among those responsibilities is being there when
the circumstances require it.
It seems that we are at war and that we are just beginning to make a revolution by legal means.**° Yet I doubt that we can ever accomplish our goals if we
have to stifle yawns the first time a dry subject comes up. I doubt that we can
ever shake off the dreadful senility that afflicts our bureaucracies and customs
unless each of us makes up his mind never to be tired.
We can do what we want to do. Our world will be tomorrow what we want
it to be today. But our will must be firm and steady. The battles of the Liberation are just a foretaste of the battles to come.**” We no longer have the right to
be bored or distracted if we want France to breathe freely and deeply in the
future.
336 This is of course one of Camus’ central ideas, but the words “it seems” signal the beginning of
disillusionment.
337 A reformulation of the notion that “the fight continues.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

141

If we seem alarmed, it is because we know that the resistance is this country’s
last chance. That chance will be lost if France rejects the resistance. We shall see
about that. But it will even more surely be lost if the resistance fails to recognize
that its duties today are sacred, that peace is not at hand, that we are still at war,
and that we are forbidden to indulge certain weaknesses. It is because we are
determined to defend the resistance to the hilt that we will never hesitate to
defend it against itself.
AGG
December 15, 1944°°°

The Consultative Assembly yesterday took up the problem of transportation.*”
That issue in turn brings up the problem of supply. And one cannot discuss the
problem of supply without touching on the black market. On this subject we
would like to offer a few observations based on common sense.
Eating less is a price well worth paying in order to win the war. No one in
France today would argue with that. But the sacrifices must be shared, and the

burden of winning the war should not always be borne by the same people. For
us, moreover, winning the war does not mean conquering square kilometers. It

means giving France every available opportunity for survival. If we give a victorious France as a gift to an undernourished generation, we will not have accom-

plished much. The level of rations should at least be set at the minimum
necessary to sustain life. Beyond that, we must be prepared to make all necessary
sacrifices, and clandestine supply operations should count as treason.
Our English friends pride themselves on having stamped out their black market. They are right to do so. But they were helped by the fact that their rations
are sufficient. It would obviously be a good thing if asceticism helped France
achieve victory. But sobriety might serve just as well. Sufficient rations would
deprive black marketeers of the one excuse they have left.
Still, the problem admits of no easy solution. In fact, it is likely that the current level of transportation could supply enough to meet our vital minimum. But
a substantial quantity of food is siphoned off by the big restaurants and wholesale
distributors. The first step in fighting the black market is to increase rations, but
the black market makes this impossible. How can we escape this vicious circle?
The way out is to distinguish between the black market and the clandestine
market. The threat to the overall supply system comes not from the fellow who
climbs on his bicycle in search of a few eggs and a kilo of butter, nor is it from

low-priced restaurants.

It’s the large-scale transport of foodstuffs and the

thousand-franc restaurants that are contributing to the current crisis, the reper-

cussions of which may be endless.
338 Editorial. Text signed A. C.
339 Note that Camus followed the work of the Consultative Assembly on a daily basis. See the previous
editorial.

142

CHAPTER

2

The crackdown must be aimed at these targets, and it must strike as one
strikes in wartime. Selling essential medicines at fancy prices, storing tons of but-

ter and meat to supply luxury eateries, and siphoning off the coal needed for the
war effort are all things that must be condemned as sabotage is condemned in a
country at war. The minister of supply*”° seems to be searching for solutions.
Our opinion is that he isn’t looking very hard. If he had been, he would already
have found out, for example, that it takes no more than two weeks to close down
a deluxe establishment (which may be disguising itself to look less prosperous
than it is), confiscate its means of transportation, hit it with a heavy fine, and
throw its owners in jail. Two weeks tops. And if that were to be done to one or
two restaurants, it would give pause to the others.
If you want to accomplish anything, you have to demonstrate that you mean
business. The measure we are proposing as a first step is an obvious one. We
assure the minister that it would not be difficult to put into practice. A statement
from him on this subject would be welcome.
To be sure, not all Frenchmen feel called to sacrifice to the same degree. But
the vast majority of them will accept sacrifice if it is shown to go hand in hand
with justice. Fine speeches are not enough if you're talking to empty stomachs
and bitter hearts. Examples are necessary. And if you bring justice to the people,
then you can ask them to make whatever sacrifice is required.
There is nothing new in any of this. What would be new, however, is a decision to act without delay, followed promptly by action.
Aske

December 16, 1944°"!

There is a belief in some quarters that the new press seeks to grant itself a
monopoly by preventing the publication of new newspapers.*”
If that were the case, it would be essential, first of all, to point out that it has
failed to achieve its goal. New newspapers are appearing. Still, if the allegation
against the new press were true, it would be a serious matter. It could be accused
of betraying the democratic spirit that it claims as its own.
Hence we must examine our own intentions. Do we want to limit the Paris
press permanently to those newspapers that are being published today? Our
$40 Paul Ramadier (1888-1961) was a lawyer who became a mayor and in 1928 a Socialist deputy. He was

one of eighty deputies who refused to grant full powers to Pétain, and he joined the Resistance early on.
He served as minister of supply from November 1944 to May 1945, then as minister ofjustice in 1946,
and as the first premier of the Fourth Republic in 1947. It was he who ended Communist participation
in the government.
341 Editorial. Text signed A. C.
32 We have seen the degree to which the problems of the “new press” preoccupied Camus. See, among
others, his editorials and articles of August 31, September 1 and 8, October 7 and 11, and November 22,
pp. 21, 23, 32, 62, 66, and 118. Le Monde was soon to publish its first issue (December 19).

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

143

answer, in no uncertain terms, is no. Or, shifting to the other extreme, do

we want the French press to revert to what it was before the war, namely, a
public forum in which one man’s opinion depended on another man’s wallet?
Again, no.
Between these two extremes, is it possible to imagine a position that would
protect the right of free expression while at the same time limiting its abuse? Is
it that difficult to imagine a democracy that would not be obliged to impose
coercive rules yet would not be vulnerable to a variety of excesses? We do not
think so. It is possible, moreover, to clarify our position in regard to the particular issue now before us.
We are in a provisional period, in which everything is permitted—ventures
directed toward justice as well as ventures directed toward profit. We feel
compelled to take positions in regard to matters of justice, but we feel compelled
to do so only because the law is absent. Democracy presupposes law. A free
press presupposes laws defining the status of the press. For a long time now we
have been waiting for the government (in this instance, the Ministry of Information)*** to set forth the rules governing the press, two or three of which
are essential for protecting the press from the domination of money. What
we want is not the right to publish ourselves to the exclusion of all other newspapers; it is the knowledge that all newspapers are free to publish without
suspicions as to their motives and without running the risk that, while their
intentions might be pure, they might end up serving interests we no longer want
any part of.
While awaiting the promulgation of these rules governing the press, we
protest the publication of new newspapers. But our protest is directed not so
much against the papers themselves as against the conditions under which they
are appearing. If this it the way things stand at the moment, it is not because we
want things this way but because the new press law still has not been announced.
The ministry has been slow to act, and, paradoxically, it is the ministry that is
today compromising democracy.
The Ministry of Information may well respond that it wants to wait for the
Legislative Assembly to act. In our view this would be unfortunate. But if that is
the course to be chosen, the Federation of the Press will be justified in maintaining its hostility to the publication of new newspapers.
We do not believe that France’s ideal is to have the press stemming from the
Resistance as its only organ of expression. The moment we are sure that newspapers will be allowed to publish and express themselves clearly and honestly, we
will be glad to see the advent of new competitors, even if they prove indifferent
or hostile to the Resistance.
343 The ministry was headed at this point by Pierre-Henri Teitgen, whose courage and uncompromising
language Camus and Combat had praised on several occasions. Over the previous few weeks, however, as

various problems went unresolved, the newspaper's tone had turned much more critical, which had provoked reactions from Mauriac, among others.

144

CHAPTER

2

We are defending not positions but a principle. And we believe, in fact, that
it is the principle of democracy. When the ministry finally relieves us of this rule
of vigilance, we will believe that we've done our duty in our limited and specific
domain. Today, each of us has his assigned task. We will carry out the mission
that has fallen to us, which is to uphold the profound principle of democracy,
until such time as the government gives democracy the concrete legal form that
will allow us to turn our attention to other things.
An

December 17, 1944°“*

When a revolution has broken out, what must be done to destroy it? Experience
shows that it must first be applauded, and that the people must be praised above
all for their generosity, unselfishness, and magnanimity. When the people begin
to assert their will, the time has come to shout from the rooftops that were they
to dare to profit from their victory, they would be dishonoring it and dragging
it through the mud, that the only benefit they should derive from the revolution
is the glory of having made it, but that any guarantees they might demand would
be tantamount to stealing from their own renown.
Once the people have been lulled to sleep by unstinting praise of their disinterest, the coast is clear. The people must be made to feel that the arms they still
have in their possession are a sign of disorder and that they will be setting a fine
example of good behavior if they turn them over to certain designated individuals or authorized bodies, which will bear them in the people’s name.
Once the people are disarmed, the lion must continue to be praised for its
good nature. Immediately thereafter, however, one can begin to insinuate that
the revolution, once thought to be so pure, was not unmixed with crimes, that
lunatics mingled with its heroes, but that, fortunately, the twisted were few in
number.
The day after that, these shackles can be thrown off. If nothing has stirred by
then, it is time to announce that the revolution, which at first deceived everyone,

turns out after all to have been nothing but a crime motivated solely by plunder,
but thank God the country had not fallen into the clutches of its leading
scoundrels. But all the rubble, all the thefts, murders, fires, and crimes of every
sort, stand as witness to what the revolution would have wrought had it not been
nipped in the bud.
Once this theme has been broached, experience shows that it cannot be
repeated often enough, until eventually the people, blinded by the sudden storm
of accusations, end up believing that they have just barely avoided plunging
headlong into an abyss of crime. That is the right moment to profit from the
people's fear, which leads to stupor, and launch a bold foray to the rear, stopping
the victorious in their tracks.
344 Editorial. Text signed A. C.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

145

So said Edgar Quinet in 1868.**° Clearly, little changes in this world. Greek historians tell us that when the aristocrats in certain Hellenic cities took up their

posts, they were required to swear an oath always to blacken the name of the people. This two-thousand-year-old principle relied on methods that Quinet
described and that we are witnessing in operation today. Here in France, for centuries now, oaths that have never been sworn are nevertheless being kept.
ASG:

December 18, 1944°“°
The text of the Franco-Soviet pact has now been made public.*4” Until the content of the treaty was known, we felt there was no point in commenting on it.
Now that the terms have been published, however, a direct commentary seems
no more urgent than before. The obligations of the respective parties are so
clearly set forth that we could do no more than paraphrase them.*** This pact is
first of all an instrument of war, with a precise and limited objective. It aims to

neutralize Germany in the present conflict and in the years to come. That is why
it is both practical and necessary and sure to win the accord of both the French
and the Soviet people. We therefore approve the treaty as published, fully and
without reservation, in addition to which we wish to express our gratitude to the

man who has led France to the place it occupies today.
Two additional observations are in order, however. The great importance of
the published text should not be allowed to obscure the fact that the Moscow
talks surely dealt with subjects other than the alliance. Soviet interests, like

French interests, extend well beyond the German problem, paramount though it
is. The Soviet zone of influence is vast, and the security of France does not end

at France’s borders. What was discussed in Moscow in this regard is therefore of
great interest, and it is to be hoped that the government will inform the country
about what was said.
345 Edgar Quinet (1803-1875) was a historian and friend of Michelet, a professor at the Collége de France

who gained fame for his participation in the Morée expedition and for his work De la Grece moderne et
de ses rapports avec l’Antiquité (1830). In 1846, his course was suspended by Guizot. In 1848 he became

a deputy but was banished after the coup d’état of December 2, 1851. From exile in Belgium, he published historical studies of revolutions and La Philosophie de UVhistoire de France. After returning to France

in 1870, he again became a deputy and summed up his theories in L'Esprit nouveau in 1874. It is easy to
see why the man and his work interested Camus.
346 Editorial. Text signed A. C.

347 General de Gaulle had visited Moscow from December 2 to December 6. Following up his discussions
with Stalin, French foreign minister Bidault and Soviet commissar for foreign affairs Molotov signed an

important “treaty of alliance and mutual assistance” on December 10. Combat published the full text on
December 18.
348 The pact dealt with (1) the common struggle “until the final victory over Germany” was won; (2) a commitment not to “enter into separate negotiations with Germany”; (3) a commitment to take “all necessary
measures” to prevent “any new attempt at aggression on [Germany's] part”; (4) mutual aid and assistance in
the case of German aggression; and (5) economic assistance for reconstruction of both countries.

146

CHAPTER

2

Furthermore, the preamble to the pact gives us an opportunity to say more
about an idea that means a great deal to us.*” Indeed, France and Russia
emphatically stated their desire to work together toward international security.
They indicated that the alliance between them was not an exclusive one and in
fact looked forward to integrating it into a more general system in which the
interests of all countries could be reconciled.
That is what is important. At times—and today is one of those times—the
system of international alliances can seem to be a necessity imposed by history.
But it has never resolved the problems of more than two or three nations at a
time, and then only for a limited duration.
Peace is the property of all nations. Today we know that the nations of the
world share a common destiny, and when a Czech is slapped in the face in
Prague, the repercussions are felt by the prosperous residents of Fontainebleau,
the collective farmers of the Ukraine, and the cotton growers of Texas. We know
that when one country experiences industrial growth, or when poverty increases
in another, the effects are felt in the farthest corners of the globe. The organization of world security cannot therefore rely on international treaties and
alliances, which are necessary but not sufficient stepping-stones to a more farreaching structure of peace. Since wars can no longer be anything but world
wars, peace today must be organized on a global scale.
These are not new ideas. No governments can be more sensitive to them than
those of France and Russia. It should never be forgotten that Russia did not
adopt its present national policy until its proposal for a system of collective security had been rejected, and that it was the only state to lay general disarmament
on the table only to have its offer dismissed out of hand.
After so many failures, it would have to have been extremely naive to continue
in the same vein, and fortunately for us it has never been naive. There can be no
doubt, however, that in a different political climate, it will revert to its original

position.
When we hear that there is suspicion in the United States concerning the
Franco-Soviet alliance, we should not be afraid to remind our American friends
that they bear their share of responsibility for the failure of international security
policy. They turned their backs on it when they could have saved it. Europe thus
fell prey to nationalism of one stripe or another. Things progressed rapidly to a
head from there.
Today we must start all over again. The Franco-Russian alliance is the first
step. But it is a sign of great political wisdom to have made it clear that the agreement was not intended to exclude others. Indeed, it is to derive support from
complementary alliances, which will bring the united nations together in a solid
yet flexible system. That will be the second stage. It would be foolish, however,
349 The preamble asserted in particular that the signatories were “convinced that once the victory is won,

the restoration of peace on a stable basis and its preservation for a durable future depend on close cooperation between them and the rest of the United Nations.” The two countries agreed “to collaborate to

create an international security system that will allow effective action to preserve world peace and foster
harmonious relations among nations.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

147

to deny that the final step—insofar as the word “final” can be applied to anything involving love and hatred among human beings—can only take the form
of a world organization in which nationalisms will disappear so that nations may
live, and in which each state will give up what it must of sovereignty in order to
guarantee its liberty. Only then will peace be restored to this exhausted world.
An internationalized economy in which raw materials will be shared, commercial competition will turn into cooperation, colonial markets will be open to all,
and currency itself will achieve a collective status is a necessary condition for such
an organization to exist.°”°

We are still a long way from that goal. Hatred has been aroused, hearts burn
too hotly for justice, and Europe has scores to settle. But beyond the shouts and
the violence, and despite our staunch determination to win a lasting victory, let
us not forget the goal we seek. Only when we have reached it will the bitterness
of so many sacrifices begin to abate.
Until then, we are pleased to hail this bright and solid alliance, which will

allow France and Russia to play the leading role they must play in the vast effort
of reconstruction upon which our hopes for the future rest.
ALG,

December 20, 1944°!

As von Rundstedt was launching his offensive,” Hitler warned his people that
they should not delude themselves. His words should be taken to heart by all
nations currently involved in the war.
“No illusions” should indeed be our watchword. To begin with, it serves
no purpose to minimize the German offensive by describing it as a “final push”
or a good opportunity for the Allies to finish them off or a desperate attempt
by the Germans to break out of the box in which they find themselves. Every
offensive is dictated by tactical exigencies, and we do not yet know whether
this opportunity will prove good for us or whether this push will indeed be their
last.
Our point is a simple one: Germany exists, it has not been defeated, and the

war is not over. This offensive has been in preparation for two months, and

350 Camus’ ideas about international organization remain current today, at least as far as the European
Union is concerned.
351 Editorial. Text signed A. C.
352 On December

17, Marshal von Rundstedt launched a counteroffensive that Combat described as

a “serious attack” in the Belgian Ardennes, between Montjoie and Tréves, and succeeded in capturing

some territory on the border with Luxembourg. Very tough combat persisted for a month, and the
situation became critical enough that the Americans considered withdrawing from Alsace. Von Rundstedt
(1875-1953) had tried to distance himself from Nazism. After being sent away by Hitler in disgrace, he
was later recalled. After the defeat of Germany he was arrested by the British and ultimately freed
in 1949.

148

CHAPTER

2

knowledgeable observers saw it coming. The fact that it was launched earlier
than expected and not in the plain of Cologne as anticipated takes nothing away
from its seriousness. On the contrary, we are facing a substantial attacking force
executing a well-prepared battle plan. That is all we know for sure, and our decisions and efforts must be based on what we know.
The conclusion to be drawn is also simple: our duty is clear. It is not to try to
estimate how far the Germans may advance. There is no point to that. It is to
help stop that advance and transform it into a costly defeat. It is never to forget
that we are at war, and that if we are fighting with American lives at Montjoie,
we must fight elsewhere with French sacrifices.
This offensive can therefore be instructive and salutary if it awakens imaginations no longer able to distinguish between what is urgent and what is superfluous. What is urgent is to integrate all of France in the war effort—not only
through appeals for unity but also by means of decisions and measures intended
to assign each French citizen a specific role in the common struggle.
That offensive should teach us that it is not possible for a country at war
to allow its young people to choose on their own between enlisting in the
military and idling away their time at fashionable night spots. It should teach us
that a country at war cannot tolerate treason, stupidity, or senility in its bureaucrats. A country at war strips down of its own volition to what is essential. What
is essential today is intelligence on the one hand and courage on the other. What
is essential is the needs of the army, the feeding of the people, and the needs of
production.
It is not by underestimating the German offensive, moreover, that we will
forge the determined will we need today and will need tomorrow. It is by saying
quite clearly that Germany is far from defeated and that it will take many more
months of effort to put it down for good.
Just imagine for a moment a German return to Paris. We know full well who

would be standing shoulder to shoulder to continue the struggle. We know full
well who would flee or lie low until the situation reversed itself again. This country is now collapsing under the weight of so many conversions. The Republic is
suffocating from the crush of new friends. But if it should find itself alone again
or in danger, it will discover who its true defenders are, even if today they seem
to disagree among themselves. It is their faith and their stubbornness that freed
France and will win the war. It is their faith and their stubbornness that will soon
restore the country’s youth and vigor. For the rest, I have no idea whether von
Rundstedt’s offensive will offer a good opportunity to finish Germany off or not,
but I know that it is our last opportunity to rid ourselves of some of the lies that
have done us so much harm®”? and cost us too much blood.
Aaky
353 Allusion to a celebrated phrase in a speech delivered by Pétain on June 23, 1940: “I hate the lies that
have done you so much harm.” The author of that speech was Emmanuel

Interrogatoire [Paris: Gallimard, 1976], pp. 88-89).

Berl (see Patrick Modiano,

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

149

December 22, 1944°°‘
France has endured many tragedies that have today reached an end. It will
endure many more that have yet to begin. But there is one tragedy from which
the men and women of this country have been suffering for five years now: the
tragedy of separation.°*”
Nostalgic longing, broken loves, ghostly dialogues carried on across the plains
and mountains of Europe or sterile monologues conducted in the mind of one
person awaiting reunion with another—such are the signs of these wretched
times. For five years French men and French women have been waiting for one
another. For five years their aching hearts have waged a desperate battle against
time, against the idea that their missing partner is growing old and that so many
years of love and happiness have been lost.
Yes, the era is one of separation. No one dares utter the word “happiness” in
these tortured times. Yet millions of people are seeking it today, and for them
these years have been a time of constant suspense, which they hope will one day
end, making happiness possible once again.
Who can blame them? And who can say they are wrong? What would justice
be without a chance for happiness, and of what use would freedom be in misery?
We know this well—we French who went to war not to conquer but to defend,
in fact, a certain idea of happiness. But to put it bluntly, the happiness we sought
was a fierce happiness, fierce enough and pure enough that we thought it worthwhile first to endure years of unhappiness in order to achieve it.
Let us therefore hold on to the memory of that happiness and of those
who have lost it. That will make our fight seem less unfeeling, and it will remind
us of how cruelly France suffered and how tragic was the lot of her separated
children.
I will not say here what I really think about separation. This is not the time or
place to write that separation seems to me to be the rule and reunion only the
exception, or that happiness is an accident that persists. What is expected of all
of us is a message of hope. Indeed, only one thing was asked of our generation:
to prove ourselves capable of overcoming despair. Maybe that prepared us to
speak of the ultimate hope, the hope that must be salvaged from the world’s misery and that resembles a victory. This is the only hope that seems worthy of
respect. The only thing over which we cannot triumph is eternal separation,

which puts an end to everything. For the rest, there is nothing that courage and
love can’t accomplish. Five years of courage, five years of love: such is the inhuman ordeal to which French men and women have been subjected, the measure
of their distress.

354 Editorial. Text signed A. C. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter “La chair” (The Flesh).

355 The theme of separation is of course central in The Plague, and Camus noted its importance in his
notebooks as early as December 1942. See Carnets I, pp. 67-72 and 90-91.

150

CHAPTER

2

The idea behind the “Week of the Missing” was to commemorate all this.>°°

One week is not a very long time. The difficulty is that it is easier to be ingenious in doing harm than in doing good. When we want to alleviate misfortunes,
our means are limited, and we give money. I only hope that people will give a

lot. Since we cannot do anything for the pain, let us do something for the misery. The pain will thus be liberated, and all these frustrated individuals will have

the leisure to endure their suffering. For many, this will be a luxury they have
been denied for quite some time.
Still, no one should think that giving money is enough to quiet all qualms of
conscience; some debts are inexhaustible. To the missing men and women, the
vast, mysterious legions of our brothers and sisters, we give the faces of those we

know, who were plucked from our midst. Then we realize that we did not love
them enough, that we did not derive from them all the benefit we could have
when they were with us. No one loved them enough, not even their country,
since today they are where they are. May this week, “our” week, not cause us to
forget “their” years. May it teach us not to love them mediocrely, and may it
bestow upon us the memory and imagination without which we can never make
ourselves worthy of them. May it serve above all to help us forget the emptiest
of our words and make ready for the silence we shall offer them on that difficult
and wonderful day when they stand before us once again.
my 2S

December 23, 1944°°’
French Renaissance

A new illustrated weekly magazine recently appeared on the scene.
Rolls of paper were allocated so that it could print photographs depicting life
in France and around the world. In the time it has been publishing, it has shown
that it deserved the confidence placed in it.
The journalists who put it together hit right away on a brand-new formula
well suited to the times. Of course they copied Match, because truth is eternal,
and anyway it was much less exhausting to do what had been done before. But
they went much farther.

356 The “Week of the Missing,” which included the collection of contributions on the streets, had been

advertised by posters and articles in the media. It lasted from December 24 until January 1. The liberation of prisoners of war and deportees did not begin until April 1945.
3°7 Note signed Suetonius. Possibly by Camus. The signature is reminiscent of certain articles that Camus
wrote for Alger-Républicain and Le Soir-Républicain and signed “Nero” or “Petronius.” Despite the temptation to attribute to Camus a pseudonym borrowed from a Latin author (70-125) who interested him

enough that he took the theme of his Caligula from Suetonius’s Lives of Twelve Caesars, one must bear in
mind that not all the “Suetonius” articles were by Camus: Roger Grenier recalls having written some of
them. For this particular article, the first ofaseries, the attribution cannot be certain. But the irony, the
defense of the Resistance press, and the attack on newspapers that published sensationalistic images suggest that it might be plausible.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

151

Readers may stumble across pages showing horrible scalped heads and bodies
tortured by the Germans. Clearly, this is a magazine of strong sensations, direct
and agreeable. Turn the page, however, and you come upon dancers in short
skirts, who yield another sensation no less direct or agreeable.
Obviously this is quality work, done at last by professionals who have nothing in common with the apprentices of the resistance press—technicians, in
other words, who have their own idea of the public and what it needs.
We welcome our new colleague, and we congratulate the Ministry of Information for finding a way to encourage a publication that does honor to France
and will certainly help to raise its standing in the world.
SUETONIUS

December 24, 1944

The Poet and General de Gaulle**’

M. Paul Claudel recently evoked the figure of General de Gaulle in Le Figaro.
Since M. Claudel is a poet, he did so in verse.’ He personifies France and
invites her to address General de Gaulle. The result is appalling.
France asks the general to look her in the eye and says, “General, you who are
my son.” And the general replies, “Shut your mouth, woman!” The inspiration
for the piece begins with Péguy,*” continues with Dérouléde,**! and ends with
the anonymous poets of La Veillée des Chaumiéres>°
For M. Claudel’s great works we feel the admiration they command. For General de Gaulle we have the respect he is due. Clearly, however, this poem reduces
both men to ridicule, and that is unfortunate. Since, moreover, General de Gaulle
is obviously not responsible for this, we have no choice but to blame M. Claudel.
His responsibility is far more that of the citizen, however, than of the poet.
M. Claudel previously confused the heroism of the underground with that of the

358 Note signed Suetonius. The attribution to Camus is much more certain than for the previous note:
Francine Camus sometimes sent her mother in Oran texts by Camus, and she sent her this one.

359 Paul Claudel (1868-1955) was a Christian poet and diplomat. His occasional poems are not of the
quality of his Cing Grandes Odes or his plays, but they do attest to his successive loyalties, since this poem,
“To General de Gaulle,” which first appeared on the literary page of Le Figaro, appears in the collection
Poemes et paroles Durant la guerre de trente ans (Paris: Gallimard, 1945) immediately after a poem dedi-

cated to Marshal Pétain.
360 Charles Péguy (1873-1914). The comparison with, for example, the lines of “La Tapisserie de sainte
Geneviéve et de Jeanne d’Arc” is not out of place: “Still, says France, I am saved!” “Still, says France, the

rest of you see that they've not done me in, and I am saved!”

361 Paul Dérouléde (1846-1914) remains the symbol of (bad) patriotic and revanchist poetry. After founding the Ligue des Patriotes, he supported General Boulanger (1837-1891) in his rejection of a parliamentary republic.
302 La Veillée des Chaumieres (or, more accurately, Les Veillées de la Chaumiere), whether it refers to the book
of that title published by Mme de Genlis in 1823 or the illustrated weekly magazine founded in 1860,
stands for writing of an unctuous, moralistic, and edifying sort.
t¥

Or

152

CHAPTER

2

belt tighteners. That was an error of moral judgment. His error now is one of
historical judgment. He is confusing the representative of the Resistance with
General Boulanger.
Those two errors have led to a third error, of style. A writer may be capable of
bringing biblical images to life yet lack the ability to render the commonplace.
SUETONIUS

December 26, 1944°”

The Pope has just delivered a message in which he openly states his support for
democracy.*™ This is good news. But we believe that this carefully worded message calls for equally careful commentary. We are not sure that we speak for all
of our Christian comrades at Combat, but we are certain that the feelings of a
great many of them are reflected in what we are about to say.
We would like to take this opportunity to say first of all that our satisfaction is
not entirely exempt from regret. We have been waiting many years for the leading
spiritual authority of the day to condemn dictatorship in no uncertain terms. |
repeat: in no uncertain terms. For certain encyclicals do suggest such a condemnation, but only when properly interpreted. It is a condemnation formulated in the

language of tradition, which has never been clear to the vast majority of men.
Yet it was that very same majority that waited all those years for someone to
speak out and clearly identify the source of the evil, as the Pope has now done.
Our secret wish was for this to be said when evil reigned triumphant and the
forces of good remained muzzled. Obviously there is cause for rejoicing that
these words have been spoken now, when the spirit of dictatorship is reeling. But
we did not wish merely to rejoice; we wanted to believe and to admire. We
wanted spirit to prove itself before force arrived to back it up and prove it right.
We would have liked to see the Pope disavow Franco in 1936, so that Georges
Bernanos would not have had to speak out and curse the regime.*” The voice that
has just dictated to the Catholic world which side it ought to choose was the only
voice that could have spoken out amid the tortures and cries, the only voice that
could calmly and fearlessly have denounced the blind force of armored divisions.
We may as well say forthrightly what we think: we would have liked the Pope
to have taken a stand at the height of that shameful period and denounce what
needed to be denounced. It is wrenching to think that the Church left that
obligation to others, to obscure individuals who lacked its authority, and some
of whom lacked the invincible hope on which the Church thrives. For the
363 Editorial. Text signed A. C. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
364 Pope Pius XII’s 1944 Christmas message contained the following statement: “True democracy, whether

republican or royalist in form, guarantees the freedom to which peoples aspire, whereas in authoritarian states
governed by political men, no one has the right to live his own life honorably.” On the Pope’s attitude during the war and Camus’ “reservations” about him, see the editorial of September 8, 1944, and n. 53, p. 31.

365 The allusion is to Les Grands Cimetieres sous la lune. Camus called Bernanos “the great Catholic voice”
in his editorial of September 16 (see n. 73, p. 39).

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

153

Church did not need to be concerned about surviving or protecting itself. Even
in chains it would not have ceased to exist. In chains, moreover, it would have
found a strength that we are tempted not to grant it today.
At least we now have this message. Catholics, who gave the best of themselves
in the common struggle, know now that they were right and that they did well.
The Pope has recognized the virtues of democracy. At this point the wording is
subtle, however. Democracy is understood in a broad sense. It can encompass
monarchies as well as republics, according to the Pope. This democracy is wary
of the masses, which Pius XII subtly distinguishes from the people. It also allows
for inequalities of social condition, albeit tempered by the spirit of fraternity.
Democracy as defined in this text has a paradoxical “radical-socialist”*™ tinge,
which surprises us no end. Furthermore, the Pope makes no secret of what he
really wants by calling for a “moderate” regime.
Of course we understand his desire. There is a kind of intellectual moderation
that is useful when it comes to understanding social issues and even to promoting the welfare of all. But all the Pope’s subtleties and precautions leave a great
deal of room for the most detestable kind of moderation, namely, moderation of
the heart. It is this moderation, in fact, that finds inequality tolerable and injustice bearable. These counsels of moderation cut two ways. Today there is a danger that they play into the hands of those who want to keep everything as it is
and who have failed to understand that some things have to change. Our world
does not need tepid souls. It needs burning hearts, men who know the proper
place of moderation. The Christians of the first century were not moderates.**”
The Church today ought to make a point of not allowing itself to become mixed
up with the forces of conservation.
We say all this because we want every well-known and well-honored institution to serve the cause of freedom and justice. There can never be too many of
us in this fight. That is the only reason for our reservations. Who are we, after
all, to criticize the century’s highest spiritual authority? None other than common defenders of the spirit who believe that the demands on those whose mission is to represent that spirit are endless.

ALG:

December 29, 1944°

Broad questions of policy gave rise to major debates in the Consultative Assembly. Delegates took part in extensive discussions. Democracies are often criticized
for being too much given to talk. To some extent that’s true, but one needs to be
366 “Radical-socialist” is intended here in the sense of the French Radical-Socialist Party, which was “neither radical nor socialist” but very bourgeois and middle-of-the-road.
367 Camus took great interest in the early centuries of Christianity from the time of his master’s thesis (see
Essais, pp. 1224-1313) to the writing of La Chute.
368 Editorial. Text signed A. C.

154

CHAPTER

2

careful in making such criticisms. Sometimes a great deal of talk is necessary in
order to bring to light the two or three common principles without which action
would be impossible. True, dictatorships can move into action more quickly, but
on occasion they pay dearly for it. There is a choice to be made between economizing on words and economizing on blood.
Nevertheless, speeches must eventually lead to principles and ultimately
to action. It would be too much to say that such was the case with the speeches
that animated the recent debates of the Consultative Assembly. In the end, however, agreement seems to have been reached on one point: the government must
govern.
To govern is to achieve harmony internally as well as with the nation. One
speaker clearly demonstrated that the government is not governing to the extent
that its policy is not coherent. The ministers who have succeeded one another in
various posts have unfortunately not all shared the same ideas. Different ministries are not all following the same line, so that the Ministry of Finance has at

times countered the Ministry of Production, while the Ministry of the Interior
thumbs its nose at the Ministry of Justice. In short, government is possible only
where there is a precise doctrine for governing and a plan that all ministers must
follow.
It is this doctrine and this plan that we are interested in. From our reading of
what was said in these debates, we believe that M. Jules Moch*” set forth the

outlines of the doctrine, while M. Gorse*”® defined its spirit and intentions in the
loftiest terms.
Socialization of banks, insurance companies, and key industries; financial
and fiscal reforms to do away with illicit products and limit legitimate profits;
and systematic reconstruction: this is the program to which we, too, subscribe.
As for its spirit and intentions, one has to be grateful to M. Gorse for uttering
the youthful words adventure and heroism in the most venerable of surroundings.
The government has a free hand because it has the nation’s backing, but it
bears the burdens and responsibilities that go along with this freedom. Its actions
will decide whether this country will be a land of senescence and resignation or
a land of youth and grandeur. It will decide whether the French ideal is one of
retreat or conquest. France nearly perished on account of the pettiness of its

369 Jules Moch (1893-1985) was an S.EI.O. deputy who served in Léon Blum’s cabinet in 1938. After
entering the Resistance, he joined de Gaulle in 1942. He served as a member of the Consultative Assembly in Algiers and later in Paris as well as of two Constituent Assemblies and held several ministerial portfolios under the Fourth Republic. He sided with Mendes France when the latter resigned from de Gaulle’s
government in April 1945.
5” Georges Gorse (1915-2002) was a graduate of the Ecole Normale Supérieure who joined de Gaulle
right at the beginning, in June 1940. As a member of de Gaulle’s cabinet in Algiers in 1943, he played an

important role in Free France and later served as deputy from the Vendée. He was placed in charge of
Muslim affairs in 1946-1947. He also served in several governments of the Fifth Republic and later
became France's first ambassador to Tunisia and, subsequently, Algeria.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

155

interests and its enthusiasms. The task of the government is to prove to the country that the century ahead is one of great adventure, that a world is to be built,
and that the era of somnolence and selfishness is at an end. Above all its task is
to show the French that this is not a bad or hopeless thing and that this torn
country, covered with wounds and scars, still has enough prestige for some people to seek to heal it and set it on a course to greatness.
Such fine things cannot be accomplished with mere words. It will take clarity
of vision, resoluteness of will, the firm hand of leaders who refuse to prevaricate,
and intransigence in the face misrepresentation. It can be done not by setting up
a High Commission for Logistics but only by cracking down on the black market and confiscating hoarded supplies for distribution to a population that
remains undernourished.
It can be done not by authorizing the publication of a pornographic
magazine*’' but only by supplying the nation with a steady flow of information
regarding the great trials that lie ahead. It cannot be done by allowing 600,000
unemployed workers to stand by and watch as houses fail to be rebuilt, or by
borrowing money that would be better confiscated, or by pardoning deliberate
treason at a time when some would condemn inadvertent treason, or by cen-

suring what everyone knows, or, finally, by thinking that signing petitions is
enough.
The government will govern. It will need to be harsh, tenacious, stubborn,
ever vigilant, without illusions, immune to discouragement, disdainful of artful
maneuvers, always concerned with efficiency, fair, yet energetic. That is a great
deal to ask. Some will accuse us of asking for the moon. The answer is simple,
however: if the government and the rest of us do not propose a goal that
is extreme and immoderately ambitious, slumber will once again overtake the
soul of France, plunging it back into that state which for any nation is akin
to death.
ANG.

December 30, 1944

Judge Not?”2
Wherever I turn, I hear attacks on the Resistance and resisters. What scoundrels

they are! They take credit for a liberation that couldn't have been achieved
without the Allies, they’re all clamoring for government jobs, and they thrive on
hatred and injustice. I also see that they are not without defenders, people
willing to admit that they deserve some credit and suffered a great deal.

371 See “French Renaissance,” December 23, p. 150.
372 Article signed by Albert Camus.

156

CHAPTER

2

All this was to be expected. No sacrifice has ever escaped calumny and denigration. Yet suffering and honor are hardly exceptional credentials in a world in
which people were obliged to choose both simply to remain human.
Resisters have one additional credential, however, which has not to my knowl-

edge been stressed enough. They made their choice in solitude. For the sake of
those unaware of the extremes to which this could lead, I want to discuss today
a terrible tragedy that remains a source of terrible chagrin to everyone who has
heard about it.
Many men of the Resistance are acquainted with a comrade whose fight
against the Germans began in 1941.°”* The course he chose was among the most
difficult: to organize sabotage of railroads in the northern zone. When the
authorities issued a warrant for his arrest in 1942, he was obliged to flee to the

southern zone. After being arrested by Vichy, he spend thirteen months in prison
and upon his release he took up an important post in the United Resistance
Movements, where he was once again responsible for organizing acts of sabotage.
In that position, he was not satisfied merely to issue orders; he personally took
part in missions and exposed himself to every danger. Eventually he was arrested
along with some very important Resistance leaders at a meeting near Lyons, the
existence of which was known to very few people.*”* Because of the identity of
those captured in that episode, the Resistance suffered a very cruel blow. Two
weeks later, however, our comrade was back, saying that he had escaped. Because

of this, some of his companions suspected him of cooperating with the Gestapo,
but the majority continued to trust him. Why? It is hard to say, though at the
time it was easy to feel: because of a certain quality of his handshake, his courageous acts, his honest gaze. Those who trusted him never had cause to regret it.
From then until the liberation, this man, who could not help but be aware of the
cloud of suspicion that hung over him and who suffered inwardly because of it,
continued his efforts and admirably served his country’s cause.
After the liberation he accepted an official post in one of our ministries. Nothing had changed, except that people close to him noticed a growing nervousness
373 The man in question is René Hardy, an engineer with the French national railway system, who joined
the Resistance early on and became a leader of Résistance-Fer, in which capacity he was in close contact
with Henri Frenay and the Combat movement. Hardy was arrested by the Germans only to be released a
short while later, and he said nothing about his arrest to his comrades. The circumstances surrounding his
release have remained mysterious to this day.
*74 The meeting in question is now well known as the occasion at which Jean Moulin, sent by de Gaulle
to unify the various internal resistance movements, was arrested at Caluire on June 21, 1943. Shortly
thereafter, Moulin died after being tortured by the Gestapo, which had clearly been tipped off about the
meeting. Klaus Barbie, head of the Gestapo in Lyons, seized papers that allowed him to identify “Max,”

as Moulin was known. Hardy’s role in this arrest has been a matter of considerable controversy. After the

Liberation he was arrested and charged with having been a German informant, but his undeniable service to the Resistance, attested by Henri Frenay among others, led to a not-guilty verdict in January 1947.
A few months later, new documents casting doubt on his story were discovered, and he was arrested again,
only to be acquitted a second time in 1950 “with a minority in favor.” These verdicts remain controversial. See Frenay, La Nuit finira, pp. 483-490. Hardy died in 1987, a few months before Barbie was put
on trial for crimes against humanity.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

157

and sudden bouts of depression that left him close to tears. A month ago, this
man was arrested by Military Security. His comrades were dumbfounded to learn
that he had confessed to having revealed the location of the secret meeting to the
Gestapo. But even before their initial anger could subside, they also learned that
their comrade had been arrested shortly before the meeting, that his wife may

have been in the hands of the Gestapo, and that he had been obliged to talk by
either torture or blackmail. It was easy to reconstruct the story from that point.
After years of irreproachable service, a warrior had momentarily given in to pain
or anguish.*” He then resumed his place, and no one can say whether it was out
of despair or in the hope of repairing the wrong he had done. For endless months
he lived with what he had done and with the thought that others had paid with
lengthy suffering for his moment of surrender. For endless months he continued
to do his duty though he no longer felt himself worthy of it. Now he has been
arrested. Soon he will be judged.
I have little to add to this simple narrative. Nothing, in fact, but a question:
Who would dare to judge? The men of the Resistance took a silent oath to
hold out if tortured. That oath was necessary. If it was never openly pronounced,
it was because everyone was aware that pain has its limits, and before being

subjected to torture no man knows whether he will prove to be a coward or
not. That is why this oath was one that each resister took in solitude, to himself

alone.
Most held out. The torturers were defeated. Others weren't as strong. It would
of course be easy to accuse them. Yet I want to say loud and clear that no resister
would want to condemn them, for if they had done as so many others did and
stayed home, if they had not chosen the more difficult path, they would be alive
and respected today. To be sure, difficult paths demand superior loyalties. But
there are times, and circumstances of suffering, in which a man is no longer himself, in which reason becomes madness and pride becomes supplication. Every
resister lived in fear of that moment, not because of the pain it presaged but
because it stood to bring them either self-contempt or the invincible peace of
knowing that they remained loyal.
No, this man

is not within the jurisdiction of our courts. He can only be

his own judge. An official tribunal may soon find him guilty. But in the depths
of our hearts we know he is innocent. If he ever returns to a life that he can no
longer relish, we will offer him our hand and our silence. Not only because
he endured an unimaginable ordeal while a host of others slept and enjoyed
themselves in the midst of terrible suffering, but also because we all know that
in the end, this implacable struggle, begun in solitude, brought him the most
dreadful condemnation of all, the judgment each man makes of himself, in utter
solitude.
ALBERT CAMuS

375 See under the head “Peste” in Carnets II, p. 118: “But there is always an hour of the day or night when
a man is a coward. It is that hour that I am afraid of.” This note was in fact used in La Peste, p. 254.

158

CHAPTER

2

December 31, 1944-January 1, 1945

The Thirteenth Caesar>”°
We Roman historians crave objectivity. That is why we are not out of place in
this newspaper. Yet if we are Roman historians, we are nonetheless men.*”’ Some
things try our patience.
M. Georges Duhamel?” is one of those things. At times I am aware of the
injustice in my attitude, but there’s nothing I can do about it: M. Duhamel tries
my patience. In the first place because he published the most patience-trying
book imaginable about America. When he came face-to-face with a new civilization, the only words he could find to express his sentiments were those of the

timid retiree, the grumpy old duffer whose every grimace conveys the idea that
in his day things were just fine.
He tries my patience because one can read him everywhere, because he is not
modest, because he is sentimental, because his sentimentality is devoid of quality, because he is prolix, and because his prolixity makes me long for Tacitus,
though Tacitus was of course one of my most formidable rivals.*”
M. Duhamel has lately produced a series of articles that have exhausted my
patience entirely. In them he lauds the kind of resistance he practiced, in broad
daylight apparently, thus requiring more courage than the modest struggle in
which 300,000 clandestine combatants engaged.
As a historian, I know that no conclusions can be drawn without critical evaluation of the testimony of witnesses. But since I am also a man, I know that no
one should pretend to have been a hero who was merely a good, well-behaved
servant and that functionaries should never speak louder than true warriors.
In studying the Caesars of the decadence,** I learned the value of one virtue
they all lacked, namely, modesty. This note is intended to remind people of that.

376 Note signed Suetonius. Very likely by Camus.
377 This sentence parodies a line in Tartuffe, act III, scene 3: “Ah, pour étre dévot, je n’en suis pas moins
homme!” (If Iam devout, I am none the less a man.)

378 In one of regular columns in Le Figaro, Georges Duhamel (1884-1966) rather complacently described
his attitude of passive resistance during the Occupation. Yet even “Suetonius” acknowledges his “injustice”
toward a writer whose work, especially the Chronique des Pasquier, marked the interwar period and who
did nothing discreditable during the dark years. Apart from his satire of American life in Scenes de la vie
future (1930), Camus’ critical attitude no doubt stemmed from Duhamel’s status as a literary institution

whose books were filled with respectable sentiments of the sort that Camus himself rejected. Shocked by
this note, Mauriac responded to it (along with the important editorial of January 5) in a piece entitled

“Contempt for Charity” on January 7-8, 1945. He says he does not wish to borrow the term “patience-

trying,” “which M. Camus uses in a very superior way, availing himself, I imagine, of the superiority of
his future work, [when] he allows himself to judge the author of La Vie des Martyrs, Civilisation, the

Sulavin cycle, and La Chronique des Pasquier.” It is very likely that this short text by Suetonius played a
considerable role in the bitterness of the subsequent polemic between the two writers.
379 Tacitus (c. 55—c. 120), Latin historian famous for his concise and suggestive style.

380 Suetonius’s masterpiece was The Lives of the Twelve Caesars.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

159

It is only right to add that my twelve Caesars were nevertheless more amusing
than M. Duhamel, who definitely tries my patience in ways no words can
express.
SUETONIUS

December 31, 1944—January 1, 1945

1945°°!
It is customary at the beginning of the new year for a newspaper to address New
Year's wishes to its readers. In this, our first year of open publication, it is easy
for us to do this, because we know that our readers’ wishes coincide with our
own. Once upon a time, in a world where the appearance of prosperity reigned,
misery could be a lonely affair. Today, except for a contemptible minority, suffering is common and loneliness shared. All our readers will therefore agree with
us in wishing for an end to this war, so that the vast forces being expended on it
can be applied to peacetime labors; so that loved ones can be reunited at last and
so that the missing can be found and the dead freely mourned; and, last but not

least, so that our hearts can be delivered from hatred.
We have proved that we could rise to the challenge of this most terrible of
wars. We did not shrink from the ordeal. Hence we are entitled today to wish for
it to be over in order to make room once again for human creativity and happiness. But we want the conquest and bold adventure to continue in peacetime, in
which we shall maintain our vigilance to ensure that the grandeur of this country and the world’s justice are never again separated.

January 2, 1945

Panem et circenses?**”
The government has just increased the taxes that have already imposed an
oppressively heavy burden on the film industry.
The Caesars whose history I wrote adopted the opposite policy. They staged
the games of the Circus for free. Bread was also free, but it’s even less advisable
to speak of that.

381 Text published in the December 31, 1944—January 1, 1945 issue. It may have been written by Camus,
but possibly in collaboration with others, most notably Pascal Pia. In some respects it is reminiscent of

the New Year's greetings published in Le Soir-Républicain on January 1, 1940: “We have two wishes to
formulate, precise, youthful, ardent wishes. We want and with all our strength hope to bring about a new
world that will afford man every opportunity to achieve his dignity. . . . Le Soir-Républicain does not wish
you happiness because we know that you have been battered in flesh and spirit. But from the bottom of
our hearts we wish you to have the strength and clarity of mind necessary to forge your own happiness
and dignity.” Fragments d'un combat, Il, pp. 735-736.
382 Note signed Suetonius. Possibly by Camus.

160

CHAPTER

2

They understood that such grandly staged spectacles, the distant forebears of
our films, were what later came to be called an opium of the people. Film is not
a delicacy for the rich. It is a weekly drug that the masses can no longer do without, and they are certainly entitled to forget the woes of the day for a few hours.
Some ill-intentioned people will say that this opium has indeed had a stupefying effect on the masses and that it deserves this crackdown. But the industry,
which is actually an art, could easily be compelled to turn its product into an
instrument for ennobling the soul rather than debasing it.
French filmmakers have made an effort in this direction, yet they alone are
affected by this tax hike. Hollywood films, which so often forsake their cultural
mission, come to France with their costs already recouped through their screening in America. The taxes may be heavy, but any money earned by these
imported productions is still pure profit.
The Germans did not manage to kill off French cinema even though they subjected a conquered country to the oppression of an occupying force. Will the
Minister of Finance succeed where the Germans failed?**’
SUETONIUS

January 2, 1945°°4
We have read with the requisite respect and approval the letter from a soldier
published yesterday by Le Populaire.** Its severity was legitimate, and its condemnations were for the most part well-founded. As for the consternation and
bitterness evinced by the writer, we have said enough about this, and have often
enough asked that the entire nation be placed on a war footing, that we need not
dwell on these matters here.
Still, we cannot approve one aspect of our comrade’s letter, namely, his condemnation of young people in the rear: “Emaciated, manipulated, foolish young
people loudly mock anything that exceeds their grasp, be it Victor Hugo or
courage.”**° Not that this view can be contradicted. Indeed, no argument for it
is given. It merely reflects an intuition, which to a large extent we understand
and approve of. But perhaps one should also give some thought to the young
people of France, who, on reading this letter, might be tempted to doubt

383 The Minister of Finance at the time was René Pleven. See the editorial of October 13, 1944, n. 136,

p. 69.

384 Editorial. Text signed A. C. and reprinted in Actuelles, chapter on “The Flesh.”
385 On Le Populaire, see the editorial of September 2, 1944, n. 39, p. 25. On January 1, 1945, under the
headline “A Soldier at the Front Speaks to You,” the paper published a letter signed A. F. (André Figuéras),
introduced by M. B. (probably Marcel Bridoux). This letter, which referred to Léon Blum, describes the

disillusionment ofa soldier in Paris on leave: “All excited after waiting a year for leave, you say to yourself
after two days that it’s not worth going to the front to fight and that you're better off there than here. . . .
Death is better than a thousand absurd lives.”
386 This is the final sentence of the letter.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

161

themselves, to imagine that this is the way others see them, and to assume
responsibility for giving their elders such a pathetic and dispiriting image of
themselves.
The young people of France have not had an easy time of it. Some of them
fought. It is no secret that on the day of the insurrection, there were as many
children’s faces on the barricades as there were adult faces. Others had no opportunity to fight or lacked the presence of mind to do so. Today, all are waiting to
see what comes next. The legacy of two generations has left them wary of ideas
and careful with words. Now they find themselves faced with immense tasks for
which no tools have been given them. They have nothing to do, and everything
in this world exceeds their grasp. Who can blame them for this? I recently saw
many of these young faces gathered in an auditorium.**’ In them I saw only seriousness and attentiveness. These young people are truly attentive, which means
that they are waiting for something and that no one has yet responded to their
silent appeal. If they are isolated and passive, the responsibility is not theirs but
ours, by which I mean the entire country and the government along with it.
Words of scorn will do them no good. What they need is a fraternal hand and
a virile tone. This country, which has suffered from senility for so long, cannot
do without its youth. But its youth need to be shown that people have confidence in them and are prepared to instill in them a spirit of grandeur rather than
a sense of distress or disgust. France has endured a time of desperate courage. It
was perhaps this courage that had no future and showed no tenderness that saved
her in the end. But the violence of a soul alienated from all there is cannot serve
indefinitely. Of course the French need no illusions. They are already too quick
to harbor them. But France cannot live by suspicion and rejection alone.
In any event, its young people need to be provided with affirmations so that
they can affirm themselves.
It is always difficult to truly unite those who fight with those who wait. The
community of hope is not enough; community of experience is also necessary. Yet
even if men who have suffered differently can never come together in spirit as one,
let us at least do nothing to drive them apart. In the case at hand, let us not add to
the anguish of young people in France a condemnation that would revolt them if
they were aware of its injustice and reduce them to a situation of inferiority if they
were to find the charge plausible. We have plenty of reasons to give in at times to
bitterness. Insofar as possible, however, we should keep our bitterness to ourselves.
The truth is that these young people do not make fun of what exceeds their
grasp. At any rate, the ones we have known never laughed at anything other than
bombast, and they were right to do so. In battle, however, or when confronted
with the spectacle of courage, they have always been silent. This was proof of
their quality and evidence of an exigent spirit that asked only to be used, and
which is in no way responsible for the solitude in which it has been left.
inn Gs
387 Francine Camus, in her letters to her mother, commented that students often asked Camus to give lectures. Note the use of the first-person pronoun, which as a rule Camus does not use in his editorials. Here,
however, he is recounting a personal experience.

162

CHAPTER

2

January 3, 1945°°°

The Agence Frangaise de Presse has just published a communiqué, which as we
have pointed out elsewhere originates with an unnamed government source.**”
This communiqué concerns the transformation of the Lublin Committee into a
provisional government of the Polish Republic.*”® The question this raises is a
delicate one, and in our reporting on the issues yesterday we spoke our minds.
We have no desire to comment further on those issues today and will confine
ourselves to a discussion of political methods.
In that connection our comment is essentially that the communiqué published by our agency lacks the elementary hallmark of courage that goes by the
name clarity. In sum, the text states that France is not obliged to intervene in
Poland’s internal affairs, that it continues to treat both Polish governments with
the same respect, and that it does not wish to take sides.
It would be impossible to shirk the duties incumbent on every government
more completely. And in particular, it would be impossible to do more to make
both sides unhappy. It is not our job to dictate to the government how it should
behave or what policy it ought to adopt. We can say, however, that if situations
arise in which one cannot take sides, it is better to remain silent than to issue an
ambiguous statement in which for the first time France has abandoned the clear
manner in which it has spoken since the liberation.
To assert that our country is not obliged to intervene in Poland’s internal affairs
is to avoid the real issue. To recognize a foreign government is not to intervene in
that country’s affairs. It is an act of international politics that every nation is
obliged to perform or not to perform after carefully weighing the pros and cons.
To justify our neutrality by saying that we don’t know enough about the political situation in Poland is to forget that the Allies used the same argument for
years to block recognition of de Gaulle’s government.*”' We criticized them
enough for this to know that the only thing their reticence ever signified was the
set of unstated assumptions on which it was based.
388 Editorial. Text signed A. C.
389 The text of the AFP dispatch was published in the same issue of Combatwith the comment that “it seems
to have been inspired by an unnamed government official.” The pertinent portion of the text reads as follows: “The Lublin Committee's decision to transform itself into a provisional government of the Polish
Republic came as no surprise in Paris. Responsible officials stress that this is essentially an internal matter in
which France is not obliged to intervene. The decision of the committee, we are told, can in no way alter
France's relations with the Polish government in London or its position with respect to the committee.”
The text points out that France lacks information about “political realities in Poland” and that Christian Fouchet, who had been sent to Poland to look into the fate of French prisoners and deportees, would
be able “to provide useful information.”
390 The Lublin Committee was established when that city was liberated by Soviet troops on July 24, 1944.

Its legitimacy was contested by the English, who supported the Polish government in exile, established in
London at the time of the German occupation.
391 See the editorials of September 30, p. 52, and October 14, 15, 17, and 19, 1944, pp. svar,
and 78.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

163

|
The reasons for France's present position are not clear to us, and silence would
have been less ambiguous. We believe, moreover, that a position like this can
_
hardly serve our country’s interests. What, in fact, are its consequences? On the
one hand, we have disappointed the London government by sending a delegate
to the Lublin Committee. On the other hand, by maintaining our relations with

the London government, we run the risk of allowing a nation we have chosen to
be our ally to think that our policy involves unstated motives.
:
Understand us well. We do not seek a political fight with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. What we had to say about the issue we have said.
We are only discussing a certain method and a certain manner of speaking. We
are arguing for a logical policy. Since we have chosen to ally ourselves with the
U.S.S.R., it goes without saying that we have recognized the legitimacy of the
Soviets’ desire to have a friendly Poland for a neighbor. We cannot ignore the fact
that the U.S.S.R. is supporting the Lublin Committee. France expects that in the
near future this committee will become the real government of Poland. One can
regret this fact or be glad about it, but one cannot pretend to ignore it without
the risk of compromising the mission we have decided to undertake.
It is not politic to make everyone unhappy. Nor is it politic to deceive anyone.
It is politic to choose after due deliberation and then to proceed directly toward
the chosen goal. The governments of the Third Republic thought they could go
to Munich and prepare for war at the same time. They were wasting their breath,

whereas we, when we speak of the need for clear language and unambiguous
political ethics and run the risk of being dismissed as visionaries, feel that we are
expressing a deeper political reality that is better suited to the times in which we
live. Rectitude is today France’s ultimate talent. General de Gaulle has demonstrated this for five years. It would be unfortunate if this prodigious example were
tarnished by two or three communiqués of the sort put out by ministries and
bureaucracies bent on perpetuating traditions that are all the more disastrous for
being so venerable. To put it in a nutshell, we would like to see French policy
continue to be expressed in texts that we can read without the embarrassment we
felt on reading the commentary that to our dismay the whole world can read in
today’s paper.
AAC:

January 5, 1945°””
The press has lately been preoccupied with injustice. This is because it cannot
talk about justice. A Catholic novelist, a woman, has written that there is no justice except in hell. Our courts are doing what they can to justify this unfortunate
assertion. Columnists and editorialists can thus take their pick of absurd

392 Editorial. Text signed A. C.

164

CHAPTER

2

sentences and preposterous instances of leniency. In between, prisoners are
snatched from their prisons and shot because they were pardoned.”
We want to say simply that all of this was to be expected and that it is probably too late now for justice to be done. The justice we called for was difficult to
implement because it required reconciling the country’s pressing need to destroy
the treacherous part of itself with our insistence on due respect for the individual. Quick justice was essential to achieve that end.
We are told that this was impossible, and that a few weeks was not enough time
to arrest those guilty of treachery, put them on trial, and punish them. But we
know that. That wasn't the problem. The problem with quick justice was that it
had to be clear justice. Explanation is in order, since our point was misunderstood.
In a defeated country, treachery sometimes weighs more heavily on the conscience of those who were saved than on the souls of those who did the saving,
because thoughts must turn to punishment. This terrifying word has always
repelled tender hearts. Yet we needed to get used to this idea, to assume responsibility for human justice and agree to decide what needed to be decided. And as
if this task weren't difficult and disheartening enough, we also had to undertake
to carry it out scrupulously, which meant in accordance with the law. Now, it
bears repeating that there is no law that applies to the kind of treachery we have
all experienced. The problem we had to solve is a problem of conscience, which
arises with respect to a law that was never written. We live in a world in which
one can fail to act honorably without violating the law.
What needed to be done, then, if not create the law we did not have? Here,

too, however, we were held back by our scruples. The law that had to be created
would have had to apply to crimes committed before it existed. Thus we were
faced with an ex post facto law, which is the hallmark of every illegal regime and
a stain on every dictatorship.
So, did we have to admit that we were helpless and judge with the laws at our

disposal, which were in fact useless?
This is apparently what we did. The results are plain to see. It is in the light
of those results that we say we should have embraced the contradictions in our
situation and resolutely allowed ourselves to appear unjust in order to do real justice. There is no need to point out how the friends of the people who are being
judged today would settle the matter if they were to return to Paris as masters.
That is not the point. The point was to create the law we needed, to formulate
it in clear and irreproachable language. And to make up for the fact that it would
have been an ex post facto law, it would have been necessary to set precise time
limits on its application. If we had done these things, it would have been possible to move quickly, because it would have been possible to speak clearly. The
government could not arrest all the guilty parties in a few weeks, but it could
3 The issue of the purge had come up several times in the month of October and had already led
to exchanges with Mauriac. With this article, however, Camus’ tone changes to one of bitterness and
disillusion. Abuses of the kind described here did in fact take place. The purge remains controversial to
this day.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

165

have created a law of honor that would have been applied for six months or a
year and would have rid France of a persistent shame.
Now it is too late. They will go on handing out death sentences to journalists
who don't deserve as much.*”* They will go on half-acquitting recruiters with silver tongues. And the people, tired of their sick justice, will continue to intervene
from time to time in cases that should no longer be their concern. A certain common sense will preserve us from the worst excesses; fatigue and indifference will
do the rest. People can get used to anything, even behavior that is shameful and
stupid. In the end, the French cannot ask for more than their minister.
All of this was indeed to be expected, but we cannot say this without bitterness and sadness. A country that fails to purge itself is preparing to fail to remake
itself. The face that a nation wears is that of its system of justice. Ours ought to
have something to show the world other than this face of confusion. But clarity
and unsparing, humane righteousness cannot be learned. For want of clarity we
are going to have to settle for paltry consolations. Obviously M. Mauriac was
right: we are going to need charity.*”
Aa,
January 5, 1945°”°
Minister Tiberius?”
For a historian, there is no such thing as an insignificant fact. Had the price of

a bushel of wheat in Rome been lower, the face of the world would have been
different.°”®

That is why I find myself deeply interested in the increase in railway fares.
Forty percent is quite a bit, and the government must have its reasons. “The

government always has its reasons,” Caligula said when he decorated his horse. I

394 This may be an allusion to Georges Suarez (see the editorial of October 25, 1944, n. 188, p. 89) or
more likely Henri Béraud (1885-1958), who had just been sentenced to death for “collaboration with the
enemy.” A novelist and reporter for Gringoire, Béraud wrote anti-English articles and books and strenu-

ously opposed democracy. His sentence was commuted to forced labor. On January 4, Mauriac had
denounced his death sentence in Le Figaro.
395 The allusion is to Mauriac’s article of December 14, “The New Alliance,” in which he wrote: “Happy
are those who believe that above the political order reigns the order of charity.” Mauriac reacted very
strongly to the closing sentences of Camus’ article. On January 7-8 he published a new article entitled
“Contempt for Charity,” in which he took an ironic tone: “What a pity that our young master, who is
clear about everything, did not deign to clarify the law for lack of which ‘we are going to have to settle,’
he says, ‘for paltry consolations.’ To which he added, one suspects with a superior smile, ‘Obviously
M. Mauriac was right: we are going to need charity.” This is the same article in which Mauriac rose to
the defense of Duhamel (see “The Thirteenth Caesar,” January 1, p. 158).

396 Note signed Suetonius. Attribution to Camus is very probable.
397 Tiberius, emperor of Rome from 14 to 37 C.E., succeeded Augustus and preceded Caligula.

398 An obvious parody of Pascal’s famous line: “Had Cleopatra's nose been shorter, the whole face of the
earth would have been different.”

166

CHAPTER

2

should add that Caligula did not give his reasons. It was enough if people
believed in their existence.*”
The world has made some progress since then. And our government has given
its reasons. It has said that the increase was advantageous because it would decrease
the number of passengers. As everyone knows, trains today find it advantageous if
passengers don't take them. The government not only gave its reasons but also provided a demonstration of them. It pointed out that trains from western France
were being used mainly by black-market traffickers, people whom we Ancients
called “hunger-bearers,” and who earned 10,000 francs per day with every trip.
Now, if I understand correctly, their trips will earn them only 9,243 francs per day,
which will obviously discourage them from resuming their activities.
Clearly the government is energetic. When Tiberius watched his moray eels
eating his slaves, he said that no government can ever be energetic enough. Our
ministers have grasped this point, and they continue to feed the slaves of the tax
collector to the eels of the black market.
SUETONIUS

January 7-8, 1945°°°
Spain is growing fainter.‘°’ A good many false news reports have come to us from
there.” Now it seems that everything is as expected, which is a roundabout way
of saying that Franco is still in power.
In truth, things couldn't be simpler. The Phalangist regime has been in power
as long as Hitler. Germany was on its last legs for a few months now, and the
Franco regime was following suit. Then, a few weeks ago, Germany recovered
some of its strength, and this spilled over into Spain, where the Hitlerian regime
appeared to regain some of its former solidity. This sharing of misfortune and
hope by the two countries, along with their common political alignment and
parallel rise and fall in temperature, should open everyone's eyes. But some people are incurably blind.
Meanwhile, among Spanish Republican émigrés, efforts have been made to
organize for more effective action. The Spanish Parliament has met in Mexico,

and Dr. Negrin has been prevented from speaking in London.“ It is true that
he had the unbelievable audacity to assert that Spain was not asking for allied

399 Camus’ interest in Caligula is of course well known. His play of that title would be written in
September 1945.
400 Editorial. Text signed A. C.
401 This sentence seems to echo the title of an article by Montherlant, “Barrés Is Growing Fainter,” which
was reprinted in Aux Fontaines du désir and used as the title of a section containing three texts about the
writer Maurice Barrés. The (perhaps unconscious) connection with Spain can be inferred from a passage
in one of these texts: “Toledo tells me that Barrés is growing fainter.” See Henri Montherlant, Essais (Paris :

Gallimard, 1963), p. 270.
402 See the editorial of December 10, 1944, p. 137. Camus of course closely followed events in Spain.
403 On Jan Negrin, see the editorial of November 21, 1944, and n. 273, p. 118.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

167

intervention and want nothing more than an end to the united nations’ diplomatic support for Franco. Obviously this offended common sense.
One has to believe, however, that M. Negrin had his reasons, because France
now seems to want to get involved. We are told that M. Mateu will arrive in Paris
on Wednesday with the rank of ambassador representing Phalangist Spain to the
French government. M. Mateu, who has a major interest in the Hispano-Suiza
Corp., whose German connections are well known, was indeed the man for the
hour. But if the reports are true, we want to state flatly that while he may have
been the best choice to represent a general who is serving the Germans, he is not
the right man to shake the hand of another general who has never served any
cause but that of France and freedom.
The French Republic has nothing in common with the dictatorship of Franco.
Maybe it’s true that we don’t have to intervene in Spain. But to resume diplomatic relations is to intervene, and we grant recognition to force and injustice
when we accredit their representative. We have other business to take care of.
And if we are incapable of erasing the unbearable shame of the Vichy government’s decision to hand Companys*™ and many others over to Phalangist firing
squads, let us at least shut our mouths and maintain a scrupulously neutral
silence. To do so will do us no honor but will at least spare us from indignity.
Some may object that we bring too much passion to our work when we write
about Spain. Yes, we do write with passion, but we also write about justice with
passion. Is this a way of saying that our idea of justice is mistaken? So much stupidity and cruelty, blindness in high places, politics mixed with human blood, so
many countries subjected for years to bloody and ridiculous dictatorships—who
can speak of such things without quivering with rage or passion? Some will say
that there may be high political reasons—very high political reasons—for maintaining relations with General Franco. But we know no higher political reasons
than honest words and human freedom. What political reasons could be high
enough to induce us to shake the hand of a man who was an accomplice to
everything we despised and everything we fought against?
America and England are not in a position to judge a humiliation they did not
endure and silent suffering they were spared, but how can we ignore such things?
In all of free Europe only we are capable of speaking in such terms. Why, then,
are we hesitating to state in no uncertain terms that we want nothing to do with
General Franco and will recognize only the constitutional government of Spain,

which the republicans are preparing to convene in a lawful assembly and with
the highest of hopes? Passion is here supported by reason and truth. One can
never be passionate enough, moreover, in defending a cause in which our reasons
and our truth are so deeply invested.
AK
404 Luis Companys (1883-1940) was president of the Generality of Catalonia in 1934. At odds with the
central government, he aligned himself with the Republicans in 1936. After the civil war he took refuge

in France, but the Vichy government handed him over to Franco. He was shot in Barcelona in 1940.
Camus recalls these facts in his article “Why Spain?” published in Combat on November 25, 1948 (see
p. 297 below) and reprinted in Actwelles.

168

CHAPTER

2

January 11, 1945

Justice and Charity”
M. Mauriac has just published under the title “Contempt for Charity” an article
that I find neither just nor charitable. In dealing with the issues that divide us,
he has for the first time taken a tone that I do not wish to make an issue of but
that I, at least, will refrain from adopting. I would not have responded to his article, moreover, had circumstances not conspired to oblige me to abandon these
daily debates in which the best and the worst of us have engaged for months
without clarifying any of the issues that truly matter to us.*°° I would not have
responded if I did not feel that this discussion, in which our very way of life is
at issue, was devolving into confusion. And since I am personally attacked, I
would like to end by speaking in my own name and trying one last time to make
clear what I have been trying to say.
Whenever I used the word justice in connection with the purge, M. Mauriac
spoke of charity. So singular is the virtue of charity, moreover, that in calling for
justice I seemed to be pleading on behalf of hatred. To hear M. Mauriac tell it,
it truly seems that in dealing with these mundane matters we must make an
absolute choice between the love of Christ and the hatred of men. Surely not!
Some of us reject both the cries of enmity that reach our ears from one side and
the tender solicitations that come to us from the other. Between these two
extremes, we are searching for the just voice that will give us truth without

shame. For that we do not need to be absolutely clear about everything; we need
only to desire clarity with passion and intellect and heart, qualities without
which neither M. Mauriac nor I are likely to do any good.
This is what allows me to say that charity has no business here. I have the
impression, moreover, that M. Mauriac is misreading the texts he has taken it
upon himself to contradict. Clearly he is a writer who works by feel rather than
argument, but on these questions I'd prefer that we set feelings aside. He has
completely misinterpreted me if he thinks that I’m smiling at the world we have
been given. When I say that the charity that has been held up as an example to
twenty nations starved for justice is paltry consolation, I beg my critic to believe
that I do so without smiling.
As long as I respect M. Mauriac for what he is, I have the right to reject what
he thinks. To do so, it is not necessary to feel the contempt for charity that he so
generously ascribes to me. On the contrary, our respective positions seem clear
to me. M. Mauriac does not wish to add to the hatred that already exists, and

405 Framed article printed with headline and signed Albert Camus. This unusual presentation underscores
the importance that Camus and Combat attached to this piece. Reprinted without title in Actwelles, chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
406 No doubt the fact that this article was the last published before Camus took a month’s leave from his
post (his first since August 21) played a part in its placement. Fatigue and illness (to which Camus refers
as “circumstances” and about which we know from Francine Camus’ letters to her mother) had made him

more vulnerable to Mauriac’s attacks, to which he here responds in his own name.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

169

in that I am quite prepared to follow him. But I do not wish to add to the lies
that already exist, and there I await his approval. Not to put too fine a point on
it, let me say that I am waiting for him to say openly that there is today a need
for justice.
To tell the truth, I don’t believe he will: this is a responsibility he will not
assume. M. Mauriac, who has written that our Republic should know how to be
harsh, is meditating on the possibility of writing before too long a word he has
yet to utter: pardon. To him I would simply say this, that I see for our country
two ways unto death (and there are ways of surviving that are no better than
death): the way of hatred and the way of pardon.*”” One seems to me as disastrous as the other. I have no taste for hatred. The mere idea of having enemies
strikes me as the most tiresome thing in the world, and my comrades and I had
to make the most strenuous of efforts to see the enemy as such. But pardon
seems no better to me, and in today’s circumstances it would look like an insult.
In any case, I am convinced that it is not up to us. If death sentences horrify me,
that is my business. I shall join M. Mauriac in granting open pardons when
Vélin’s parents*”® and Leynaud’s wife*” tell me that I can. But not before. Never
before, so as not to betray, for the sake of an effusion of the heart, what I have
always loved and respected in this world, the fount of man’s nobility, which is
loyalty.
That may be a hard thing to hear. I can only hope that M. Mauriac is aware
that it no less hard to say. I stated flatly that Béraud did not deserve the death
penalty, and I confess that I have no imagination left for the leg irons that,
according to M. Mauriac, those found guilty of treason are required to wear. It
took all the imagination at my disposal over four long years to conceive of the
fate of thousands of Frenchmen who had honor on their side and yet were consigned to the worst tortures on the word of journalists whom some would now
turn into martyrs. Asa man, I may admire M. Mauriac for his ability to love traitors, but as a citizen, I deplore it, because such love will bring us a nation of

treacherous and mediocre men and a society we no longer want anything to
do with.
Finally, M. Mauriac has flung Christ in my face. I will tell him this, with all

appropriate gravity: I think I have an accurate idea of the grandeur of Christianity, but some of us in this persecuted world have the feeling that if Christ

died for certain people, he didn’t die for us.*'° Yet we refuse to give up hope in
man. While lacking the unreasonable ambition to save man, we are at least keen
to serve him. While we are willing to do without God or hope, we cannot give
up as easily on man. On this point I can indeed tell M. Mauriac that we have

407 As early as May 1944, Camus declared himself to be “without hatred and without compassion” in
regard to Pierre Pucheu.
408 On Vélin, the pen name of André Bollier, see “A Newspaper in History.”
409 On René Leynaud, see the editorial of October 27, 1944, p. 90.
410 Camus described his position with respect to Christianity in his editorial of September 8, 1944, p. 31.

This sentence resonates with any number of passages in The Plague and The Fall, among other works.

ara

Ee

Ema

TET

ET

|
170

CHAPTER

2

not lost heart and will refuse to the end a divine charity that would frustrate men
of the justice they are due.
ALBERT CAMUS

February 9, 1945"!
To judge by what is being said about us, it would seem that Combat has changed
its line and succumbed to a regrettable fever of opposition.*” It is true that since
the Liberation many things and many people have changed. And I suppose that
is why the very people who have remained steadfast in what they were saying are
now accused of inconsistency.
In any case, I am bound to say that Combat has never changed its position.
Our team has remained united around the very things that united us in insurrection and that keep us together now in a time of great confusion. This paper's
editorial writers are jointly responsible for what the paper says.*!*
Careful readers are well aware of this. We have always said that liberation was
not liberty and that the fight against the Nazi enemy was for us identical with
the fight against the power of money. We have always maintained that alliance
politics was not enough and that our only goal was a world organization that
would at last bring peace among nations.
For six months we have championed the same program without wavering. For
six months we have called for a war—and-reconstruction economy what would
mark a break with the past, and for socializations (first of all in banking) that would
place production at the service of the collectivity rather than abandon it to the private interests whose dereliction of duty we have noted. For six months we have
called for the creation of a true popular democracy based on economic justice and
liberal politics. For six months, aware of the contradictions that are suffocating a
world caught between an economy that is now international and a politics that
remains stubbornly national, we have called for a world economic federation, in

which raw materials, commercial markets, and currency would be internationalized
and which would also lay the groundwork for a political federation that might prevent the nations of the world from slitting each other's throats every twenty years.*"4

411 Editorial. Signed text.
412 Probably an allusion to an article that appeared in Le Monde’s “review of the press” on January 25,
which expressed surprise at “the limited role that Combat is apparently inclined to allow for groups from
the Resistance,” owing to its rejection of the national union advocated by Communist Party leader
Maurice Thorez, which according to Combat would become the only party in a one-party state.
413 Camus, who had published nothing since January 11, had been back at the paper for a few days but
on a somewhat reduced schedule. He resumed his position and his full responsibility with this signed article, following which editorials once again became anonymous, as they had been in the first few months,
a move no doubt intended to serve as a guarantee of unity among the various editorialists.
“14 These two paragraphs succinctly summarize Combars political line prior to the emergence of ideological cleavages.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

171

We were not alone last August in defending this program, and we were not all
that original. Near unanimity existed then, and therein lay our greatest source of
hope. Our government had accepted the principles set forth above. And it was
for precisely that reason that we gave the government our support while vowing
to remain vigilant and directing all our effort to defending the common hope in
the language of objectivity. What has changed to occasion such surprise in some
of our comrades? Let us be blunt: what has changed, it seems, is not our convictions but the intentions of the government.
The decisions taken over the past few weeks and the policies adopted by certain ministries are no longer consistent with the program outlined above. There
are ministers who no longer have our confidence because they no longer have our
approval. We are not the ones who are isolating ourselves at the present time; it
is the government that is isolating itself: For we are not alone. The Socialist Party,
the trade unions, and, last but not least, the C.N.R., have recently announced
their positions. M. Cachin himself has published two articles correcting the latest declarations of the Communist Party and calling for needed socializations.*””
No, nothing has changed, except perhaps the goals of the government.
What else is there to say? The word “opposition” has been mentioned. I myself
would find opposition unfortunate. I hope we can avoid it. But we will choose
the path of opposition tomorrow without hesitation if the domestic political program that has been announced fails to prove that the government has kept its
promises. For we too have promises to keep. We made them at a time when
humiliation had become a religion and dereliction of duty a national pastime.
We will keep our promises out of respect for ourselves and for the people of this
country. That is our idea of honesty, in any event, and we shall stand by it.
ALBERT CAMUS

February 16, 1945‘"°
Along with other difficult issues, the Crimea Conference had to decide whether

the decisions taken by the future League of Nations would be taken by majority
vote or unanimous consent.*!” A reader not well-versed on this issue might conclude that this was a matter of pure form. In fact, the whole future of the world
hangs in the balance.*!8
415 Marcel Cachin (1869-1958), a member of the SFIO, was one of the founders of the Communist Party

at the Congress of Tours in 1920. He directed the newspaper L'Humanité from 1918 to his death and
played an important role in the Resistance. After the war he became a deputy and was regularly reelected.
416 Editorial. Text probably by Camus.
417 The reference is to the important Yalta Conference, in which Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt met from
February 4 to February 11. A prelude to the San Francisco Conference that established the United
Nations, the Yalta Conference drew new borders in Europe, divided Germany into zones of occupation,
and established that the Polish government would be open to Polish émigrés in London.
418 The lucidity of this remark cannot be overstated. The Yalta Conference did indeed prove decisive for
the future of the world, most notably by establishing spheres of influence for East and West.

172

CHAPTER

2

What is really at stake? Imagine a political conflict between two members of
the League leading to sanctions against one of them. The question is whether
those sanctions can be enforced as soon as a majority of nations finds against one
of the parties to the dispute, or whether sanctions must wait until unanimous
consent has been achieved. If the latter, the power in danger of being punished by
the world council would obviously have to approve the measures taken against it.
Its veto would be enough to nullify any decision of the Supreme Council.
Clearly, the question of the veto comes down to this: either the future League
of Nations will be a federal instrument that will strictly enforce the rules of an
international democracy, or it will be an organization that will call upon the great
powers to demonstrate the supreme virtue of sanctioning themselves for their
own imperialist aims. Although we are widely reputed to harbor utopian inclinations, we have only moderate confidence in human virtue, hence we conclude
that it is a question of choosing between international democracy on the one
hand and recognition of imperialism on the other.
In this respect, the decisions of the Crimean Conference were decisions of
boundless importance. The official communiqué stated that the problem had
been resolved. The solution was disclosed today by The New York Times, which
is generally reliable and whose report has yet to be contradicted. According to
that paper, the veto power will be maintained, but its use on all major issues will

be limited to the five great powers: the U.S.S.R., the United States, Great
Britain, France, and China.*”
If this report is accurate, it is of considerable importance, for it would effectively put an end to any idea of international democracy. The world would in
effect be ruled by a directorate of five powers. The decisions they take will still
be applicable to all other nations, but any one of the five could nullify a decision
against its own interests by exercising its veto. The Five would thus retain forever
the freedom of maneuver that would be forever denied the others.
We are well aware that it is flattering for us to be counted among the five powers. We are also well aware that this solution would resolve the German question
for some period of time. But we are only too well aware as well of the reasons for
five years of dreadful struggles and atrocious miseries not to say as simply as possible how deeply distressing we find decisions such as these. They bear on the fate
of millions of people who expected that with victory would come certainty that
the peace would last long enough for them at least to forget their pain. They
expected that some kind of international law would protect small nations as well
as great ones and punish imperialist projects. Instead, if the Times report is correct, what they are being offered is an ephemeral balance of power and inevitable
struggles for influence. They expected the victorious countries to give up a portion of their sovereignty to an international organization. Instead they are confronted with a reinforcement of great-power sovereignty at the expense of the
sovereignty of smaller nations.

“19 These five nations were to enjoy permanent seats on the Security Council.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

173

To be sure, France retains her sovereignty. But the point is that it is incumbent
on France to declare forthrightly that justice is not served by this decision and
that the path that we are being asked to take in the name of “realities” fails to
take account of two terrifying realities, war and conquest, which will eventually
bring the world to a new confrontation with death. France, whose wealth today
consists solely in her labor and her liberty, should say to the world that the only
realistic course leads to economic federalism, to the sharing of wealth, and to the
submission of all nations to the rule of international democracy. These were the
purposes for which this country took upon itself for four years the burden of
guns, deaths, and tortured bodies. And since some would speak to us of
grandeur, let us continue to say that if our grandeur is to be built on the misfortune of others, we want no part of it.

February 17, 1945°7°

“Here, at least, we aren't living amidst lies,” said a friend of ours who is fighting
on the Alsatian front. When we first published these words, some found them
bitter, others atrocious.*?’ Unfortunately, events seem to justify them all the
more with each passing day. But if we are to maintain the proper attitude and
the proper detachment, it behooves us to distinguish between lying on the one
hand and equivocation and confusion on the other.
It was a lie to declare, hand on heart, that France has always played a benevolently protective role vis-a-vis her colonies, yet we have no reason to doubt the
sincerity of the words that General de Gaulle spoke on the occasion of the
Annamite [Vietnamese] holiday Tet, or the munificent promise he held out to
millions of people: “France intends to make the political, economic, social, and
cultural development of the Indochinese Union one of its primary goals.”
Such declarations can easily be negated, however, if we invoke a nonexistent
tradition to support them. If we insist that none of the past can be repudiated, we

seriously impair our chances of future success. As everyone knows, the General
Government in Indochina balanced its budget by selling opium, just as it browbeat local “elites” and oppressed the people. If France wants to remain in control
in the Far East, it must announce that it intends to renounce such methods.
A much more serious lie, and much more dangerous for the future, is to pretend
to be working toward an international democracy when (according to a report
published in yesterday's New York Times) the five great powers intend to reserve to

420 Editorial. Text possibly by Camus.
421 The repetition of a previously quoted phrase and the explicit reference to the editorial of December
13, p. 138, which Camus signed, suggest that this editorial was also by him, but a few days earlier Camus

had noted that “the editorialists . . . answer to one another.” The question cannot be resolved on internal
grounds. Camus was not a specialist on Indochina. That role was filled by Colonel Bernard, who would
later publish a number of key articles on that issue. But Camus was interested in colonial issues and in the
relation of the nation to people and state.

174

CHAPTER

2

themselves the veto power, a decision which, if confirmed, will lead to implicit
recognition of various types of imperialism. In this connection, it is worth pointing out the persistent ambiguity of the terms people, nation, and state.

If our century is one in which economic and social realities have interpenetrated and the interests of peoples fit uncomfortably within the obsolete limits of
the nation, the history of the past thirty years has taught us that the state has often
worked against the nation. It has become a commonplace to maintain that no
matter what the circumstances a country needs a strong state. But the heart of the
issue lies elsewhere. A people either chooses or allows to be imposed on it a regime
whose executive and ruling organs constitute the state. The less the doctrine that
state champions in the nation and in the world is linked to the particular interests of the people it represents and to the general interests of the peoples that surround it, the more power it will seek, even to the point of becoming despotic.
The ill-fated Pétain, following an absurd logic of his own, tried to resolve the
problem of the relationship between people, nation, and government by substituting the “French State” for the “French Republic,” which strictly speaking
made no sense. We should be careful not to confuse matters further by turning
the state into a kind of superior entity that must be “served.” It is the role of prefects to serve the state, but the role of the state in a regime like ours is to serve a
policy that is well expressed, albeit incompletely, in the Charter of the Resistance,
for example. A democracy needs a coherent and energetic state but not a “strong
state” in the sense that the word has taken on. In our case, this coherence and
energy should be used to accomplish needed reforms at home and defend the
French people’s desire for peace in the world.
We are of course aware that the French government is not responsible for the
decisions taken at Yalta, but as General de Gaulle has said, France need not feel
bound by any agreement to which it was not a party, and which it can approve
only as the representative of the French people.
As distressing as it is not to live in a world of truth, let us not exacerbate our
pain by allowing the best of us to die at the front in a climate of deceit.
March 9, 1945‘?
For two days, M. Teitgen,*” the minister of information, has been under attack
by the Consultative Assembly. Today he is going to answer. While his justifications may be clever and honest, we doubt that they will get to the heart of the

422 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, who often defended the Resistance press against newspapers sub-

ject to the power of money. The vehemence of the attack on Pierre-Henri Teitgen may have been due to
Pascal Pia, though Pia, it should be remembered, usually signed the few articles he wrote. Furthermore,
the attribution of the article of March 16, which would respond to Témoignage chrétien’s attack on this
piece, is almost beyond doubt.
423 On Paul-Henri Teitgen, see the editorials (and notes) of September 10 and October 29, 1944, pp. 34
and 92.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

175

issue. Why should they, since most of the criticism directed at him has concerned
questions of paper and allocation, which are no doubt important but surely
secondary?
In fact, what should have been challenged is the very existence of the ministry
of information and its mission. On the face of it, there is reason to doubt the

need for such a ministry. For if it were a matter of informing the public about
government policy, each ministry has press attachés for that purpose, who, by the
way, discharge their duties without giving the slightest thought to the ministry
of information.
As for material difficulties such as the lack of paper, these were never enough
to justify the creation of a special industry. They could have been dealt with by
a professional organization such as the Press Federation or a department of the
ministry of industrial production. Hence the real reasons for the existence of the
ministry of information lie elsewhere.
M. Teitgen’s mission and that of his ministry was clear: it was to effect a transition. M. Teitgen was supposed to file indictments against those newspaper
companies that worked with the enemy for four years. He was supposed to oversee the confiscation of their property and make sure that the confiscated property was put to good use. He was supposed to grant authorization to publish to
new newspapers provided that they satisfied certain clear and generally recognized criteria. And finally, he was supposed to draft rules that would protect the
French press from the influence of financial and economic interests.
M. Teitgen has done none of these things—nothing serious, at any rate. In
some areas he contented himself with short-term expedients, while in others he
resolutely abstained from taking any action at all.
As far as authorizations to publish are concerned, they were awarded without rhyme or reason, other than an obvious inclination to favor the popular
democrats.*”* A post of this kind calls for a man capable of remaining above the
parties. M. Teitgen preferred to ensconce himself in his own.
This was a serious offense. More serious still was the fact that he allowed a
new press regime to establish itself without reinforcing either its discipline or its
freedom. For this is a matter that affects not only newspapers but freedom in
general.
There are two ways of infringing liberty: by police power or economic power.
The latter can be exercised either directly—in a material manner—or indirectly,
by orienting the way people think, by addling their brains, by using the press to
bias them in favor of special interests. The law of 1881, which still governs the
press in this country, left the door wide open to the power of money. It has been
amended only slightly. We now know the extent to which the moneyed interests
used the press before the war.
In order for the Resistance press to see the light of day, how many men and
women were killed, tortured, or deported? Must all that sacrifice have been in
424 The last phrase should no doubt be read as “Christian democrats,” since Teitgen was one of the lead-

ers of the M.R.P., the Christian Democratic party.

176

CHAPTER

2

vain? And today, because nothing stands in the way, must this or that newspaper
be allowed to accept money from some well-heeled lender, abdicate its independence, and squander the fortune in courage and sacrifice that enabled it
to become what it is? Is freedom truly served when such things are allowed to
happen?
If the Resistance press, still vulnerable to pressure from the moneyed interest
or from government, ultimately forsakes or betrays the national interests that justify its existence, some dishonor will attach to the failure to do anything to
attempt to protect it from such pressure. It may already be too late.
If M. Teitgen does not intend to serve the free press, why is he waiting to say
so? And if he cannot, why is he waiting to resign?

March 11-12, 1945”
Yesterday we published as objective as possible a report of M. Teitgen’s speech.
Truthfulness obliged us to say that the speech was clever enough to change the
sentiments of a portion of the Assembly. It is also true, however, that the speech
seemed clever only because the objections put to the minister were weak or
incomplete. Once again, clarity is called for.
Let us start off by saying that M. Teitgen is quite right to call for a reform of
political morality. We at Combat will not contradict him on this point, and we
do not wish to pick a personal quarrel with him. All we are saying is that if journalists are expected to be impartial, a minister should not place himself above his
office and should not be too sensitive to criticism. There was nothing modest
about M. Teitgen’s speech. M. Francisque Gay,’”° in his defense of the minister,
also muddied the waters. The fact that M. Teitgen is a Catholic is of no importance, and we readily grant that he is a man of many merits who has suffered per-

sonally. But that has nothing to do with his office. The rules of politics in this
case are rules of modesty.
Our role is to judge not what M. Teitgen is but what he does. In recent days
he has received a wide range of criticisms of varying merit. But the one major
criticism that takes precedence over all the others was made by M. Texier
alone.*”” In a sense, it is of no importance that new newspapers were granted
authorization to publish, and it was not inappropriate for M. Teitgen to summon
all his “spiritual families” to speak at the same time. But strict legal statutes
“25 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, a follow-up to the previous one and included in the reply by
Témoignage chrétien.
426 Francisque Gay (1885-1963)

was a Christian activist in Marc Sangnier’s “Sillon” movement.

He

turned the publishing house that he directed into one of the centers of the Resistance. As director of
L’Aube, he was one of the founders of the M.R.P. He served as a member of the Consultative Assembly
and deputy from Paris and later as vice-premier or minister in governments headed by de Gaulle, Gouin,

and Bidault. Some months after this article was published, he tried to arbitrate between Combat and
Henri Frenay and Claude Bourdet.
427 J. Texier, one of the first resisters, who became editor of a daily paper in 1944-45.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

Weed

governing the press should have been issued first, in order to assure its champions that the children of Pascal and Voltaire of whom the minister spoke were not
also the cousins of Messieurs de Wendel.*”8
The simple question is this: has M. Teitgen established a legal statute governing the press, or has he not? He knew the importance of such regulations,
because he assented to them when the Resistance was still underground. But he
has not issued them. The day before yesterday he said that he was about “to take
the necessary preliminary steps.” But the broad outlines of the statute were
worked out underground, and the reform should have taken no time at all: all
that was needed was the will to implement it. Apparently that will was lacking.
That is how things stand today. Our proposals are treated as “advice,” and the
government's promises are deferred. Structural reforms have been put on hold,
financial measures have been delayed, and the press statute has been postponed.
Tomorrow, when the enemy has consolidated its position, the reforms will fail or
will be seen as bad. We will be the utopians.
This is how things will go with the press if we are not vigilant. We of the
underground press had confidence in ourselves. We knew the price of shame,
and the memory of our comrades served as our guarantee. But other newspapers
have emerged. We do not hold them in suspicion, nor are we accusing them of
anything. We are simply saying that we haven't as much confidence in them as
we have in ourselves. It is no doubt a good thing that they are publishing, but
the press statute should have been announced first, before the authorization to
publish was granted. This was not done. Now the gates are open. Regardless of
what M. Teitgen may want, money will find a way in if it wants to and if it has
not done so already. That is our case, and as you can see, it is a simple one.
M. Teitgen has a pure heart and a guilty mind. He will forgive us if we withdraw
our confidence in him.
The verdict is not ours to decide, but that won't stop us from stating our
views. M. Francisque Gay, again defending the minister, said that if the “rotten
press” returned, the blame would fall on the Resistance press and not on the minister. We will continue to protest against this view as long as we have an ounce
of energy. The Resistance press did what was within its power: it occupied premises during the insurrection and published newspapers under conditions without
historical precedent. Afterward, it was up to the minister to give a statutory definition of freedom of the press. Within its limited domain, the Resistance press
made history. The minister was supposed to make law. He did not do so, and for

that he is entirely responsible, whatever his intentions may have been.
Hence our conclusion is unambiguous. In politics, it is not possible simply to
be what you were. You define yourself by what you do. On the one issue where
there was something to do, M. Teitgen did nothing. Pardon us, therefore, for
saying that in our eyes he is nothing. Or at any rate, he should be nothing from
now on.
428 The Wendels were a family of industrialists who for decades had been a major power in the steel industry as well as in politics and finance.

178

CHAPTER

2

March 16, 1945”

In Témoignage chrétien, Father Chaillet was good enough to comment on our
position in regard to the current minister of information.*° His manner is courteous, but he manages to confuse a number of different things. In particular, we
would like to assure him that it is perfectly possible to have an opinion about the
press statute and the usefulness of a minister without necessarily invoking a philosophy of solitude and irony. It is in fact rather naive to assume the opposite.
Whatever our philosophy might be, assuming we all share one in common, we

can assure Témoignage chrétien that we don't rely on it to deal with all of life’s
vicissitudes. We aren't that inspired.
The problem we are facing is a merely practical one. We are asking for a press
statute that the minister has had six months to prepare and which he tells us is still
only in the preliminary stages. We're afraid that it may be too late. Father Chaillet
wonders whether the statute will be enough to prevent the moneyed interests from
taking a hand in the affairs of the press. In our view, this is not the right question.
True enough, there is no certainty that the statute will have the desired effect, and
we are not so naive as to believe that institutions, even well-wrought institutions,
can by themselves vanquish interests. What is certain, however, is that money will
have its way if an intelligently crafted statute is not adopted. Father Chaillet can
take it on faith that we are certain of two or three things that have nothing to do
with philosophy. If the regulation of the sale of paper were to end tomorrow, we
would return to the press regime that existed before the war, and the independent
press would cease to exist in this country. To cite just one example, any press baron
prepared to make the necessary financial sacrifice for the required period of time
could print newspapers of twelve pages and sell them for the same price as our
four- to six-page editions, and the circulation of the paper published by Father
Chaillet’s friends would collapse within a few months, as would ours.
If a new statute does not prohibit these practices or force paper dealers to
charge the publishers of twelve-page papers three times what they charge the
429 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus, to judge by its content and tone; a follow-up to the editorials of
March 9 and 11-12.
450 On Témoignage chrétien, see the editorial of September 16, 1944, n. 52, p. 31. In the March 16, 1945,
issue of that paper, Father Chaillet published an article entitled “Notes on an Important Debate,” in
which he defended Pierre-Henri Teitgen’s speech to the Consultative Assembly against the criticisms of
“the Combat editorial writer,” from whose editorials he cited a number of passages and whom he praised
in passing as a writer he “always profits from reading” despite their “metaphysical differences.” In particular, he reproached the writer for “attacking the assembly born of the Resistance” and “putting weapons

into the hands of those waiting for the right moment to attack publicly the press born of the same Resistance.” He added: “We agree as to the corrupting virtue of money. . . . But is there any assurance that a
statute will suffice to prevent the failure of the reforms?” He concludes by commenting on the final paragraph in the March 11-12 editorial: “It is peremptory, as if establishing despair as a standard. This judgment may well be appropriate for the solitude ofaphilosophy of irony. It does not have a useful place in
a progressive revolution, where what one was has considerable influence on what one must become. It is
not as easy to build a new world as it is to build a stage set.” Was this allusion to the theater a reference
to Le Malentendv?

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

179

publishers of four-page papers, our dead comrades will have sacrificed in vain.
France will go back to the same old lies as before.
This simple example should be enough to justify our harsh criticism of M. Teitgen.
In any case, it should show that we are inspired solely by a general concern for the
public good. The personality of the minister in question is of little interest to us, but
what he has done and above all what he hasn't done are of great interest. And contrary to the views of our amiable opponent, to judge the minister solely by what he
has done is by no means a token of despair. In human terms, we readily acknowledge
that what a man has done in the past should always be taken into account, but the
actions of a minister cannot be judged on sentimental grounds.
Finally, when we say that journalists of the Resistance did what they had to do
to bring about a revolution of the press, we are not thinking of what they have
done since the liberation. We are in a good position to know that in that respect
they have not always set a shining example, although they have done at least as
well as the new non-Resistance newspapers. We are thinking only of what the
Resistance press did during the insurrection, when it achieved every objective it
was assigned. Since then, it has waited for the minister to consecrate its victory.
But the minister’s mind was elsewhere, and it is because of this distraction that
we are withdrawing our confidence.
Our friends from Témoignage chrétien should therefore be able to see perfectly
well that philosophy has nothing to do with our position. Yet a policy so obviously riddled with inconsistencies might well lead us to adopt a philosophy in
which bitterness played too large a part were it not for our rational faith in man,
which makes obstinacy a primary virtue.

March 18, 1945*°!
Breaking our general rule, we trust that we may just this once speak out in anger.
Many sources tell us that the siege of Paris has not ended and that miserable
Parisians who go to the countryside in search of food for their families are being
arrested, searched, and threatened. After their contraband is confiscated, their
meat ration is not increased by a single gram but is instead canceled for several
weeks. They are threatened, while the black market, far from suffering as a result,
is thriving as never before, since people have to pay seventeen francs for the same
egg they bought for five francs only to have it snatched from the mouths of the
children of Paris by the economic police.
The bounds of decency have been exceeded. M. Ramadier**” has thus far
distinguished himself by handling all logistical matters with perfect neutrality. In
the most difficult of situations, this minister has chosen never to intervene.
Instead, he contents himself with reporting to those under his jurisdiction about
431 Editorial. Text possibly by Camus, in that Camus previously wrote of certain ministers in harshly critical
terms, particularly those ministers who held positions of responsibility before the war, as Ramadier did.
432 On Paul Ramadier, see editorial of December 15, n. 340, p. 142.

180

CHAPTER

2

a situation that they are perfectly capable of assessing without his help. He breaks
his silence only to announce what he has not been able to do. He does so courteously and objectively. As an informer he could not possibly do better.
For a time it was possible to believe that this minister was a disciple of
Machiavelli.’ He banned the consumption of meat so that our allies would give
us corned beef. M. Ramadier had apparently decided to prick the honor of the
Americans. Since he did nothing, they were forced to do something in his stead.
But then our butter was also taken away, along with other things about which
the Allies could do nothing. Hence this was not a policy; it was a system based
on sharing and distributing a single commodity: statistics.
This system was just barely tolerable, but it depended on allowing each consumer the freedom to supply his own needs. Since the government was incapable
of demolishing Vichy’s system, the absurd autonomy of the départements, and the
omnipotence of the prefects, Parisians concluded that it was up to them to go
out and find the dozen eggs that the minister of supply took six months to fail
to come up with. They did so, and their ingenuity is daily saving the lives of the
children indispensable to our future.
Now M. Ramadier has decided to emerge from his lengthy period of slumber.
And as if to deny the people under his jurisdiction the right to succeed where he
failed, he has dispatched a swarm of zealous lackeys across Paris to persecute all
who refused to die of hunger.
This we cannot stand for. For months now, M. Ramadier has demonstrated
that he was incapable of meeting our needs. We will not ask him to resign, since
everybody knows that ministers enjoy a longevity in office inversely proportional
to their abilities, and everyone knows that stable governments are strong governments. Nevertheless, we can insist that he not shed the enviable beatitude that
has enveloped him for many months.
All we expect of him is that he continue on his course while allowing private
individuals to do what he was incapable of doing. M. Ramadier cannot be unaware
that infant mortality rose by 40 percent this winter. We will allow him to welcome
this news with serenity and admit that there is nothing he can do to improve the
situation. But we will not allow him to stand in the way of people who feel less easy
in their hearts when their own children’s lives are at stake and who do for themselves what they waited in vain for the government to do for them.
March 27, 1945°*“

It is rather vexing and a bit ridiculous to be obliged today to take a stand on the
issue of /aicité [the French tradition of secular education—Trans.]. This may
seem like beating a dead horse, and we refrained from intervening in this
433 Machiavelli, Nicolo (1469-1527), whose masterpiece The Prince describes a political doctrine based

on cynicism.
434 Editorial. Text authenticated by a letter from Francine Camus to her mother, which included this article.

as
AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

181

_ polemic because we hoped it would be short-lived. Yet it seems that this is not
| to be, since the government itself is about to take a stand and since M. Capitant**”

on Saturday filed a bill that met with a certain indignation before being with**°
| drawn yesterday.

:
In any event, the issue cannot be avoided and must be dealt with. Our only
__ regret is that it has been raised at all. Catholic activists, lacking foresight and pru_ dence, have placed weapons in the hands of their enemies. Sure of receiving a
_ favorable hearing in certain quarters of the government, they forgot the risk of
: offending the many Frenchmen who see secular education as the best guarantee
of freedom of conscience. In this respect, to say that this debate is inopportune
is also to offer an opinion on the issue it raises.
Freedom of conscience is far too precious a thing for us to attempt to regulate
it in an atmosphere of passion. Restraint is essential. Christians and unbelievers
should also note that with respect to education, freedom of conscience depends
on freedom of choice. Since teaching is provided by the state, the state cannot
teach or assist in the teaching of truths not acknowledged by everyone. Thus it
is possible to imagine the state offering lessons in civics.*8” Here it is unchallenged. By contrast, it is impossible to imagine official instruction in religion,

because contradictory views cannot be avoided. Faith can no more be taught
than love. Those who are sure enough of their truth to want to teach it to others should do so with their own funds. They cannot reasonably ask the state to
do it or help them to do it.
For nearly half a century, we have known only one peace in France, namely,
religious peace. We have enjoyed peace because religious teaching was based on
the principles set forth above. Why modify now the institutions that embodied
this peace? They have been good for everyone because, we are happy to say, they
made anticlericalism a thing of the past. Opening those institutions to question
will surely harm the interests of religion more than it will serve them.
We have always treated religious issues with the respect and attention they
deserve. That is why we feel justified in warning Catholics against carrying their
convictions too far. No one wants to see a dialogue between Christians and
435 René Capitant (1901-1970) was a jurist and among the first to join the “Combat” movement (along
with E de Menthon he was one of the founders of Liberté). A convinced Gaullist, he was a member of

the National Liberation Committee and served as minister of national education in the Provisional Government. In 1968 he became minister of justice. He also wrote numerous political works, including De
la Résistance a la rénovation (1945), a title that seemed to echo the subtitle of Combat. In October 1940

Camus published excerpts from Capitant’s 1935 book on the doctrine of national socialism in Le Soir
Républicain, along with an introduction of his own (see Fragments d'un combat, Il, pp. 653-657).

436 In 1940 the Vichy government instituted a policy of granting generous subsidies to private schools
(including religious schools). Capitant proposed setting up a special fund to replace these subsidies. When
the Consultative Assembly debated the issue a few days later prior to voting on the national education
budget, Capitant defended the principle of secular education but argued that the subsidies could not be
eliminated without first approving transitional measures. In fact, the appropriations were continued until
the end of the school year and terminated as of July 15, 1945.
437 Civics instruction now exists, but the problem of state aid to private schools, which now exists in
France, still gives rise to passionate debates.

182

CHAPTER

2

unbelievers more than we do, because we think both sides would benefit. But the
lay school is in fact one place where such an encounter is possible. Even with all
the objectivity in the world, the same cannot be said of private [religious]

schools. Many of our university and high school teachers are Catholics and even
priests, and there is nothing wrong with that. There is no reason why a similar
collaboration cannot be established in the public elementary schools. By contrast, it is impossible, or at any rate very rare, for unbelievers to teach freely in
religious schools. That is where we see advantages to objectivity. For us, that settles the matter.
Vichy had its reasons for ignoring these arguments and subsidizing private
schools. Those reasons no longer exist today, and it is right for the state to
reclaim its freedom. Beyond that, we have only the following to say. If we were
Catholics, and if, as would only be natural, we wished to spread our convictions
as widely as possible, we would favor eliminating private religious schools alto-

gether, and we would participate directly, as individuals, in national lay education. Young Catholics would thereby gain precious experience of the people of
this country and of a national reality which their sheltered upbringing all too
often prevents them from seeing. It would thus serve a common goal, which it
must be granted restores to its proper place the parochial dispute over subsidies
to which we have just been treated.

March 29, 1945*°°
Truth is a harsh master, allowing no time for rest. Today we had intended to
moderate our tentative approval of the government’s Indochina plan. We
intended to say that if the plan set forth by M. Giacobbi*” marked a certain
progress with respect to our traditional colonial policy, it nevertheless betrayed a
timidity that would prevent it from achieving its stated goal. We wanted to show
that the grant of unlimited powers to the governor-general, the vagueness of the
proposed election procedures, and the emphasis on the military aspect of our
undertaking—in short, everything about the plan—suggested a failure to understand that reform can be effective only if it is total.
All these things still need to be said. Yet even as we contemplated the best way
to say them, the following dispatch from the Americans’ United Press forced
itself upon our attention: “Officials in Washington did not seek to deny reports
that Allied strategy included no plans to supply weapons to French Resistance
forces in Indochina, as General de Gaulle has requested.”
438 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus. The accent on “solitude” and “solidarity” in the last two paragraphs should offer sufficient guarantees of its authenticity. On Camus and Indochina, see the article of
February 17, 1945, n. 421, p. 173.
439 Paul Giacobbi, a member of the Radical Party and senator of the Democratic Left, was one of eighty

deputies who refused to grant Pétain full powers in 1940. He served as minister of supply in the Provisional Government until November 15, 1944, and then as minister of colonies. In April 1947 he became
one of the founders of the Gaullist R.RE, only to quit the party a short time later.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

183

So this is one of those times when it becomes difficult to report the truth. Do
we have the right to make demands of our own country at a time when others
are making judgments about it that they have no business making? Should we
challenge French colonial policy at a time when it is being repudiated by foreign
powers? If not, should we acquiesce in a degradation of our country’s image on
the pretext that anything likely to enhance that image runs the risk of serving its
rivals? Should we renounce our sense of justice for the sake of our prestige
abroad?
These are not questions to be treated lightly. Of course we know that many
people in such circumstances would not hesitate to choose silence, setting their
country’s interests above the interests of justice. We intend to speak out, however, because we believe that the two are inextricably intertwined and that the
face that France must show the world is the face of justice.
We begin by saying to all who oppose us that our reforms in Indochina will
accomplish nothing if they are seen as concessions made necessary by events
rather than as formal signs of a policy of emancipation. This is the basis on which
we will be judged, and every one of our hesitations will become a weapon against
us. Justice, full justice—therein lies our victory. Indochina will be with us if
France leads the way by introducing both democracy and freedom there. But if
we hesitate at all, Indochina will join forces with anyone at all, provided they are
against us. Given the extremity of the situation in which we find ourselves, half

measures are out of the question. The French government must understand this,
and no matter what the situation, we must repeat it constantly.
At the same time, however, we say to the American people that their government’ stated policy cannot possibly be what they want, that their boys cannot
possibly be fighting so that French soldiers in Indochina can be sacrificed to
nameless interests. All great nations make mistakes, and America has made its

share.
True, France has not always done all it should have done. But there has always
been a part of itself that was not taken in by its mistakes, and on two or three
occasions it was able to do more than it was obliged to do. The Americans cannot be unaware of this.
They have never been our enemies. At no time in history have we ever not
been brothers in arms and thought. And we know that the American people cannot want to see what is purest in that fraternity betrayed by the sacrifice of men
fighting in enemy territory in our common cause.
The men who are addressing these words to their American comrades know
what resistance in an occupied country means. It is above all an overwhelming
sense of solitude. When that solitude goes without support, when arms do not
fall from the sky, it turns into despair. And the ultimate sin in this world is to
rob courage of hope.
National fortunes come and go, and man’s struggles are ephemeral. What is
not ephemeral, however, is man’s solidarity in the face of suffering and injustice.
Beyond governments, beyond the interests of a few, we know that the cause of the
American people is also our cause and will continue to be so as long as freedom

184

CHAPTER

2

is interfered with anywhere in the world. It is this certainty that compels us, with
clear awareness of our mistakes but also conscious of the justice of our request,

to call upon the free people of America not to allow this sacrifice.

April 3, 19454%°
What was being celebrated yesterday in the city’s streets? The hope of imminent
victory, premature armistice fever, the joyful union of nation and army, an
enthusiasm that even empty stomachs could do nothing to dampen, and a people’s insistence on hoisting its banners even though the world pays them no heed.
There was a great deal to celebrate, many things that permeated the crowd itself
and made it difficult to perceive from within it what was worth celebrating and
shouting about.
Far from the areas where the crowd gathered and cheered, however, deserted
Paris wore its historical face. For that, a few old stones and a river forever young
were enough. The eerie silence of the abandoned city was perhaps the best place
to grasp the reasons why so many people had come together in a vast outpour-

ing of human emotion. For all those men and women had of course gathered to
contemplate a military spectacle and applaud the hopeful promise of a power we
do not yet possess. But they also knew that it was their city’s holiday and that
they were being invited to celebrate what Paris had once again done for freedom.
Yesterday was thus a celebration of hoped-for power and freedom already in
hand, of the army and the people, of war and revolution. In the hearts of all the
cheering people, moreover, there was no doubt that this marriage, impossible for
so long, had been achieved without effort. No one distinguished between insur-

gents and soldiers. To celebrate Paris was to celebrate the city that had provided

both fighters for the insurrection and soldiers for the front.
At this point we would like to express our emotions, as difficult as it is to do
so and as out of place as it may seem. For this joining of the national spirit with
the revolutionary spirit, which was and remains our greatest and only hope, was
what needed to be revived. We hoped that the man who was the first to point
this out and who exemplified it throughout the war would stress the lesson of
Paris and join in weaving the two traditions together. General de Gaulle did not
do as we had hoped.
To be sure, his speech was not without emotion, which in part we shared.**!

We listened to the portrait of historic Paris, of Saint Genevieve and Saint Joan of
“40 Editorial. Text authenticated by the fact that Francine Camus mailed a copy to her mother. The themes
and tone here are reminiscent of the editorials of August 1944.
“41 General de Gaulle gave a speech at the Hétel de Ville in which he stressed the “symbolic” aspect of
Paris and the major myths on which it was founded. Beyond what is mentioned in the editorial, he evoked
1871 and the triumph of Prussia, 1914 and the taxis of the Marne, 1940 and the surrender. He magnified the role of Paris in the liberation of France, glorified the army, and after reminding his listeners of
Ftench “duties” and “losses,” concluded with a call for reunification and courage: “Let parties and private
interests silence their demands. Let us be people of few words! Let’s get to work!”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

185

Arc, of Henri IV and the Three Orders of the Constituent Assembly. All that was
worth remembering. But we also expected General de Gaulle to call attention to
1830, 1848, and the Commune. To say that we expected this is to put it too
mildly; we were sure that he would remember those dates. Yet not a word was
heard to justify our confidence.
Yet these were days important in the history of Paris, and what would Paris be,
in point of fact, without freedom’s barricades and the nameless dead? They alone
did not make Paris, of course, but in the end Paris could not have been made
without them! Let there be no misunderstanding. We are not nostalgic for revolutions past, even though we surely lived through the purest of revolutions in
August ’44, and the unselfishness of those days is something we will never know
again. But we also know the price of blood, and we know that the blood of
France is too rare for us to wish to see any more of it spilled. We ask only for
recognition of the fact that the blood of freedom*? can no more be divided than
grandeur can, because it is the essence of grandeur. The true power of this nation
is its power of indignation, its force of renovation. When we come to doubt the
one, it is because we have questions about the other.
It is not possible, in any case, to lead this country to power while ignoring its
revolutionary virtue. This is a truth that was consecrated in four years of silent
struggle and that should have left its imprint on this country’s politics. Our
chance for the future depends on the power of new ideas and rebellious courage.
If General de Gaulle’s often solitary voice had been able to harmonize momentarily with the voice of the people who cheered him, it would have expressed that
chance. And once again, as in the days when he spoke to us from across the sea,
he would have been the spokesman for the multitude who, because they never
did set one thing apart from another, were bound to die on the cobblestones

of Paris.

April 4, 1945‘
As the end of hostilities draws near, the regulation of the peace grows more com-

plicated with each passing day. There is no reason to be surprised or otherwise
affected by this: it is a normal development of the situation. As the common discipline imposed by the war is eased, each state reverts to acting independently. It
would be hasty and crude, however, to conclude that the Allies are divided
because they have different views on certain issues.
What exactly is going on? Each nation wants its own conception of the peace
to take precedence, and each wants to protect its own interests. That is only
human. Recently and somewhat belatedly, it was revealed that under the terms
of the secret agreements signed at Yalta,““* Russia asked for three votes at the San
42 An echo of the title of the editorial of August 24, 1944, p. 16.
443 Editorial. Text authenticated by inclusion in a letter from Francine Camus to her mother.
444 On the Yalta Conference, see the editorial of February 16, p. 171.

186

CHAPTER

2

Francisco Conference.“’ The United States briefly considered making a
similar request. Great Britain would not have objected, probably because it was
counting on controlling the votes of the Commonwealth nations, which would
have given it five. But some of those countries have already hinted that they
intend to exercise their independence. In any case, much dismay greeted this
news, not only among the smaller powers but in certain circles in America as
well, so that in the end Washington abandoned its original plan. In the face of
this opposition, the U.S.S.R. seems to have retreated somewhat. The Soviet delegation has dropped its most important member, Mr. Molotov,‘“° and the press

has bluntly stated that bilateral agreements are in its view likely to yield better
guarantees of security than international councils, although the two are not
incompatible.
We should add that there were other reasons besides the question of the
voting procedure for this tepid attitude toward the San Francisco Conference.
The Soviet Union had asked that the Polish government—that is, the Lublin
government**’—be invited, only to meet with a polite but firm refusal from
President Roosevelt. Furthermore, the Soviets take a rather dim view of the idea
that the future government of Germany should be drawn mainly from the
Catholic center-left, which apparently enjoys solid backing from London as well
as Washington.
All of these are issues that would no doubt be discussed in a preliminary
conference of the “Three” or “Five Great Powers,” if only such a meeting were
envisioned.
The facts we have just rapidly summarized merit the attention of the French
people. Not because we ought to be glad or sad about them but simply because
they are facts. Two very great powers are going to emerge from this war at once
weaker and stronger than they went into it, and because of that they have the
right to insist that their voices be heard. The future of French foreign policy cannot avoid this glaring truth.
Nor should French policy try to circumvent this fact by clever maneuvering.
It would be absurd for France to choose one camp and stick with it. In any case,
we have before us the example of England, whose position is not so different

445 ‘The San Francisco Conference, which would take place on April 25—26, 1945, was held to draft the
United Nations Charter.
“46 Vyacheslav Molotov (1890-1986) was close to Stalin and played a major role in the history of the
Soviet Union. After joining the Bolshevik Party in 1906, he was deported and escaped several times. He
was one of the founders of the newspaper Pravda, and after the October 1917 revolution served as a member of the Central Committee and later the Politburo and president of the Council of Commissars of the
People. In 1939, he became commissar for foreign affairs and until 1949 negotiated all international
treaties. From 1953 to 1956 he again served in this post. As a representative of the most hard-core Stalinist line, he was dismissed from the Central Committee and eventually expelled from the Communist
Party in 1964.
447 See the editorial of January 3, p. 162.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

187

from ours and which is managing fairly successfully to remain above the fray
without becoming isolated.
Always mindful of people’s concerns but uncompromising on its guiding principles, free of petulance, and capable of resisting its sentimental leanings and its
wariness toward or preference for certain personalities or regimes as opposed to
others: these should be the tenets of our foreign policy.
Because of the situation in which France now finds herself, her present condition, her role can only be one of mediation. Any narrowly continental or even
European policy would be shortsighted. While contributing to the stability and
organization of Europe with simple, straightforward treaties dictated by common sense, she must also stand between this continent and America not as an
arbiter but as a conduit.

April 5, 1945**8
“I am a teacher, and I’m hungry.” Of all the letters we receive, how could we read
this one without feeling a pang in our hearts? A sentence like this takes only a
moment to write, but how many desperate days must have pre-ceded it?
It would be nice to be able to set those days alongside the many speeches,
decisions, and bulletins with which we have been inundated. It would nice to be
able to spur the imaginations of those whose actions have direct repercussions on
the individuals for whose lives the government is responsible. But imagination,
like food, is in short supply these days. The ministry of supply“? continues
to live in a world of abstractions, while hundreds of thousands of French men
and women continue to suffer from everyday realities that could not be more
discouraging.
Yet how can anyone fail to see that such a sentence constitutes the most damning of indictments of a society that, like it or not, is coming to an end. For how
can anyone go on defending this crazy world in which a teacher with a graduate
degree earns a tenth as much as the most underprivileged bartender and in which
neither intellectual talent nor skilled labor is paid what it is due?
We are told that we need to be patient and trust in capital. But in this case it
is the teacher who has to wait and not the minister, which tends to undermine
the argument, and in the provincial restaurant where the teacher goes hungry
every day, absurd income disparities mean that cutlets will be served at one table
and boiled vegetables at the other. As long as money is free to invest in the black
market, patience will remain impossible and trust unthinkable.

448 Editorial. Like the previous pieces, this one is authenticated by the fact that it was included in a letter
from Francine Camus to her mother, as well as by the reuse of the quote from Baudelaire.
449 See the editorial of March 18, p. 179, which was highly critical of Paul Ramadier.

188

CHAPTER

2

The minister of supply is a man whose leanings are well-known, so we
will spare him our correspondent’s conclusions. Impatience colors the tone of
his remarks. One can’t eat politeness. We would simply add that we cannot be
altogether proud of this country as long as working people go hungry. To judge
by the people assigned to it, the ministry of supply has been deemed to be a
department of relatively minor importance. It would be impossible to overstate
what a colossal error this is. This issue should be paramount among official
concerns. Human lives, the value and common dignity of which we have learned

to recognize, depend on what measures are taken. The sentence quoted at the
beginning of this editorial brings shame to our country and our government.
The government must be changed if the country is to be made respectable
again.

Of course we have no illusions. Baudelaire said that two rights had been omitted from the Declaration of the Rights of Man: the right to contradict oneself
and the right to disappear.*”’ Although some of our ministers abuse the former,
their discretion in the use of the latter is rather bewildering. M. Ramadier will
not disappear, the garbage collection system will not be reorganized, inertia will
assert its strength, and the teacher will still go hungry.
But we will not tire of issuing warnings or of repeating that there are no
minor issues. The France of tomorrow will be what its workers and teachers are.
If they go hungry, we should feel ashamed. But if they receive the bread and
the justice they are demanding, our consciences will be clear. M. Pleven**! will
forgive us for thinking that this freedom is more important than freedom for
capital.

April 6, 19454”
Those who look upon the resignation of M. Mendes France*® as the outcome of
a personal dispute are sorely mistaken. It is not only a man who has departed but
a ministry, for with its annexation to the ministry of finance, the ministry of
national economy loses its reason for existing, which was to oversee and coordinate

450 Camus here repeats this remark in the same terms in which he cited Baudelaire in Carnets J, p. 160.

In Edgar Poe, sa vie et ses oeuvres, Baudelaire wrote the following in the introduction to his translation of
Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque: “Among the many enumerated rights of man, which the nineteenth
century has in its wisdom revised so frequently and so self-indulgently, two rather important ones have
been left out, namely, the right to contradict oneself and the right to disappear, but society regards the
man who disappears as an insolent rebel.”
451 René Pleven became minister of finance in November 1944. See the editorial of October 13, 1944,
and n. 136, p. 69.
452 Editorial. Text authenticated by its inclusion in a letter from Francine Camus to her mother.
3 On Pierre Mendes France, see the editorial of November 30, 1944, n. 305, p. 128. As minister of
national economy from the very inception of the government, he had already submitted his resignation
to de Gaulle on January 18, but the general had asked him to reconsider. He resigned for good on April 5

when his recommendations for strict monetary controls and wage and price stability were not accepted.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

189

industrial production, labor, agriculture, and supply. That is a change of some
moment.
To be sure, the ministry of national economy has thus far done nothing to
endear itself to us. But one has to recognize that its inaction was forced upon it
and is clearly the primary reason for M. Mendes France’s resignation.
There were two reasons for the ministry’s inability to act. First, the refusal to
grant the ministry of national economy control over the ministry of finance left
M. Mendes France without the means to act. Second, it soon became clear that
his control over the other departments of his ministry was merely theoretical.
Sovereign ministers are no less touchy and jealous of their independence than
sovereign nations. This is cause for regret at a time when, in order to save itself
from shame, disorder, and misery, a country is obliged to make war and revolution, both of which demand concerted and disciplined action.** They also
require the government to choose the means it intends to use and the doctrine it
wishes to follow, and, finally, they require that it adhere to its decisions once
taken. Only a policy capable of steadfastly pursuing its goals can hope to change
the established order.
There is no need to point out that we are a long way from having such a policy. We don't know much about the measures advocated by M. Mendés France.
We know that his proposed financial policy was energetic and utterly undemagogic, which is rare enough to inspire respect and esteem. But we also believe
that strictly financial measures are unlikely to have much of an impact if they are
not accompanied by economic and administrative measures. For us, even lacking knowledge of the specifics of his plan, that was enough to justify the ministry of national economy. It seemed like the instrument most capable of putting
right a situation characterized by famine for the many and riches for a few. But
if it was to accomplish anything useful, it needed to be granted the necessary
powers.
What is the use of talking about the French community if that community
cannot make its views known inside the government and if the government is
not concerned with setting clear priorities among its ministers? Under these conditions, it should come as no surprise that responsibilities are parceled out, while
the best ministers find themselves powerless against the great citadels of the
bureaucracy. M. Mendes France’s resignation is noteworthy because it sheds
some light on the situation of the government and makes things a little less
murky than they were. With the ministry of national economy moving to
M. Pleven’s control, we know what to expect from it in the future.
M. Pleven has stated his views in sufficient detail that we know who he is.
Undoubtedly honest and sincere, he is also a resolute adversary of reform.
Change dismays him; his tastes are conservative. He was therefore a poor choice
for the new responsibilities that have been given to him. In view of his ardent

454 Camus had made similar statements often since August 21, 1944.

190

CHAPTER

2

desire to save and conserve, we are afraid that he may well conserve the black
market, the trusts, and injustice.
As gentle as his grip may be, we also fear that the franc is slipping through his
fingers and losing a little more of its purchasing power every day. For we are at a
point in our history when even the most disinterested conservatism can't help
being suicidal.

April 10, 1945*>°
The victories on the western front cannot account for the tranquil placidity with
which the French are receiving the news of the prodigious successes that Russia
is now scoring in the east. Of course it is well-known that our compatriots take
no interest in changes that occur beyond their borders. But the world is moving
fast, and what made us strong when we had our health and our tradition has
been and will continue to be a source of woe if we aren’ careful.
In this connection, the French need to correct their traditional indifference to
and ignorance of Russia. For the past twenty-five years, French governments,
along with the majority of the people, have refused to see or understand the fact
that an astonishing experiment was under way over a vast expanse of territory, an
experiment with which, like it or not, we will some day have to reckon. We
began by refusing to accept the Revolution of 1917. We forced Lenin’s Russia to
surround itself with a thick cordon sanitaire through which no news could
pass.*°° For want of news, people made things up. With help from thickheaded
conservatives, France soon came to believe that the Soviet Union had been swept

by anarchy. Suspicion breeds suspicion. Whatever we think of political realism,
moreover, it has to be granted that the moral tragedy that the German-Soviet
pact represented for so many decent people*” is easily explained if one sees it as
a consequence of Munich.*°8*”
455 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, similar to the editorial of December 18, 1944, p. 145, which
Camus signed.
456 Lenin (1870-1924) went from revolutionary activist and theoretician to leader of the Bolshevik major-

ity in 1903. Under his leadership, the Bolsheviks embraced the idea of socialist revolution and dictatorship of the proletariat. After being elected chair of the People’s Soviets in 1917, he established the
governmental structure of the U.S.S.R. and in March 1918 signed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk with
Germany. This treaty, which freed up some German troops to join their comrades on the Western Front,
endangered the Allied position in the final months of World War I. After the armistice of November 1918,
the Allied powers organized a sort of diplomatic, economic, and political blockade of the U.S.S.R. Recognition of the Communist regime faced many obstacles and came only belatedly.
7 On August 23, 1939, the Soviet Union signed a nonaggression pact with Germany. This agreement
was of course violated when Hitler attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941. The pact, which envisioned
the division of Poland between Russia and Germany, put the French Communists, who on the whole
approved the agreement, in a difficult position.
458 Note that appeared in Combat: “For convincing evidence of this, see M. Gafenco’s remarkable book,
Préliminaires de la guerre a l'Est (Libraririe de !Université, Fribourg).”

459 On Munich, see the editorial of September 12, 1944 and n. 64, p. 36.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

191

People still had their eyes shut in 1939. And, as presented by the press, the
Russo-Finnish war“? led to one of the greatest misunderstandings of all time.
Not until the Germans attacked and the Russians resisted in ’41, and then the
Soviet victories of ’42 and °43, did France and the world finally wake up to the
fact that a formidable power had come into being on the fringes of Europe, a
power that could claim supremacy in many areas.
Today we can see this even more clearly. Virtually every paragraph of the
Czech government's first proclamation stressed the pro-Soviet orientation of its
politics. We must recognize that Russia is taking the place in Central Europe that
France traditionally occupied. This will not surprise the French who suffered in
shame when Hitler entered Prague. For four years, we have had to cleanse ourselves of that shame. Today, as the hour of victory approaches, we must recognize that the same shame prevents us from taking a leading place among the
victors. What could we even say without the Franco-British friendship that we
seem to disdain so unreasonably?
That is why our first order of business should be to admit our errors. As everyone knows, moreover, we are not communists. Because of this we are that much
more free to say that the French did the impossible by ignoring for twenty-five
years a civilization that was being created before their very eyes.
It is indeed a civilization, despite any objections we might wish to raise against
it. In America and Russia, the world has rejuvenated itself in different ways. We
are better informed about America, but we need to open our eyes to Russia as
well. So let us open our eyes and acknowledge that old cultures need to rejuvenate themselves too. The last thing that can be done with history is to turn up
one’s nose. For that reason (and many others besides), we must recognize that
anti-Sovietism is a stupidity as awful as systematic hostility to England or the

United States would be.
Does this mean that all Russian policy must be approved automatically? That
would be another kind of blindness, and there are principles to uphold in everyone’s interest, which Russia sometimes seems to neglect. The point is simply that
we must own up to our illusions and accord the new Russia the place she has
earned with her superhuman sacrifices.
In Europe, that place is the very one that we have given up. But whatever
regret we may feel as Frenchmen, we must acknowledge that nations sooner or
later pay the price for their failures. Today, our renaissance depends in part on
our will, and that is of course exclusively our own affair. But it also depends on
our lucidity. The first effort we need to make is to put things back in their proper
places.

460 The Soviet Union invaded Finland in November 1939. Without support from the West, Finland
signed a treaty with Moscow that deprived it of a portion of its territory. Under pressure from Germany,
Finland continued its war against the Soviet Union, with which it signed an armistice in September 1944.
Under the terms of the Treaty of Paris in 1947, it once again lost Carelia. Though included in the Soviet
orbit, it managed to maintain a degree of independence.

192

CHAPTER

2

April 14, 1945°°!
His face was the very image of happiness.“ For so many who knew him
without ever coming near him, all that remains is the smile that for all those years
he displayed on the front pages of newspapers, on movie screens, and amid
cheering crowds of his countrymen. This is no doubt the reason for the emotion
that was felt throughout the free world at the news of his death, even though it
was but one of the many deaths that America has contributed to our common
cause.
History's powerful men are not generally men of such good humor. Ambition’s hallmarks are not often signs of joy. But it would never have occurred to
anyone to associate Roosevelt with ambition. He was too much the expression of
his country to have given any thought to dominating it. He was a great individual rather than a great man.
What, in fact, is a great individual if not a man who lends his face, his words,
and his actions to a great civilization? In this respect, Roosevelt seemed to us the
exemplary American. But it is the distinguishing characteristic of accomplished
individuals to speak for their entire culture even when they seem to be speaking
in the most personal of terms.
To be sure, we could not approve of all his policies. But whose policies can
always be approved? His, at least, never bore the marks of greed or hatred. To the
idealism that America has shown also has a place in reality he brought grandeur
and efficiency. The greatest praise one can offer him is to say that he knew the
value of life.
He also had to triumph over himself before triumphing over others. His
laughter was praiseworthy. It was the laughter of a hard-won serenity, the kind
that one finds after an infirmity has been overcome. His apparent happiness was
not that of comfort, nor that of a mind too limited to perceive mankind’s distress. He knew one thing: that there is no pain that cannot be overcome with
energetic and conscientious effort. When we know this about a man, we know
what he is worth, and we begin to like him.
But he is dead. Until now it was possible to talk about his accomplishments
but not about his destiny. Today we know his destiny. He was the great leader of
the free people that he led to the threshold of victory. On the verge of triumph,
he suddenly changed course, as if he had been made to take charge of freedom’s
risks but not to endure the dissension that will come with victory. That is as it

461 Editorial. Text authenticated by Roger Grenier, A/bert Camus, Soleil et Ombre (Paris: Gallimard, 1987),

p. 189: “In the middle of the night, after the paper had been put to bed, Pia sometimes invited some of
us into his office, and he would read us the editorial by Camus that was to appear the next morning. He
showed us how something like an allusion or personal confession could be included in a subject dictated
by current events. For instance, when Roosevelt died, there were a few sentences about the illness against
which he had struggled all his life, sentences that Camus could not have written without thinking about
the tuberculosis that continued to threaten him.”
462 ‘The same expression occurs in the editorial of November 9, 1944, p. 106.

tle

——

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

193

should be. But there is not a single free human being who does not regret his loss
and who would not have wished his destiny to have continued a little longer.
World peace, that boundless good, ought to be planned by men with happy faces
rather than by sad-eyed politicians.
But that is not to be. We are told that America was plunged into deep silence
at the news. It is not difficult to believe that people felt such distress. Given a
moment’ thought, who among us would not share it? When one man succeeds
to this degree, everyone succeeds. Despite all the distractions of the moment, people feel emotional enough to observe a moment of silence because this man has
left this unreasonable world, whose only hope lies in the quality of its people.

i

April 15-16, 1945*°
Mr. Truman has made no secret of how heavy he finds his new responsibilities.
They are indeed overwhelming. He has to succeed a man of rare magnitude,
while at the same time the unambiguous yet immensely tangled relationships
born of world war are coming unraveled. It is his job to oversee the most perilous of transitions, from war to peace.
As American troops close in on Berlin, he must hastily master the detail of
global issues and projects from the treatment of defeated Germany to the wealth
and poverty of nations. The United States is now intimately involved in all these
things. It is worth noting that Mr. Truman called a first meeting of his advisers
to discuss European issues.
To be sure, the new president of the United States has explicitly stated that he
intends to adhere to Mr. Roosevelt's policy. As to economic policy, however, the
world remains totally in the dark. Until now, Mr. Truman has specialized in
domestic politics, where he was no doubt a serious player but hardly an innovative one. He has always defended well-established ideas, and all we know is that

in the last election he stood up for smaller countries.
Since he is not a man with a program or plans, it is possible, and even probable, that the cabinet and the Senate, which had labored somewhat in Roosevelt’s
shadow, will regain some of their former importance. Mr. Truman's intentions

will no doubt become clearer in the upcoming congressional debates about
whether the United States will join the Bretton Woods monetary agreements*®
and about the tariff question. Both are issues with important consequences for
America and the world.
463 Editorial. Text possibly by Camus, in that it is a follow-up to the previous one, but neither the content nor the tone settles the issue.
464 Harry Truman (1884-1972), Roosevelt’s last vice-president, succeeded him and carried on his policies.

He accelerated work on the atomic bomb and made the decision to drop the first two on Japan, thereby
ending the war. He presided over the San Francisco Conference and was reelected in 1948. He was responsible for the creation of NATO.
465 The United States and forty-four other countries met at Bretton Woods in July 1944 to establish a new
international monetary system to replace the gold standard.

194

CHAPTER

2

One other thing will take longer to clarify itself: Mr. Truman’s attitude toward
international relations. Relations between nations are in the first place relations
among men. The things that poison human relations—anger, incomprehension,
and selfishness—more or less directly affect international relations.
We hear that Mr. Truman is a man of even temper and that he likes music.
Let us also hope that he has the inclination and ability to think on a world scale,
and to do so in a disinterested manner.

April 17, 1945°°°
With every step closer to victory, we all experience an intensification of hope and
anguish. For us, victory does not mean simply putting an end to the enemy. It
also means reunion with all whose return we are awaiting. We have suffered not
only oppression but also separation. For many years now the world has reverberated not only to the sounds of exploding bombs but also to the futile cries of
those who were lost.
All that is about to end. But the men and women of France, who have pined
so long for their loved ones, are eager to know what the future will bring. Will
their long suffering at last be compensated by a reunion that will make up for
everything, or will it end with the ultimate separation? For if the enemy can no
longer build anything, he can still destroy. That is probably why these days of
victory do not find France as happy as she might be. Every man and every
woman in this country has a more private victory to win, a victory that will
remain uncertain until the day of the great reunion comes.
That is also why each report of a happy homecoming affects us even more
than the announcement of a great military success. Of course we know that the
homecomings would not be possible without the military successes, but the
heart and its unjust wisdom remain. It is good to give in to them. Yesterday, a
group of political deportees arrived in Paris after a long trail of woe.**’ These are
our comrades, the ones of whom we are most proud, whose astonishing odyssey
caused General de Gaulle to feel an emotion that he did not try to hide yesterday on the station platform.
Today comes news of the rescue of resistance journalists,’ including our
friend Claude Bourdet,*” the son of Edouard Bourdet. We have never spoken of
him so as not to reveal anything about him to the enemy. But under the name
466 Editorial. Text possibly by Camus. Although the tone is not entirely decisive, Camus dealt with this
subject in his editorial of December 22, 1944, p. 149, in terms somewhat similar to this piece. Furthermore, separation was of course an important theme in his work, especially in La Peste.
“67 The day before, General de Gaulle, Henri Frenay, and various political and labor leaders had appeared
at the Gare de Lyon to welcome the first train bringing political prisoners home from Ravensbriick.
Among them were the actress Rosine Deréan, about whom Jacqueline Bernard, who did not return herself until the end of May, was to write an article in 1946.
468 A dispatch from the A.EP. correspondent with American forces announced the liberation of 3,500
French prisoners from Buchenwald, including a number of political figures, journalists, and professors.
469 On Claude Bourdet, see the introduction, pp. xxxi-xxxii.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

195

Aubin he was one of the coordinators of “Combat” when it was underground
and served as its representative to the C.N.R. A man of fragile health but cheerful character, he drew from his Catholic faith and his commitment to honor the
strength he needed to take part in the arduous adventure known as the Resistance. After worrying about his fate for so long, what a joy it is to know that he
is alive and on his way home to those who love him! His place on our team awaits
him. There will never be enough of us to try to keep our judgment independent
in these difficult times, when we must make the transition from disinterested
combat to a political life in which it is not as easy to remain just.
There will never be enough of us throughout France to measure what we
had hoped for against what we are doing, or to decide what we must change
and what we ought to hold on to. That is why, in our eyes, the most moving sight
of the last few days of an atrocious war has been the arrival every five minutes at
the Gare d’Orsay of a new trainload of men who only yesterday were in
chains but who today are free, back in a Paris radiant with sunshine and spring
weather.
That is where one must go to join the crowds of people saluting these returning prisoners, if one wants to understand what victory means to a country that
for four years was riven in its conscience and its affections.
May 9, 1945°”°
Who would think himself capable of describing this delirious day without getting it wrong?*”! Amid the mingled and exalted voices of an entire nation, what

one voice could hope to impart to this great hurrah for freedom and peace its
true meaning? Perhaps, as the memory recedes into the past, it will become possible to choose from among the cannons, sirens, and bells, the songs, flags,

shouts, and laughter, the one special image that will capture every aspect of this
moment with equal justice. For now, we can only immerse ourselves in it and try
to express the immense human warmth, the overwhelming joy brimming with
tears, and the wild excitement with which the streets of Paris were filled yesterday. Suffering need not be solitary, but joy surely never is. Yesterday's joy was
everyone's. We must therefore speak for all.4””
In the face of this great outpouring, the memory of so many pitched battles
and hard-fought struggles took on its full meaning. Why did we fight so hard, if
not to allow a people to celebrate its deliverance? In all the capitals of Europe and
around the world, millions of people joined in celebration. Some laughed under
warm May skies, while others basked in the heat of the night. What they all
470 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, harking back to the tone of his editorials on the liberation of Paris.
471 Germany surrendered on May 8, 1945.
472 These expressions are rather close to what Rieux says at the end of La Peste, which can be read as a continuation of these reflections, even in the sequence of ideas: “When he felt a temptation to add his voice
directly to the thousand voices of those suffering from the plague, he was struck by the thought that no
aspect of his suffering was not shared by the others, and that in the world where pain is so often solitary,
that was an advantage. Surely he was obliged to speak for them all” (p. 274).

196

CHAPTER

2

celebrated together, however, was the strength that free men derived from consciousness of their rights and fanatical devotion to their independence.
History is full of military victories, yet never before has a victory been hailed by
so many overwhelmed people, perhaps because never before has a war posed such
a threat to what is essential in man, his rebelliousness and his freedom. Yesterday

belonged to everyone, because it was a day of freedom, and freedom belongs either
to everyone or to no one.
For five years, millions of soldiers were obliged to witness scenes of carnage in
order to prove that no one man could claim freedom for himself at everyone
else’s expense.
Once again this truth demanded its awful proof, as if history were nothing but
the long and frightful record of the sacrifices men have had to make unremittingly
in order to claim the freedom that some would just as unrelentingly deny them.
The years of subjugation were also years of silence. And so it is that this day
of freedom was a day in which millions of voices repeatedly cried out. In a Paris
teetering between spring and summer, the amazing roar of the crowd could be
heard all night long. This we will never forget. It was the exultation of the free
spirit embodied in an entire nation. This war was fought to the end so that man
could hold on to the right to be what he wants to be and say what he wants to
say. Our generation understood this. We will never again cede this ground. We
will never allow ourselves to be muzzled.
All around the city, fountains deprived of water for so many years sprang back to
life, shooting jets of water upward into the glowing skies. In the depths of our souls,
all of us experienced a surge of new hope. It is this that we will have to preserve if
this victory is to be made final and to remain our common possession.*”* Those of
us who are still waiting or still weeping for a loved one can enjoy this victory only
if it justifies the cause for which the missing and dead suffered. Let us keep them
near us and not consign them to the definitive solitude of having suffered in vain.
Only then, on this overwhelming day, will we have done something for mankind.

May 12, 1945/74
We are waiting for a government shakeup,*”” for a change in policy and major
new decisions essential if the massive reconstruction effort we need to undertake
is to get off the ground. We are waiting, and, in the aftermath of the wild victory
‘75 This hope for a “final victory” is of course contradicted in the closing lines of La Peste: “He knew, however, this chronicle could not be the chronicle of definitive victory.”

474 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus, who often championed the ideas it contains: hostility toward the
politicians of the Third Republic and insistence that they be judged for their actions and not for their past
suffering.
“5 The shakeup, which came on June 1, resulted in few changes: Christian Pineau replaced Paul Ramadier
(who had been wanting to resign for two months) at the ministry of supply, R-H. Teitgen became minister of justice, replacing Frangois de Menthon, who was sent to London to serve on the War Crimes
Commission, and Jacques Soustelle succeeded Teitgen at the ministry of information.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

197

celebration, we are beginning to hope, we are beginning to say to one another that
anything can happen and that tomorrow will witness the birth of the new republic that everyone dreams of. We are still waiting, and the early news is that former
premiers Herriot, Daladier, Reynaud, and Blum‘*”° may join the new government.
Thus far we have had to do without their experience, and their wisdom.
If we cared for simplistic formulas, we would sum up our thoughts by saying
that the future of France can be decided either by thirty-year-olds or by sixtyyear-olds. It appears that the choice has already been made, however, and what
is left for us is to state our opinion of a policy that will put the levers of state back
in the hands of those who held them for so long with such obstinate blindness.
Given that some of these men have just returned from a harsh captivity, we
will temper our remarks. Misfortune has scarred their lives. For that reason
alone, they are entitled to respect, and nothing we say is intended as an insult.
But it is one thing to give these men the respect they are due and another to
decide whether their misfortune is enough to assure us that they possess the
political skills the country needs. In that respect they can be judged only on the
basis of what they did, not what they suffered. And we are bound to say flatly
that what they did does not entitle them to lead this country politically at a time
when France needs men who are as determined as they are prudent.
The men being proposed for office took power in a difficult and troubled
time. They brought disparate skills and very diverse temperaments to the task. Yet
all shared one attitude compounded of weakness mixed with blindness: all retreated
in the face of fascist aggression. These are the men who bear responsibility in

476 These names symbolize the period just prior to the war. Edouard Herriot (1872-1957) served as president of the Radical Party from 1919 until his death. He also served as mayor of Lyons and held a number of ministerial portfolios in addition to several terms as premier between 1936 and 1940. When the
Chamber of Deputies voted to grant Pétain full powers in July 1940, he abstained, and he did not become

an out-and-out opponent of Pétain until August 1942, when the Vichy government abolished the offices
of the two parliamentary chambers. After being placed under house arrest, he was deported to Germany
but was brought home by Laval in August 1944 in the hope that he would convene the Chamber of
Deputies. From 1945 to 1954 he again served as president of the National Assembly.
On Daladier, see the editorial of September 12, n. 63, p. 35.
Paul Reynaud (1878-1966), a republican of the right, deputy, and several-times minister of the Third
Republic, most notably as a member of Daladier’s cabinet in 1938, he became premier in March 1940.
In June he resigned to make way for Pétain. Interned by the government of Vichy and tried at Riom, he
was deported to Germany in 1942. On his return he was reelected deputy and served on various parliamentary commissions and the Council of Europe.
Léon Blum (1872-1950) was a state councilor and graduate of the Ecole Normale Supérieure. A writer

as well as a politician, he played a very important role in the socialist movement in France. As a collaborator of Jean Jaurés at L’Humanité from 1904, he belonged to the minority of socialists who rejected communism at the Congress of Tours in 1920, at which time he founded Le Populaire, the newspaper of the
S.EI.O. He led the first Popular Front government (June 1936—June 1936) and together with Maurice
Viollette worked on a bill to grant French citizenship to certain categories of Algerians (see below, article
of May 18, 1945, n. 501, p. 208). As an opponent of Laval and of full powers for Pétain, he was interned,
tried at Riom, and handed over to the Germans, who deported him to Buchenwald. After the Liberation,
he resumed his editorship at Le Populaire, called for a reform of the Constitution, and briefly led a socialist government in December 1946, Reynaud and Blum were repatriated in May.

2

CHAPTER

198

whole or in part for the murder of Ethiopia, the destruction of the Spanish
Republic, the conquest of Austria, and, finally, thanks to Munich, the occupa-

tion of Prague by German troops that no one of our generation will ever forget.
No doubt their motives at least partly reflected their desire for peace. Yet it was
the joint action of these experienced politicians that ultimately led Daladier to
lose the peace as well and to declare war under the worst possible conditions. To
put it bluntly, it is hard to imagine a policy more consistent in its failure or more
foolish in its conception.
We are therefore obliged to say that these politicians have had their chance,

and their success was mediocre, to put it mildly. There is no dishonor in that.
Political life consumes souls in abundance, and not all of them can be firstrate. But the present period is one in which weakness, even if it is paternal, and
routine, even if it is unconscious, cannot and should not be regarded as adequate

credentials.
We are well aware that such language may seem harsh or out of place. We
know that these men endured their misfortune with dignity. Pardon us, however,

if we do not single them out more than is fitting in a world in which millions of
people have experienced severe hardship and deserve an end to their terrible suffering. In the end this punishment is not so awful. We do not condemn these
politicians as human beings. We merely deny them the privileges and power of
which they've already had enough. Retirement awaits them: we say this without
irony. There they will find the peace and respect appropriate to men who may
have made mistakes but did not betray the country’s trust. No doubt it is also
true that they will not find the marvelous intoxications of power. Today, however, we all need a different kind of power, a power that can come only from

intelligence and a steadfast will. When one measures MM. Daladier, Herriot,
and Reynaud‘” against the enormous effort required, how can one fail to perceive that the harder they bite their tongues, the louder this country will speak.

May 13-14, 1945

Crisis in Algeria*”®
When one looks at the recent disturbances in North Africa, it is wise to avoid
two extremes.*”” One is to describe as tragic a situation that is merely serious.
The other is to ignore the grave difficulties with which Algeria is grappling today.
4

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

477 Note that Léon Blum is not impugned with the others.
“78 This text inaugurates a series of
six articles devoted to Algeria. All were published in a prominent place
on page one in large type under bold headlines, and Albert Camus’ byline appeared immediately underneath. Five of these articles, including this one, were reprinted in 1958 in Actwelles III: Chroniques algériennes, 1939-1958, along with the editorial of June 15, which served as their conclusion.

*” On May 1, demonstrators demanding the release of Messali Hadj clashed with police in Algiers and
Oran. On May 8, the armistice celebration was marred by nationalist demonstrations in eleven Algerian
cities. In Sétif and Guelma in the Constantinois, these demonstrations developed into riots that continued

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

199

To adopt the first attitude would be to play into the hands of interests out to
persuade the government to take repressive measures that would be not only
inhumane but also impolitic. To adopt the second would be to continue to
widen the gap that for so many years has separated the metropolis from its
rican territories. In either case, one would be opting for a shortsighted policy
as harmful to French interests as to Arab ones.
The survey**° that follows is the fruit of a three-week visit to Algeria, and its

only ambition is to reduce the incredible ignorance of the metropolis in regard
to North African affairs.**' I tried to be as objective as possible as I traveled more
than 1,500 miles along the Algerian coast as well as inland to the limits of the
southern territories.
I visited not only cities but also the most remote douars, and I listened to the
opinions and firsthand accounts of bureaucrats and native farmers, of colonists
and Arab militants. A good policy is first of all a well-informed policy. Of course
this survey is just that: a survey. But if the facts I report are not new, they have
been checked. I therefore hope that they can be of some use to those charged
with coming up with a policy that can save Algeria from spinning out of control.
Particular Problems‘?

Before going into detail about the North African crisis, however, it may be
useful to dispose of a certain number of prejudices. To begin with, I want to

remind people in France of the fact that Algeria exists. By that I mean that it
exists apart from France and that its problems have their own peculiar texture
and scale. Hence one cannot resolve those problems by following the metropolitan example.
One simple fact will suffice to illustrate what I mean. All French schoolchildren learn that Algeria, which falls under the jurisdiction of the ministry of the
interior, consists of three départements. Administratively, that is true. In fact,
however, those three départements are the size of forty typical French départe-

ments and have a population equivalent to twelve. So the metropolitan bureaucracy thinks it has done a great deal when it sends 2,000 tons of grain to Algeria,

until May 13, leading to terrible repression that produced many victims, the exact number remaining a
matter of controversy to this day. Combat did not report these events until May 12 in a brief article entitled “Agitation in Algeria, Where Food Shortages Have Given Rise to Severe Discontent among the

Natives.” The paper reported that the council of ministers had conducted “lengthy discussions” of the situation in Algeria, “where the administration is encountering severe difficulties stemming in part from
shortages in the supply of food to the native population.” The council took unspecified steps to remedy
the situation and issued instructions to the governor-general concerning the maintenance of order.
480 Camus uses the word enquéte, which he also used at the end of “Misére en Kabylie,” a report he did
in 1939 for Alger-Républicain (reprinted in Actuelles II). This demonstrates the continuity of Camus

thinking and attitudes.
481 Camus arrived in Algeria on April 18 and returned to Paris on May 7 or 8, as is shown by his letters
to his wife, in which he describes his travels in various parts of the country.
482 The subtitles were not reprinted in Actwelles III.

200

CHAPTER

2

but that amounts to exactly one day's consumption of the country’s 8 million
inhabitants. The next day they have to start all over again.

The Political Awakening of the Muslims

As for the political dimension, I want to point out that the Arab people also
exist. By that I mean that they aren't the wretched, faceless mob in which Westerners see nothing worth respecting or defending. On the contrary, they are a
people of impressive traditions, whose virtues are eminently clear to anyone willing to approach them without prejudice.
These people are not inferior except in regard to the conditions in which they
must live, and we have as much to learn from them as they from us. Too many

French people in Algeria and elsewhere imagine the Arabs as a shapeless mass
without interests. One more fact will set them straight.
In the most remote douars, 500 miles from the coast, I was surprised to hear
the name of M. Wladimir d’?Ormesson mentioned.‘ The reason for this was
that, a few weeks ago, our colleague published an article on the Algerian question that Muslims deemed to be ill-informed and insulting. ’'m not sure that the
journalist for the Figaro will be glad to know how quickly he made a reputation
for himself in Arab lands, but it does tell us a great deal about the political awakening of the Muslim masses.
Finally, if I point out one more fact of which too many French people are

ignorant—namely, that hundreds of thousands of Arabs have spent the past two
years fighting for the liberation of France—I will have earned the right to move
on to other matters.

Algeria Has to Be Conquered a Second Time

In any case, all this should teach us not to prejudge anything about Algeria and
to refrain from repeating clichés. In a sense, the French have to conquer Algeria
a second time. To sum up my impressions from my visit, I should say that this
second conquest will not be as easy as the first. In North Africa as in France, we
need to invent new recipes and come up with new ways of doing things if we
want the future to make sense to us.

483 In Le Figaro for March 8, 1945, under the title “Imperial Worries,” Wladimir d’Ormesson (see edito-

rial of September 8, 1944, n. 52, p. 31) wrote about shortages in Algeria, empty stores, and a state of utter
misery. His political analysis deserves to be cited as a good example of current opinion: “Agitators are taking advantage of the widespread misery to kindle the flames of discord. Everyone knows how easy it is to
launch demagogic appeals and lead credulous mobs with words. When professional politicians resort to
such tricks, it is only to be expected. What is unacceptable is when they are abetted by officials (sometimes high officials), the press, and even the official radio stations. What is not acceptable is for some
Frenchmen to dare to speak openly of the ‘scandal of French colonization.’ Where do they think such
tactics will lead?”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

201

The Algeria of 1945 is enduring the same economic and political crisis it has
always endured, though never before to this degree. In this lovely country, now
glorious with spring blossoms and sunshine, people suffering from hunger are
demanding justice. We cannot remain indifferent to their suffering, because we
have experienced it ourselves.
Rather than respond with condemnations, let us try to understand the reasons
for their demands and invoke on their behalf the same democratic principles that
we claim for ourselves. My goal in the remaining articles of this series is to support this effort simply by supplying objective information.
(to be continued)

PS. This article was complete when an evening paper*** appeared with an article accusing Ferhat Abbas, president of the “Friends of the Manifesto,” of having personally organized the Algerian disturbances. This article was obviously
written in Paris on the basis of fragmentary information. Nevertheless, it is unacceptable to make such a serious accusation on the basis of such flimsy evidence.
There is much to be said for and against Ferhat Abbas and his party. We will in
fact be discussing him. But French journalists must recognize that a problem this
serious cannot be resolved by intemperate appeals for blind repression.
ALBERT CAMUS

May 15, 1945

Famine in Algeria*®>
The most obvious crisis afflicting Algeria is an economic one.**®
Algeria already shows unambiguous signs of this to the attentive visitor. The
leading taverns serve drinks in cut-off bottles with the edges filed down. Hotels
give you wire coat hangers. Bombed-out stores have fallen beams in their windows rather than glass. In private homes it is not uncommon for the bulb used
to light the dining room to be moved to the bedroom after dinner. There is a

shortage of manufactured goods, no doubt because Algeria has no industry, but
above all there is an import crisis. We will be looking at its effects.

484 The reference is to an article by Yves Grosrichard in France-Soir for May 13-14, published under the

unambiguous

headline “Algerian Disturbances

Fomented

by the Agitator Ferrat-Abbas

[séc].” After

expressing the hope that “the measures taken by the government to deal with the food supply and the military situation will calm the disturbances,” the article concluded: “According to our information, the party
of the ‘Manifesto’ and its leader have considerable funds at their disposal. Opposed by the caids, whose
loyalty is beyond doubt, as well as by the religious caste of wlemmas, and vigorously condemned by all
democratic elements in North Africa from the communists to the ‘moderates,’ though secretly approved,
it seems, by a minority of wealthy “Doriotist’ families, Ferrat Abbas and his henchmen appear to be in the

pay of foreigners.”
485 Article reprinted in Actuelles III, without subtitles. The content and tone of this piece are reminiscent
of “Misery in Kabylia.” Kabylia was already suffering from famine in 1939.
486 Combat published this note: “See the beginning of this survey in our May 13 issue.”

202

CHAPTER

2

The news that must be shouted from the rooftops is that most Algerians are
experiencing a famine. This is the reason for the serious disturbances we have
heard about, and this is what needs fixing.*°”
The population of Algeria is nine million in round numbers. Of these nine
million, eight million are Arabo-Berbers, compared with a million Europeans.

Most of the Arab population is scattered throughout the vast countryside in
douars, which French colonial administrations have combined into mixed villages.
The basic diet of the Arabs consists of grains (wheat or barley), consumed in
the form of couscous or flatbread. For want of grain, millions of Arabs are suffering from hunger.
Famine is still a dreadful scourge in Algeria, where harvests are as capricious as

the rainfall. In normal times, however, the reserves maintained by the French
administration made up the shortfall caused by drought. There are no longer any
reserves in Algeria, because they were transferred to the metropolis for the benefit
of the Germans. The Algerian people were therefore at the mercy of a bad harvest.
No Water since January

That misfortune has happened. Let me mention just one fact to give you an idea
of how bad it was. Throughout the high plateaus of Algeria, there has been no
rain since January. These vast fields are covered with wheat no higher than the
poppies that stretch off to the horizon. The land, covered with cracks like a lava
flow, is so dry that double teams had to be used for the spring planting. The plow

tears at the flaky, powdery soil incapable of holding the sown seed. The harvest
expected for this season will be worse than the last, which was already disastrous.
Some Figures

I beg the reader’s indulgence if I cite some figures. Normally, Algeria requires
some 18 million quintals of grain. As a general rule, its production is roughly
equal to its consumption: for instance, the 1935-36 harvest of all grains combined was 17,371,000 quintals. Last season's total was barely 8,715,000 quintals,
however, which is just 40 percent of normal needs.
This year’s forecasts are even more pessimistic, with a maximum expectation
of roughly 6 million quintals.
The drought is not the only reason for this terrifying shortage. The acreage
devoted to grain has decreased, because there is less seed and also because fodder is
not taxed, so that certain heedless landowners chose to grow it rather than essential grains. Certain temporary technical difficulties also play a part: deteriorating
“87 All reports about the riots in Sétif, from the government as well as the press, said the same thing. Unlike
most of them, however, Camus did not rely exclusively on this explanation, and his survey would take a
much more political turn. Note that on the same day, Combat, like other papers, published a communiqué
from the ministry ofthe interior concerning the riots in Sétif and Guelma, which claimed more than a hundred victims and were blamed on the PPA. and “certain elements of the ‘Friends of the Manifesto’ movement.” The paper reported that order had been restored and mentioned numerous declarations of loyalty
to France. It also published an A.EP. dispatch concerning the killing of Europeans in Sétif and Périgotville.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

203

equipment (a plow blade that used to cost 20 francs now goes for 500), fuel
rationing, and labor shortages due to the military mobilizations. What is more,
demand for grain has increased owing to rationing of other foods. Without help
from the outside world, it is clear, therefore, that Algeria cannot feed its population from its own soil.
130 to 150 Grams of Grain per Day

To witness the consequences of this famine is enough to break your heart. The
administration was obliged to reduce the grain allowance to 7.5 kilograms per
person per month (farmworkers receive 18 kilograms from their employers, but
they are a minority). That works out to 250 grams per day, which is not much
for people whose only staple is grain.
Yet even this famine ration could not be honored in the majority of cases. In
Kabylia, in the Ouarsensis, in the South Oranais, and in the Aurés (to take
widely separated regions), four to five kilograms per month was the most that
could be distributed, which comes to 130 to 150 grams per person per day.
Is it clear what that means? Is it clear that in a country where sky and land are
invitations to happiness, this means that millions of people are suffering from
hunger?*** On every road one sees haggard people in rags. Traveling around the
country, one sees fields dug up and raked over in bizarre ways, because an entire
douar has come to scratch the soil for a bitter but edible root called talrouda,*”
which can be made into a porridge that is at least filling if not nourishing.
The reader may be wondering what can be done. To be sure, the problem is a
difficult one. But there is not a minute to waste, and no one’s interests can be
spared, if we want to save these wretched people and stop hungry masses egged
on by criminal madmen from resuming the savage*”® massacre in Sétif. In my
next article I will indicate what injustices must be ended and what emergency
measures must be taken in the economic sphere.
(To be continued.)

ALBERT CAMUS

May 16, 1945
Algeria Asks for Ships and Justice*!
What can we do for the millions of Algerians who are suffering from hunger? It

doesn’t take exceptional political lucidity to observe that only a policy of massive
imports can change the situation.

488 Cf, the first text of “Misery in Kabylia,” entitled “Greece in Rags,” which was not included in Actuelles
TIE: “In one of the most attractive regions of the world, an entire people is suffering from hunger.” (Fragments d'un combat, p. 279.)

489 In Actuelles III, this word was spelled tarouda.
490 The word “savage” was omitted in Actwelles IT.
41 Article reprinted in Actuelles III under the title “Boats and Justice,” and without subtitles. The origi-

nal title is reminiscent of an article in “Misery in Kabylia” entitled “To Live, Kabylia Demands!”

204

CHAPTER

2

The government has just announced that a million quintals of wheat will be
distributed in Algeria. That is good. Bear in mind, however, that this amount is
enough to meet the needs of only about a month’s consumption. There is no way
to avoid sending the same quantity of grain to Algeria next month and the
month after that. The import problem has thus not been solved, and it will con-

tinue to require the utmost energy.
I am by no means unaware of the difficulty of the undertaking. To restore the
situation, feed the Arab population properly, and eliminate the black market,
Algeria will need to import 12 million quintals. That amounts to 240 shiploads
of 5,000 tons each. Given the state in which the war has left us, everyone understands what that means. But given the urgency of the situation, it must also be
recognized that we can allow nothing to stand in our way and must, if necessary,
demand that the world provide the necessary ships. When millions of people are
suffering from hunger, it becomes everybody's business.*””
When we have done this, however, we still will not have done everything we
can, because the gravity of the Algerian affair does not stem solely from the fact
that the Arabs are hungry. It also stems from the fact that their hunger is unjust.
Hence it is not enough to give Algeria the grain it needs; that grain must also be
distributed equitably. I would have preferred not to write this, but it is a fact that
the distribution is not equitable.
The Wrongs of the Caids

For proof of this assertion, consider first the fact that in this country, where grain
is almost as scarce as gold, it can still be found on the black market. In most of
the villages I visited, it was possible to buy grain not at the official price of 540
francs per quintal but at an underground price ranging from 7,000 to 16,000

francs per quintal.“”° The black market is supplied with wheat siphoned from
official supplies by thoughtless colonists and native overlords.
Furthermore, the grain that is delivered to distribution points is not distributed equally. The caidship, that most harmful institution, continues to wreak
havoc.’ The caids, who act in a sense as stewards representing the French
administration, have all too often been entrusted with the task of overseeing distributions of grain, and the methods used are often highly idiosyncratic.
The distributions carried out by the French administration itself are inadequate but generally honest. Those carried out by the caids are generally unfair,

governed by self-interest and favoritism.

‘2 'The same expression can be found at several places in La Peste (e.g., pp. 67 and 125).
“3 Combat note: “To make clear what this means, wheat at 10,000 fr. per quintal puts the price ofa kilogram ofbread at around 120 fr. The average daily wage of an Arab worker is 60 ft.”
“4 Tn “Misery in Kabylia,” Camus had spoken out against the imposition of the caidship, a typically Arab
institution, on Kabyle regions. The caid acted as judge, administrator, and chief of police rolled into one.
It is easy to imagine how such a position could be used, and the very term “caid” came to have a pejorative connotation,

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

205

Finally, to save the most painful point for last, the ration distributed to natives
throughout Algeria is inferior to that distributed to Europeans. This is the case
officially, since a European is entitled to 300 grams per day, compared with 250

for an Arab. Unofficially, the situation is even worse, since the typical Arab
receives only 100 to 150 grams, as I mentioned earlier.
The people of Algeria, animated by a sure and instinctive sense of justice,
might perhaps accept the need for such severe rationing in principle. But they do
not accept (as they made clear to me) the idea that because it was necessary to
limit rations, only Arab rations should have been reduced. People who have not
been stingy with their blood in this war are justified in thinking that others
should not be stingy with their bread.
This unequal treatment, together with various other abuses, has created a

political malaise, which I will deal with in forthcoming articles. But within the
context of the economic problem that concerns me now, it is further poisoning
an already grave situation, and it is adding to the suffering of the natives a bitterness that could have been avoided.
To quell the cruelest of hungers and heal inflamed hearts: that is the task we face
today. Hundreds of freighters filled with grain and two or three measures of strict
equality: this is what millions of people are asking of us, and perhaps this will help
to make it clear why we must try to understand them before we judge them.*””
ALBERT CAMUS
May 17, 1945°”°
“Our food consists of one liter of soup for lunch and coffee with three
hundred grams of bread for supper. . . . We are covered with lice and bugs. .. .
Jews are dying every day. After they die, they are piled up in a corner of the camp
to wait until there are enough of them to bury. . . . For hours or days on end,
whenever the sun shines, a foul odor spreads through the Jewish camp and
through ours.”
The camp pervaded by death’s dreadful odor is Dachau.” We have known

about it for quite some time, and people are beginning to tire of the sheer number of atrocities. Delicate souls find these accounts monotonous and reproach us
for continuing to speak of them. But France may change its tune when it learns
that this latest cry was uttered by one of Dachau’s thousands of political deportees just a week after their liberation by American troops. These men have been
kept in their camp awaiting a repatriation that is not yet in view. In the very place
where they thought they had attained the ultimate depth of suffering, they are
495 This remark set Camus apart from most other commentators.
496 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles.
497 In 1933 a concentration camp was set up at Dachau in Bavaria to detain opponents of the Nazi regime.
The “Jewish camp” held 25,000 Jews sent from Auschwitz in July 1944 in even worse physical condition

than other deportees. The mortality rate was terrifying.

206

CHAPTER

2

today experiencing even worse distress, because now their confidence has been
shaken.
The excerpts we quote are taken from a four-page letter sent by an internee to
his family. References are available in our offices for anyone to see. We had previously received a good deal of information indicating that this was the way
things stood with our deported comrades. We refrained from speaking of it,
however, while awaiting more reliable reports. We can wait no longer. The first
message to have reached us from the camp is decisive, and we cannot help but
proclaim our outrage and anger. This shameful situation must end.
When the German countryside abounds with food, and Hitler's generals fill
their stomachs as usual, it is indeed shameful for political detainees to go hun-

gry. When “honored deportees”*”* are repatriated immediately by airplane, it is
shameful that our comrades are still scanning the same forlorn skies they have
been contemplating for years. These men aren't asking for much. They don't
want any special treatment. They aren't asking for medals or speeches. They want
only to return home. They have had enough. They were willing to suffer for the
Liberation, but they cannot understand why they should suffer from the Liberation. Yes, they have had enough, because everything has been spoiled for them,
even this victory, which to a degree unknown to a world uninterested in matters
of the spirit, is also their victory.

People need to know that a single hair from one of these prisoners’ heads is of
greater importance to France and the whole world than twenty of the politicians
whose smiles are recorded in countless photographs. They, and they alone, were
guardians of honor and witnesses to courage. That is why people need to know
that while it is already unbearable for us to know that they are suffering from
hunger and disease, we will not allow them to despair of our assistance.
Our comrade’s letter, each line of which is grounds for outrage and revulsion,
recounts the way in which the news of victory was received in Dachau: “Not one
hurrah,” he writes, “not one demonstration: this day brought us nothing.” Can
anyone comprehend what these words mean, given that these are men who,
rather than wait for victory to arrive from across the sea, sacrificed everything in
order to hasten the day for which they hoped with every fiber of their being? Yet
when that day came, it found them amid stinking cadavers, their spirit confined
by barbed wire and struck dumb by a world stupider and more unconscious than
they could have imagined in their darkest hours.
We will not stop with speaking out on the matter. But if this man’s cry is not
heard, if immediate measures are not announced by Allied organizations, we will
repeat our demand, and we will use every means at our disposal to spread the
news and let the whole world know what fate the victorious democracies have
reserved for witnesses who allowed their throats to be cut so that the principles
for which they stand would have at least the appearance of truth.
“8 The allusion is to ministers and officials of the Third Republic, including Daladier, Blum, and Reynaud, who were reported to camps in Germany but held under conditions markedly different from those
of other deportees.

AUGUSTA

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

207

May 18, 1945
Natives of North Africa Estranged from a Democracy from Which

They Saw Themselves as Excluded Indefinitely*””
As grave and urgent as the economic privation from which North Africa is suffering is, it cannot by itself account for the Algerian political crisis. If we discussed the famine first, it was because hunger is the first priority. But when we
have done everything that needs to be done to feed the Algerian population, we
still will only have scratched the surface. Or, to put it another way, we will still,
at long last, need to come up with a policy for North Africa.?°”
Far be it from me to try to formulate a definitive policy for North Africa in
the space of two or three articles. This would please no one, and truth would not
be served. But our Algerian policy is so distorted by prejudice and ignorance that
to offer an objective account based on accurate information is already to render
an important service. That is what I propose to do.

An Abandoned Hope

I read in a morning newspaper that 80 percent of the Arabs wished to become
French citizens. In contrast, I would sum up the current state of Algerian policy
by saying that, indeed, Arabs used to want to become citizens but no longer do.
When you've hoped for something for a long time and your hopes are dashed,
you avert your eyes and your erstwhile desire disappears. That is what has happened to the indigenous peoples of Algeria, and the primary responsibility for
this is ours.
French colonial doctrine in Algeria since the conquest has not been notable
for its coherence. I shall spare the reader the history of its fluctuations, from
the notion of an Arab kingdom favored by the Second Empire to that of assimilation. In theory, it was the idea of assimilation that triumphed in the end.
For the past fifty years or so, France’s avowed goal in North Africa was gradually
to open the way to French citizenship for all Arabs. Let it be said at once
that this idea remained theoretical. In Algeria itself, the policy of assimilation
met with unremitting hostility, primarily on the part of the most influential
colonizers.

499 Fourth article on Algeria, reprinted in Actuelles IJ] under the title “Le malaise politique.” The subtitles
were omitted.

500 The originality of these statements at this point in time cannot be overstated. Official communiqués
and most newspapers continued to blame the riots on the famine and the actions of “agitators.” See, for
example, Le Figaro for May 22, in which Philippe Roland published an article entitled “Positions and
Dimensions of the Algerian crisis,” which objectively described the economic situation (using the same
figures that Camus cited) and explained that “the Muslims [are] manipulated by propaganda from con-

tradictory extremes” leading to “a crushing of the spirit . . . that ultimately disorients and disconcerts even
the least receptive Muslim.”

208

CHAPTER

2

Explaining the Attitude ofNorth African Natives

There exists a whole arsenal of arguments—some of them apparently convincing
at first sight—which have until now sufficed to keep Algeria immobilized in the
political situation we have described.
I won't discuss these arguments. But it is clear that on this issue as on others,
some day a choice will have to be made. France had to state clearly whether, on
the one hand, it considered Algeria to be a conquered land whose subjects,
stripped of all rights and burdened with additional duties, would be forced to
live in absolute dependence on us, or, on the other hand, it attributed to its dem-

ocratic principles a value universal enough to be able to extend them to populations for which it had accepted responsibility.
France, to its credit, chose, and having chosen, it was obliged, if words were
to mean anything, to follow the logic of its decision to the end. Special interests
opposed this venture and tried to turn back the clock. But time inexorably
marches on, and people evolve. No historical situation is ever permanent. If you
are unwilling to change quickly enough, you lose control of the situation.
The Blum-Viollette Plan:

Because French policy in Algeria ignored these elementary truths, it was
always twenty years behind the actual situation. An example will help to make
this clear.
In 1936, the Blum-Viollette plan marked a first step toward a policy of
assimilation after seventeen years of stagnation. It was by no means revolutionary. It would have granted civil rights and voting status to roughly 60,000
Muslims. This relatively modest plan aroused immense hopes among the
Arabs. Virtually the entire Arab population, represented by the Algerian Congress,” indicated its approval. But leading colonists, banded together in the

Financial Delegations’”’ and the Association of Mayors of Algeria, mounted a

501 In 1936, at the behest of Algeria’s governor Maurice Viollette, the government of Léon Blum sought

to establish a formula for citizenship that would have treated political rights separately from private status, thus allowing a certain number of Muslim natives—veterans, recipients of military decorations, and
holders of elementary education certificates and university degrees, among others—to become French citizens without giving up their personal status. Under the auspices of the Maison de la Culture of Algiers,
Camus had worked actively on behalf of this plan (see the complete text in Fragments d’un combat, I, pp.
143-144, and “Manifeste des Intellectuels d’Algérie en faveur du projet Viollette” in Essais, p- 1328).

502 The Algerian (or Muslim) Congress was an umbrella organization of Algerian political movements,
except for Messali Hadj’s Etoile Nord-Africaine. It originated with the Council of Ulemmas, founded by
Sheikh Ben Badis in 1931, and supported the Popular Front.
°03 Les Financial Assemblies were local assemblies responsible for dealing with budgetary matters, in which
Europeans held two-thirds of the seats.
°4 The Association of Mayors of Algeria consistently opposed all reform and, with support from rightwing parties in France, played a decisive role in seeing to it that the Blum-Viollette plan was never put to
a vote in parliament. On their activities, see Fragments d’un combat, |, pp. 122-139.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

209

counteroffensive powerful enough to ensure that the plan was never even presented to the Chambers.

Ordinance ofMarch 7°”
The dashing of this great hope naturally led to a very radical disaffection. Now
the French government is proposing that Algeria accept the ordinance of March
7, 1944, whose electoral provisions more or less emulate those of the BlumViollette plan.
If this ordinance were really enforced, it would give the vote to roughly 80,000
Muslims. It would also eliminate the exceptional legal status of Arabs, a goal for
which North African democrats have fought for years. In effect, Arabs were not
subject to the same penal code or even the same courts as Frenchmen. Special tribunals, more severe in their punishments and more summary in their procedures, kept Arabs in a permanent state of subjection. The new ordinance has
eliminated that abuse, and that is a very good thing.
Time Marches On

Arab opinion, much dampened by all that has taken place, remains reserved
and wary, however, despite all the good things in the new plan. The problem is
quite simply that time marches on. The fall of France was followed by a loss of
French prestige. The 1942 landing’’® brought Arabs into contact with other
nations and spurred them to make comparisons. Finally, one cannot ignore the
fact that the Pan-Arab Federation””” is a constant temptation for the people of
North Africa, whose misery only adds to all their other grievances. As a result of

all this, a plan that would have been welcomed enthusiastically in 1936 and
would have solved a great many problems is today met only with wariness. Once
again we are late.
Peoples generally aspire to political rights only in order to set themselves on
the road to social progress. The Arab people wanted the right to vote because
they knew that, with it, and through the free exercise of democracy, they could

eliminate the injustices that are poisoning the political climate of Algeria today.

505 The ordinance of March 7, 1944, adopted by the Provisional Government in Algiers, granted Muslims

all the rights and duties of Frenchmen and opened all civilian and military posts to them without loss of
personal status. It expanded the representation of Algerians from one-third to two-fifths in all local assemblies, broadened the Muslim electoral college to include all Algerians above the age of twenty-one, and
abolished all measures of exception (statut de l’indigénat, Régnier decree). On this ordinance, see the editorial of October 13, 1944, n. 138, p. 70, and the texts of Belloul (December 1, 1944, and January 9,

1945).
506 See editorial of September 4, 1944, and n. 44, p. 27.
507 The Pan-Arab Federation, which would later become the Arab League, included Saudi Arabia, Egypt,

Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen.

CHAPTER

210

2

They knew that they could eliminate inequalities in wages””® and pensions, as
well as more scandalous inequalities in military allowances and, in a more general sense, everything that helped to perpetuate their inferior status. But the
Arabs seem to have lost their faith in democracy, of which they were offered only
a caricature. They hope to achieve by other means a goal that has never changed:
an improvement in their condition.
That is why, to believe my sample, Arab opinion is in its majority indifferent
or hostile to the policy of assimilation. This is most unfortunate. But before
deciding what ought to be done to improve the situation, we must have a clear
sense of what the political climate in Algeria is today.
Arabs today face any number of possibilities, and since, historically, every aspiration of a people finds political expression, Muslims have lately found themselves
drawn to a remarkable figure, Ferhat Abbas, and his “Friends of the Manifesto”

party. In my next article, I will discuss this important movement, the most important and novel to have appeared in Algeria since the early days of the conquest.”
ALBERT CAMUS

May 19, 1945°!°

The day before yesterday we protested the fate reserved for deportees who remain
in German camps.”!’ Yesterday our comrades at France-Soir’? tried to give our
protest a political interpretation that we reject categorically. To attempt such a
thing is not only puerile, it is in bad taste in dealing with so grave an issue. We

here are not defending anybody. We have only one goal: to save the most precious of French lives. Neither politics nor the nation’s sensitivities have any place
in this distressing situation.
In any case, this is not the moment

to begin leveling accusations, because

there is no shortage of blame. This is the moment to act quickly, to hit hard at
those with lazy imaginations and carefree hearts who are costing us so dearly. We
must act, and act quickly, and if our voices can stir up what needs to be stirred

up, we will use them and spare no one.
The Americans are now promising us that they will use their aircraft to bring
home five thousand deportees per day. This promise was made after we launched
508 One of the articles of “Misére de la Kabylie” was entitled “Insulting Wages.”
509 See article of May 20-21, p. 212.
510 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter “La chair.”
511 See editorial of May 17.
512 In France-Soir on May 19, under the title “Don’t Accuse to Let Yourself Off the Hook,” Philippe Viannay
(who was, as the paper noted, the founder of Défense de la France, as France-Soir was originally known,

and who had “personally gone to Germany to investigate the conditions surrounding the repatriation of
our deportees”) expressed the view that while the Americans bore some responsibility for the situation,
there was above all a “dreadful failure on the part of the French, who have failed to defend their own,”
who weren't working hard enough, and who were devoting too many transportation resources to officials
and not enough to deportees.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

211

our appeal, and we greet it with joy and satisfaction. The matter of the camps
under quarantine remains to be dealt with, however. The camps at Dachau and
Allach** have been decimated by typhus. On May 6, detainees were dying at the
rate of 120 per day. Deported doctors in the camp have asked that the quarantine perimeter be expanded beyond the camp itself, which is overcrowded and
where every inch of ground is infected, to include the S.S. camp a few miles
away, which is clean and comfortable. This request has yet to be granted, as it
should be.
When all the problems have been resolved, blame must be assessed, and it will
be. But for now we must wake up everyone who is asleep, without exception. We
must tell them, for example, that it is unacceptable for our deported comrades
not to have regular correspondence with their families and for their homeland to
seem as far away today as in the days of their greatest despair. We must also tell
them, to give another example, that what these broken-down operations need is
not jars of jam but medical supplies along with all the equipment necessary to
save a few of these irreplaceable lives.
In any case, we will continue to protest until we are fully satisfied. If our previous article stirred emotions, so much the better. It would have been better still,

of course, if no article had been needed to stir up emotions. There are things that
can be seen at Dachau that should have sufficed. But this is the time for action,
not regrets.
To be perfectly clear, our grievance is not specifically directed at the Americans.
As everyone knows, we here are doing all we can to promote friendship with the
Americans. The charge we bring is a general one, however, and the guilty should
acknowledge their mistakes, make amends, and put things right by rectifying
their oversights and errors. Men and nations do not always see where their true
interests and true riches lie.
In all the democracies, governments of every stripe are in the process of
proving in this instance that they do not know where their true elites are. They
are in pestilential camps, where the few survivors of a heroic troop are still fighting against the indifference and carelessness of their own governments.
France in particular has lost its finest sons in the voluntary combat of the
Resistance.*!* The country is gauging the extent of this loss every day. Each of
the men who is dying today in Dachau weakens it further and adds to its woe.
Because we here are only too well aware of this, we are terribly jealous of these
men and feel that we must defend them with every ounce of our strength, with-

out regard for anyone or anything, until they are liberated a second time.””°

513 Allach was attached to Dachau.
514 Camus returns to this idea again and again; see the editorial of October 27, 1944, p. 90.

515 The editorial of May 23, which was not written by Camus, follows up on this one and states: “Our
protests, together with those that have been raised throughout France against the situation of the political deportes, have had their effect.” Repatriation did in fact accelerate, and the Dachau deportes were
transferred to German villages. The newspaper pointed out, however, that there were camps other than
Dachau and demanded that everything possible be done to ensure a rapid repatriation.

212

CHAPTER

2

May 20-21, 1945
Arabs Demand a Constitution and a Parliament for Algeria’!

I said in my last article that a substantial number of North African natives, having given up on the policy of assimilation but not yet won over by pure nationalism, had turned to a new party, the “Friends of the Manifesto.” I therefore
think it would be useful to make French people familiar with this party, which,
like it or not, has to be reckoned with.”
The leader of this movement is Ferhat Abbas,’!® a native of Sétif, a university

graduate with a degree in pharmacy, and, before the war, one of the staunchest
proponents of the assimilation policy. At that time he edited a newspaper,
LEntente, which defended the Blum-Viollette plan and called for the establishment in Algeria of a democratic political system in which Arabs would enjoy
rights corresponding to their duties.
Today, Abbas, like many of his coreligionists, has turned his back on assimila-

tion. His newspaper, Egalité, whose editor Aziz Kessous””” is a socialist as well as
a former proponent of assimilation, is calling for Algeria to be recognized as a
nation” linked to France by ties of federalism.

The Man

Ferhat Abbas is fifty years old. He is undeniably a product of French culture. The
epigraph of his first book was a quotation from Pascal. This was no accident. He
is in fact a man in the Pascalian spirit, combining logic with passion with some
considerable success. The following thought is very much in the French style:
“France will be free and strong by dint of our freedoms and our strengths.”
516 Fifth article on Algeria, reprinted in Actuelles IIT (with addition of a note on Ferhat Abbas) under the

title “The Party of the Manifesto.”
°17 Camus knew the political situation in Algeria well, not only from his own political activities but also
because he had covered the trial of Sheikh El Okbi for Alger-Républicain in June 1939 (see Fragments d'un
combat, pp. 412-510).
518 Camus gives an excellent account of the career of Ferhat Abbas (1899-1985). Having served as gen-

eral councilor, municipal councilor for Sétif, and financial delegate before the war, Abbas saw the failure
of the Blum-Viollette plan as proof of the impossibility of assimilation. In 1938 he founded the Algerian
Popular Union for Conquest of the Rights of Man and the Citizen. Although he was careful to say that
“attachment does not mean assimilation,” he did not yet envisage an Algeria separate from France. The
program of the Manifesto, and the creation of the “Friends of the Manifesto” party, marked a clear shift
in his demands. From May 1945 until independence, Ferhat Abbas would play an important role in the
history of Algeria. After serving in Tunisia as president of the Provisional Government of the Algerian
Republic and later as president of the Algerian Assembly, he was completely sidelined.
°19 Aziz Kessous exercised official responsibilities in Ferhat Abbas’s party. A member of the S.EI.O., he
tried, even after November 1954, to bring French and Algerian liberals together by founding a newspaper, Communauté algérienne. In Actuelles IIT Camus reprinted a letter he had written to Kessous under the
title “Letter to an Algerian Militant,” which had appeared in the first issue of the newspaper.
°20 In Actuelles IJ a note was attached to this statement indicating that “to be precise, Ferhat Abbas spoke
of an Algerian republic.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

213

Ferhat Abbas owes his style to our culture, as he is well aware. Even his humor
bears the French stamp, as is evident from the following classified ad, which
appeared in uppercase characters in Egalité: “Exchange one hundred feudal lords
of all races for 100,000 French teachers and technicians.”
This cultivated and independent man has evolved along with his people, and
he has set forth their aspirations in a manifesto that was published on February 10,
1943, and accepted by General Catroux™! as a basis for discussion.
The Program

What does the manifesto say? In truth, taken on its own terms, the text limits
itself to a detailed critique of French policy in North Africa and to the assertion
of a principle. That principle, which takes note of the failure of the assimilation
policy, is that there is a need to recognize an Algerian nation linked to France but
distinctive in character. According to the manifesto, “it is now clear to everyone
that this assimilation policy is an inaccessible reality [my italics] and a dangerous
instrument designed to serve the interests of the colonization.”
Building on this principle, the manifesto asks that Algeria be given its own

constitution in order to ensure that Algerians will enjoy full democratic rights
and parliamentary representation. An appendix added to the manifesto on
May 26, 1943, and two more recent texts from April and May 1945, further flesh
out this position. The amended manifesto calls for recognition, an end to hostilities, and an Algerian state with its own constitution, to be drafted by a con-

stituent assembly elected by universal suffrage of all people residing in Algeria.
The general government would then cease to be a bureaucratic agency and
become a true government, with top positions equally divided between French
and Arab ministers.
As for the assembly, the “Friends of the Manifesto” were aware that any proposal for strictly proportional representation would have met with hostility in
France, since with eight Arabs to every Frenchman in the population, the assembly would then become a de facto Arab parliament. As a result, they agreed
that their constitution should allow for 50 percent Muslim representatives and
50 percent Europeans.
The “Friends of the Manifesto” and Their Demands

Not wishing to wound French sensibilities, the “Friends” conceded that the
assembly’s powers would include only administrative, social, financial, and economic matters, with all issues of external security, military organization, and
diplomacy being entrusted to the central government in Paris. To be sure, this
521 General Catroux (1877-1969) served as governor of Indochina in 1939-1940 before joining General
de Gaulle in London. In 1943, when de Gaulle and the Provisional Government arrived in Algiers, he

became governor-general of Algeria and state commissioner on the National Liberal Committee. Later he

served as ambassador to the Soviet Union. Though appointed minister for Algeria in 1956, he was unable
to take up his duties.

214

CHAPTER

2

basic principle went hand in hand with certain social demands, all of which are
aimed at bringing as much democracy as possible to Arab politics. Nevertheless,
I believe that I have gotten the gist of the document right and have not misrepresented the thinking of the “Friends of the Manifesto.”
The Manifesto and the Algerian Nationalists

In any case, these ideas, and the man who represents them, have attracted the
support of a substantial part of the Muslim community. Ferhat Abbas has drawn
together a very diverse group of men and movements, such as the sect of the
Ulemmas, Muslim intellectuals who preach in favor of a rationalist reform of
Islam and who were until recently proponents of assimilation, as well as socialists, to name just two examples. It is also quite clear that elements of the Algerian
Popular Party,” an Arab nationalist party that was dissolved in 1936 but con-

tinued to propagandize illegally in favor of Algerian separatism, have joined the
“Friends of the Manifesto,” which they see as a good platform for action.
They may be the ones who compromised the “Friends of the Manifesto” in the
recent disturbances. But I know from a direct source that Ferhat Abbas is too shrewd
a politician to have recommended or wished for such excesses, which he knew were
likely to strengthen the hand of Algerian reactionaries. The man who wrote that
“not one African will die for Hitler” has given sufficient guarantees on this subject.
The reader will form his own conclusions as to the program I’ve just laid out.
Whatever your opinion may be, however, you need to know that this program
exists and that it has had a deep impact on Arab political aspirations.
If the French administration had decided not to follow General Catroux in his
provisional approval of the manifesto, it might have noticed that the whole political construct of the manifesto derives its strength from the fact that it considers
assimilation to be an “inaccessible reality.” It might then have concluded that it
would be enough to make the reality accessible to cut the ground out from under
the “Friends of the Manifesto.” But it chose instead to respond with imprisonment and repression. This was stupidity, pure and simple.
ALBERT CaMUS

May 23, 1945

It Is Justice That Will Save Algeria from Hatred?

A political portrait of Algeria today would not be complete without taking note
of French democrats who live in daily contact with the grave problems we have
*22 The Algerian Popular Party, created by Messali Hadj in March 1937, replaced the North African Star,
an offshoot of the Communist Party, of which it had taken control in 1927 and which had just been dissolved. Hadj was imprisoned and later deported to Brazzaville. When the A.PP. was dissolved, he founded
the Movement for the Triumph of Democratic Liberties.
°°3 This sixth article in the series on Algeria was not reprinted in Actuelles III, Camus most likely thought
it outdated in 1958.

CC
)

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

215

described in previous articles. Make no mistake, however: democratic elements
are in the minority.
Bear in mind that the Vichy regime found its warmest supporters in Algeria,
where traces of it remain. With the exception of Alger-Républicain (and, to a

lesser extent, Oran-Républicain), all the Algerian dailies collaborated. They have
retained something of that period, as a glance at any of them reveals. Yet they are
still allowed to publish, no doubt without M. Teitgen’s knowledge.
If these newspapers have large readerships, it is because democracy has not had
a good press in North Africa. Many of these readers are high officials of the General Government. This is what is sometimes called a “clarified political situation.”
Our Last Chance

There are democrats, however. The Radical Party, the Socialist Party, and the
Communist Party are unanimous in this regard. I’ve read in several places that
the Communist Party is engaged in agitation in Algeria. I am obliged to say that
this is the exact opposite of the truth.”
The Communist Party, which is opposed to the “Friends of the Manifesto,”
was behind the creation of a movement open to Arabs called the “Friends of
Democracy.” The position championed by this movement enjoys the practical
support of the Radicals and Socialists. All backed the ordinance of March 7,
1944, which they considered to be a step toward equality of political rights. All
call for this ordinance to be extended and denounce the social abuses that are the
cause of so much suffering in Algeria.
I believe that their program can be summed up in three points: 1) extension of

the ordinance of March 7 to all Arabs in possession of a school-leaving certificate
and all who fought for France; 2) elimination of the regime of mixed communes

and expansion of indigenous municipal rights; 3) egalitarian social policy.
This program, which is reasonable and humane, is widely believed to be
France's last chance to safeguard its future in North Africa.
New Men

But a new politics calls for new methods and new men. For example, there
would be no point in extending political rights to everyone with a schoolleaving certificate while doing nothing to increase the number of such people.
At the present time, according to the administration’s own figures, one million
Muslim children are without schools. This incredible failure can be remedied
only by building new schools and accelerating the training of teachers. By the
same token, the government cannot allow officials to take it upon themselves to

modify its ordinances and sabotage their application, as is happening in Kabylia
today, to judge by prefectoral instructions I saw with my own eyes.

524 The Communist Party would support the Algerian insurrection from 1954 to 1962. That may be one
of the reasons why this article was not published in Actwelles III.

216

CHAPTER

2

New men are therefore needed. And at a time when so many young French
people are searching for a way and a reason to live, it may be possible to find a
few thousand capable of grasping the fact that a land awaits them in which they
can their fellow man and their country at the same time serve.”
I have now traced the economic and political outline of the Algerian problem
as clearly as I know how. This is only an outline, of whose insufficiencies | am
well aware. But as I said at the outset, my only ambition was to clarify a situation obscured by blindness and prejudice. Thus far I have done so objectively. In
concluding, however, it seems to me that I must add a personal note.
As anxious conquerors, we have something to learn from the wisdom of Arab

civilization. In order to learn from that civilization, we first have to understand
it and serve it. Granted that we have nothing to teach, it is obvious that we have
something for which we need to ask forgiveness.
Our feverish and unbridled desire for power and expansion will never be
excused unless we make up for them by unwavering attention to the pursuit of
justice and the spirit of self-sacrifice. Despite the repressive actions we have just
taken in North Africa, I am convinced that the era of Western imperialism is

over.
The material civilization that we bring with us can save itself only if it someday brings more complete liberation to everyone it subjugates. Then we will win
the friendship of the people who depend on us. Otherwise, we will reap hatred,
like all vanquishers who prove themselves incapable of moving beyond victory.
Unfortunate and innocent French victims have lost their lives, and this crime in

itself is inexcusable. But I hope that we will respond to murder with nothing
other than justice, so as to avoid doing irreparable harm.””°
‘T Accuse Europe”

This problem also transcends our borders. “I Accuse Europe” is the title of one
of Ferhat Abbas’s pamphlets. On this point, at least, Europe can side with the
prisoner. More than that, Europe should accuse itself, since with all its constant
upheavals and contradictions, it has managed to produce the longest, most terrible reign of barbarism the world has ever known.
Today, the free men of Europe are victorious; they have for the time being
halted the terrible course of this decadence. Now they want to turn history on
its head, and in this they can surely succeed if they are willing to make the
°25 This call would no longer have made sense in 1958.
°26 This protest was quite isolated. In a report published in Le Figaro on July 13, 1945, under the title
“What I Saw and Learned in Algeria,” Pierre Dubard (who had previously reported that “the repression

is over”) quoted the prefect of Constantine, who claimed to be “boiling” with “rage against the savagery
of the natives”: “The rapidity of the repression saved Algeria.” The work of Kateb Yacine contains an
account of “acts of repression” in Sétif. A note in L’'Homme révolté alludes to these events after discussing
the systematic massacre of the population of Lidice by the Nazis: “It is striking to note that atrocities that
remind us of these crimes were committed in the colonies (India, 1857; Algeria, 1945; etc.) by European

nations in obedience to the same irrational prejudice of racial superiority” (Essais, p. 590).

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

217

necessary sacrifices. But the only way to make this revolution is to make it totally.
They will save Europe from its demons and low gods only if they liberate all
people who depend on Europe.
At the conclusion of this survey, I have only one question for the French, who
today know what hatred is: “Do you truly want to be hated by millions of people, as you have hated thousands of others? If so, let things continue on their
present course in North Africa. If not, welcome these people among you and
treat them as equals, using all appropriate means.”
I have no doubt about the response of the French people, or of any reasonable
man. But what about those in government? Maybe it’s time to envisage a period
in which governments will govern in accordance with reason, which under
today’s conditions means boldly and generously.”

>27 To complement this series of articles on Algeria (which would conclude with the editorial of June 15),

Combat on May 25 published a response to accusations made against Camus by Quilici in La Bataille.
Although it is quite clear that Camus did not write this response, it is likely that he approved its language.
Here is the text, entitled “Contempt has never turned anyone into a French citizen”:
“In the weekly La Bataille, M. Quilici vehemently attacks our friend Albert Camus for his inquiry into
conditions in Algeria. Ever since he arrived in Paris, M. Quilici has distinguished himself in the eyes of
respectable people. Indeed, he seems to have set himself the task of insulting men associated with the interior resistance. Nevertheless, we have never answered his attacks, because it seemed to us that their qual-

ity did not warrant a response. The case in point is no better in that respect, but we are obliged to respond
because the issue raised by these attacks is too serious to leave the job to just anyone.
“To discredit Camus's information on Algeria, M. Quilici attacks the intellectual arrogance of anyone
who would claim to know the situation in North Africa after three weeks of research. Hence we must
point out that Camus is North African by birth and upbringing. He has spent most of his life in Algeria,
and until the armistice of June 1940 the only political problem that interested him was the Algerian problem. The Kabyles have not forgotten the investigations of poverty in Algeria that Camus published in
Alger-Républicain a few months before the war.
“M. Quilici suspects Camus of not caring enough about French victims in Algeria. But how could he
not, since his whole family lives there both in cities and in colonial villages vulnerable to the rebels? Therefore, if he asks that we respond to hatred not with hatred but with justice, there is a good chance that he

does so not on a whim but only after careful consideration.
“For the rest, we will not mince words. M. Quilici previously published an article on Algeria that was
a veritable provocation on account of the disgraceful contempt it showed toward Arabs. He has not
stopped. On the one hand, he approves of the democratic solution that Camus advocated and that implies
a need for greater assimilation, while on the other hand he seems to regret the fact that Arabs are not
required to ride in special cars on Algerian railroads. Contempt has never turned anyone into a French
citizen, and for all its show of loyalism, we know of no more vile text than M. Quilici’s, which does a dis-

service to the country to which he seems to think he has exclusive rights.
“Furthermore, M. Quilici sees proof that the disorder in Sétif was orchestrated in the fact that it broke

out at the end of the war, as in 1871. Indeed, it is likely that the disorder was orchestrated, but the proof
doesn’t seem convincing to us, and we find it hard to imagine a rebel leader waiting to send his troops into
battle until the forces of repression can easily be mobilized against them.
“As for the tactic of blaming our American friends for the troubles in Algeria, the silliness of the charge
speaks for itself. We here believe that France is an adult country capable of acknowledging its mistakes as
well as defending its rights. That is what M. Quilici calls the taste for universality. But this comes from
an inadequate vocabulary, and from his confused idea of the meaning of honesty.
“Make no mistake: M. Quilici’s attitude is significant. If he represented himself alone, it wouldn't mater
much. But too many men like him offer Algerians a misleading image of France. The reason for our anger

218

CHAPTER

2

May 25, 1945°”°
Yesterday, General de Gaulle delivered a speech that brought us a great deal of

satisfaction.” That the production of coal and electricity and the entire credit
system be placed in the service of the nation before the year is out—these are
reforms for which we fought hard. We fought the government itself, and that
gives us all the more leave today to voice our total approval.
General de Gaulle, moreover, has set these reforms in their real perspective
and shown that, in addition to the domestic reasons for implementing them,
there would be international consequences as well. This is ground on which we
are quite pleased to follow him. Indeed, there is not a single domestic issue that
does not also have global repercussions and that is not influenced in turn by
international politics.
We will be what we are worth. Others will judge us by what we produce. And
we won't be able to produce anything if we don’t put the chief instruments of
production into the hands of the nation and don’t set the entire country to work
on a single project: reconstruction. If the nation is to work, it must feel that it is
working for itself and not in order to cement the privileges of a few.
The solidarity in misfortune and destruction that France has just experienced
must not be forgotten in the hour of her rebirth. After the defeat, the French
people learned that the nation was theirs and not the exclusive property of a few
specialists. That is why they ask that their sacrifices serve the common interest
and only the common interest.
Therefore the announcement of these reforms, even if it does not solve any of
the great problems of the moment, may well contribute to their solution. Workers cannot accept the harsh constraints of wage and price controls unless they have
proof that those constraints have a purpose and they are not the only ones to bear
their burden. Solutions to our problems will be even further advanced if, as
General de Gaulle has promised, everything possible is done to improve the food
supply. If rationed products truly find their way into the hands of workers, their
condition will be improved. The government must bend all its effort to this task.

will be clear when we say that there are Frenchmen in Algeria whose first feelings of shame came when
they saw how men like M. Quilici conceived of their role in a conquered land. M. Quilici wants people
in Algeria to speak the language of hatred, but the problem is serious enough, and we feel enough scruples about the French future in North Africa, to urge the government to turn a deaf ear to such appeals
and to state publicly that France will never acknowledge such language as its own.”
Combat
8 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus: it approves of a severe style, exempt from all demagogy and proposing specific reforms, and it calls for constructive effort—all notes that Camus struck repeatedly in his
editorials.
2° Combat printed the text of de Gaulle’s speech announcing a number of reforms in response to demands
voiced by resisters in the spirit of the N.C.R. program. These reforms were implemented in 1945-1946:
they included a reform of the bureaucracy, nationalization of credit (December 2, 1945), nationalization
of gas and electricity (April 8, 1946), insurance (April 25, 1946), and creation of the Charbonnages de
France (May 17, 1946).

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

219

To be sure, yesterday's speech offered no prospect of comfort and no hope of
a tranquil existence. We have never had any doubt that what France expects is
years of toil and effort. But that toil is freely embraced, and when the government has done what must be done in order to ensure that it is also just, then all
decent people will unite in the common effort.
We are not among those who believe that effort is a substitute for happiness.
Of course each individual has the right to judge for himself. But nations have the
duty to regard the happiness of each citizen as sacred. The years of labor that
await us are therefore not an end in themselves. But they await us, and we must
do what is necessary. If the government sees to it that justice accompanies our
efforts, our toil will seem less harsh.

May 26, 1945°°°

While awaiting the ministerial shakeup that has, to be sure, been a long time
coming, some recently repatriated legislators are calling for a return to “Republican legality” and the “Constitution of 1875.” This demand has, as one might

expect, met with a highly favorable response in the Radical Party press.”*!
May we say that we find this ambition somewhat surprising? Because
ultimately, if it were a matter of strictly observing the laws in force in 1939, the
man in power right now ought to be not de Gaulle but Pétain. Called upon by
M. Albert Lebrun to constitute a ministry in 1940 and endorsed by an overwhelming majority of both chambers, which voted to grant him full powers, he

and he alone came to power in conformity with the law. And as for the Constitution of 1875, it was once again all those respectable parliamentarians who
authorized Pétain to modify it to suit himself. They exhibit a curious logic when
they invoke a legality and a constitution that they helped to destroy.
The regime in France today is an extralegal one; more precisely, it is obliged
to strike a compromise between legislation passed by Vichy and the laws of the
Third Republic without being able to found its power on either one and without the mandate to overhaul the legal system completely.
The latter remains a possibility, however. Although the role of the present
government is to make a transition (always a thankless task), and although it is
not required to establish new institutions until universal suffrage has spoken,
the public has demonstrated its desire for certain specific reforms clearly
enough to allow the government to start charting a new course. In this regard,

the recent municipal elections may be seen as having removed any remaining
doubt.?*
530 Editorial. Text possibly by Camus.
531 Camus was in the habit of attacking the Radical Party.
532 The municipal elections of April 29 and May 13 marked beyond question a victory of the left: the
Communist Party, the Socialist Party, and the M.R.P.

220

CHAPTER

2

In fact, what matters is not the discussion of legality, which is doomed to go
nowhere. The provisional government is being asked only to act in a democratic
way, that is, in the interest of freedom and justice.
National elections are impossible before all prisoners have returned home. But
the government should not seize on this as a pretext to ensconce itself in a
fortress surrounded by police and special secret agents. Now that the war in
Europe is over, the government should state all its intentions in regard to both
domestic and foreign policy so that the choice to be laid before the voters will be
clear. It should strive to expose all its work to the light of day.
If the election of the Constituent Assembly is to have a meaning, the issues of
the day must be debated publicly, and the government must stop shrouding its
policies in vague explanations. Offering relief to one group and then another
cannot continue forever. The necessities of History cannot always be finessed.
Some legislators in the past and some members of the government today
remind us of the Spanish cardinal of the Renaissance who went into battle with
his armor on backward in order to make people think that he was always advancing, when in fact, according to one of his colleagues, he was constantly retreating.

May 27, 1945°°°
The foreign affairs committee of the Consultative Assembly has just called for
France to break off diplomatic relations with Franco. In addition, France and
England are proposing to reconsider the status of Tangier, which the Spanish dictator altered unilaterally in the middle of the war in accordance with his usual notion
of democratic procedure.” Thus the issue of Spain is once again on the agenda.
In fact, it would have been surprising if it had not come up. At a time when

free men everywhere are celebrating the defeat of fascism, one has to ponder the
paradox that the entire Iberian Peninsula remains under fascist rule, while the
rest of the world appears to regard this as natural.
The issue is clear, however. As everyone must know, if Franco remains in
power, it is because the Allies want him there. If the victorious nations purely
and simply ended their relations with Franco’s Spain, the Phalangist regime
would not survive for more than a few days. It is no secret that the Spanish economy is propped up by the Allies. If it endures, it is because no one is doing what
it would take to kill it.
This is a serious matter. The Allied governments, including the French government, run the risk of being misunderstood by millions of people who fought
for the very principle of liberty. They risk lending credence to the idea that they
prefer a dictatorship they control to a republic that might not be to their liking.
This will bring them into conflict with people who have always believed that
*3 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, following up the editorial of November 21, 1944, p. 116.
*34 In June 1940, after the armistice, Franco seized Tangiers. See editorial of November 21, 1944, n. 269,
Pelle

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

221

fascism had to be destroyed wherever it was found, down to its very last citadel,
even if that means Spain.
There is no danger, however, that they will find their actions self-contradictory,
because they already are. There is not a single line in any speech delivered by any
Allied leader during the war that is not contradicted by the very existence of the
Franco regime. For there is still one place in the world where the spirit of mediocrity and cruelty reigns, where prisoners are shot despite the interventions of
French officials, and where hundreds of thousands of fighters have been held in
prison for years for the crime of hope. We need not remind our readers what
those fighters mean to us.”
It seems clear that, in spite of all the destruction of the past few years, diplomats have not changed their ways. Apparently there are words to which they will
always be deaf.
Yet if governments are always ready to contradict themselves, individuals and
nations can no longer do so in today’s world. They have paid too dearly for their
principles to allow them to be twisted for the sake of a political compromise. All
people of all nationalities who rejected Munich and Hitler reject Franco. If it is
true to say that total war must inevitably lead to total victory, then we are bound
to say that our victory will not be complete as long as Spain remains enslaved.**°
Patience is a word that may still have meaning in the bureaucracies of various
capitals. It has no meaning for the prisoners of Madrid or for anyone who has
just experienced the endless impatience of defeat and subjugation. People of all
countries are tired of secret diplomacy. They want the last Hitlerian government
in Europe to disappear, or else they demand that the Allies state clearly and
bluntly the reasons for their indulgence and forgetfulness.

May 31, 1945°°”

The Syrian affair, which we have been analyzing daily on the basis of information gleaned from a variety of sources, needs to be approached cautiously.”* It
would be good if we were in a position both to acknowledge our wrongs and
535 We have previously encountered Camus’s attachment to republican Spain (see the editorials of
September 5, October 5 and 24, November 21, and December 10, 1944, and January 7-8, 1945).
536 The last sentence is reminiscent of one in an article published in the underground Combat that was
certainly written by Camus: see p. 1 above.
537 Editorial. Text probably by Camus.
538 The Franco-British crisis in Syria and Lebanon (placed under French mandate in 1919) was set against

a background of French equivocation as to independence for the states of the Levant. Though promised
by the Viénot accords in 1936, independence never became a reality. It was proclaimed in 1941 by
General Catroux, the high commissioner for the region, after Free French Forces entered Syria, and guaranteed by British troops. Nationalist demonstrations took place in Beirut on May 8, 1945, and clashes
erupted afterward. The situation took a turn for the worse on May 29, when French outposts in Damascus
came under attack; the city was bombarded the following night. French and British troops were not evacuated until 1945. Combat followed these events quite closely thanks to reporting by its special envoy Pierre
Kaufmann. The newspaper also stressed the importance of Middle East oil.

222

CHAPTER

2

defend our rights, because that would be a position of true strength. But the
complexity of all issues touching on the Arab countries is compounded in this
case by international influences that have been making themselves felt in the
Middle East. In the face of so much confusion, we seem incapable of speaking
in a clear voice that would strengthen our position.
The influence that has made itself felt on the Algerian issue stems from
England. Because we here are particularly attached to the Franco-British entente,
and because we hope that in the future it will become a political reality in which
the two countries will find compensation for their reciprocal weaknesses,
we regret that England’s views were expressed primarily in the official communiqué that we published two days ago, a communiqué that pointed a finger of
accusation at us.

This is not to say that we ought to reject every accusation and stubbornly deny
that we have made mistakes. We ought to acknowledge our errors and admit that
the scuttling of the independence treaty of 1936 was not the right thing to do.
But England should also own up to its mistakes and try to find common ground
with us so as to safeguard the just rights of the Syrian and Lebanese people
for their sake alone and not for the benefit of rival imperialisms. Fortunately, a
segment of the British public grasps this. In the Manchester Guardian, for
instance, we read that “anyone who has studied our treaty with Iraq cannot
regard the French proposals as extravagant, for they bear a striking resemblance
to the terms of our agreement. But the way in which these demands have been
presented and the negotiations carried on is singularly lacking in wisdom.”
The liberal newspaper adds, moreover, that British officials have made France’s
situation more difficult, because “they have not always negotiated honestly or
tactfully enough.”
This is the kind of thing that needs to be said. But if we are to speak in this
voice, the Western nations must stop looking upon the Middle East as a closed

preserve over which ownership is to be asserted. Europe must seek to play an
emancipatory role in its overseas territories rather than engage in a battle over
conflicting interests. Given the way things are going and minds are evolving, we
have a long way to go. But that is no reason why principles cannot be laid down,
and in this respect French policy should set an example to the greatest possible
extent. In our present historical situation, to take such a position would serve
both the interests of justice and our own interests. For, around the world, twenty
nations that have suffered and fought for freedom are waiting for some country
to demonstrate at last in word and deed that it intends truly to consecrate freedom’s triumph.
In return, we could ask that, in the absence of any kind of international society, which the democratic nations seem incapable of creating, France be granted
rights not incompatible with the states of the Middle East.
It’s probably already too late, however. In Syria rebellion is already under way,

Damascus has been shelled, and hostilities have begun. The hope of a just and
peaceful settlement has vanished. Whatever comes of these operations, which
will cost still more French lives, they signify a bitter failure.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

223

June 1, 1945°°”

Mr. Churchill’s ultimatum—for it is an ultimatum—and President Truman’s
statement have placed France in a very grave situation, which is quite likely to
evolve to its detriment.” Yesterday we said what we thought about the SyroLebanese affair. Our views have not changed. But today the conflict has moved
beyond the states of the Levant: it has brought the American and British governments into conflict with the French government. General de Gaulle’s entire
foreign policy is under attack.
We have never been tender with that policy. We have steadfastly pointed out
its dangers. Even today, it strikes us as odd to propose a policy based on strength
and power when the means for such a policy are lacking. This choice makes us
vulnerable to being called to order twice in the same day, reminded first in the
House of Common that we are acting as though we'd won the war, when we were
beaten, and then in Washington that if we have an army at all, it’s thanks to
equipment and arms from other countries. The facts puncture inflated notions
of our power: they confirm our criticisms, and such confirmation is a bitter pill
to swallow.
Since the conflict now is among allies, however, it is essential to add that our

policy was not alone in being faulty. Everybody knows that international diplomacy is hardly as disinterested and generous as official communiqués might suggest. Clearly the conflicts in the Middle East would not have turned this bitter if
not for the presence of rich oil fields. Although it is legitimate for an impoverished
France to defend its economic interests, this is not the ground that France has
chosen. Indeed, it has been weakened by its errors in other areas, errors that are
made worse by its unwillingness to acknowledge them. The unkept promise of
independence to Beirut and Damascus is today the best weapon in the hands of
those who would like to see France disappear from the Levant.
To be sure, from the reoccupation of the Rhineland by German troops right
on to the Liberation, we have known governments that always gave in to force,
not always without bluster but always without firing a shot. That is the extreme
opposite of the policy of Charles de Gaulle, but only in the sense that extremes
meet, as they say: the results are identical.

We briefly hoped that France would draw strength from its weakness by
adopting a new tone in its dealings with the world, the tone of truth and, up to
a point, of impartiality. We did not think that it would take upon itself the injus-

tices and errors of its past policies on the vain pretext of preserving the nation in
all its power. What has been defeated can’t be preserved.
539 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, like the previous one, which it follows up directly.
540 On May 31, Churchill sent de Gaulle a message announcing that he had ordered the commander in
chief of British forces in the Middle East to take action, adding: “With a view to avoiding a clash between
British and French forces, we call upon you immediately to issue to French troops an order to cease fire
and withdraw to their barracks. Once fire has ended and order has been restored, we shall be ready to
begin tripartite discussions in London.” Washington approved of London's action.

224

CHAPTER

2

We are forced to repudiate forever methods and individuals condemned by
events. We are obliged to take risks and to innovate if we want France to survive
with some dignity. We cannot walk in Foch’s boots,™! nor in M. Lebrun’s shoes.”
That is why we should not allow ourselves to be blinded by this crisis, which
in other times would have brought down the government—and which may still
be exploited, particularly abroad, to that end. As deep as our disagreement with
General de Gaulle is on these issues, he must remain in office if France is to
establish the Fourth Republic, whose first elected officials should, we now know,
take office before the end of the year.
And then—if we may use a rather shopworn word—France will either be revolutionary or it will cease to be.

June 5, 1945
Henri Frenay is one of our comrades-in-arms.* To say that he was the man who
created the underground “Combat” movement in 1940 is enough to give you
some idea of the moral weight he carries among us. Because of that camaraderie,
we have always shied away from praising him and even hesitated to defend him
in a few cases when we should have. For the same reason he has always shied
away from calling upon us for support. All this goes without saying, and we're
not about to change our basic attitude in this regard.
Nevertheless, carrying scruples too far would risk putting us in a false position,
compromising both friendship and truth. Today we find ourselves in that situation. Still, we are not going to say that the work of the minister for prisoners has
been a model of its kind, nor are we going to adduce commonsense arguments
that would cut the ground out from under various demagogic attacks. Instead, we

want to make a different point: that there is a principle that must be respected if
political and social life are to be possible, namely, the principle of liberty.
Suppose, then, that all the criticisms of the minister for prisoners were accurate. Suppose that it was right to convene a group of prisoners just barely returned
home and invite them to voice their legitimate demands. Suppose, finally, that the
meeting at La Mutualité this past Saturday had been organized by people who had
only the public interest in mind.’ Having come under attack, the minister for
prisoners asks to be heard. He asks his accusers to hear him out.
*41 Marshal Foch (1851-1929), supreme commander ofAllied troops in the final months of World War I,

signed the armistice of 1918.
542 Albert Lebrun (1871-1950) served as president of the Republic from 1932 to 1940. He resigned when

the armistice was concluded in June 1940.

543 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus.
°44 Commissioner for Prisoners of the C.RN.L. in Algiers in 1943, Henri Frenay became minister for prisoners and deportees at the Liberation.
*4 On June 2, a meeting called by the Association of Prisoners of War of the Seine drew 25,000 repatriated prisoners, who protested the insufficiency of government assistance and called for the resignation of
Henri Frenay. In December 1945, when Frenay was attacked by L’Humanité, he sued for libel, but the case

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

225

However one views the substance of the case, it is worth noting that our past
and present ministers have not accustomed us to quite so much independence or
to the kind of courage that it takes to leave the sanctuary of one’s office behind
and face a resolutely hostile crowd. This willing acceptance of responsibility and
sense of obligation are nevertheless what we would like to see in our government
officials.
And they refused to listen to Frenay. Newspapers of a certain ilk shout every
day in unison that the minister is wrong about everything and invite an embittered and disappointed mob to shout along with them. The minister had said he
was going to prove that he’s right about certain issues. Undoubtedly that’s precisely what the organizers were afraid of, since they refused to hear him out.
What new moral code holds sway that allows the simplest request for fairness to
be dismissed without a second thought? And what do the repatriated prisoners
(a million strong) think about a France that has regained its freedom only to wit-

ness the birth of new forms of servitude?
The prisoners’ cause is a great cause. The very idea of using them for
partisan ends should turn the stomach of anyone with a shred of decency. But it
is up to the prisoners themselves to defend their cause and make sure that it is
not tainted by acts of injustice, like the anti-Semitic demonstrations of the other
day, or by blind partisan passions. Frenay may be wrong, and we have reported
on the prisoners’ disappointments when we thought it necessary to do so.”
But the basic right of every man to be heard when he is accused cannot be
denied, even to a minister. This principle needs to be stated and defended. These
methods are intolerable, not only because they are the methods we fought
against for four years but also because they harm interests that should be sacred
to us all.

June 15, 1945°"”
After being briefly traumatized, the French public is turning its attention away
from Algeria. As attention fades, various papers have taken advantage of the situation to publish articles that attempt to show that it wasn’t as bad as it seemed,
that the political crisis in the country was of limited scope, and that it could all

was dismissed. Combat published a note in support of his case: “L’Humanité has in particular accused
M. Frenay of having deliberately slowed the repatriation of prisoners and deportees, of having barred a
thousand foreign children interned at Buchenwald from entering France, of having sought to imprison
Spanish resisters upon their return from Germany, etc. Argument in court proved that those assertions
were false, but Judge Albert, who issued the writ, held that they were not defamatory, thereby demonstrating, perhaps, to anyone who might still have been unaware of it, that the way in which certain magistrates define honor explains why they still sit on the bench despite having sworn an oath to Pétain when
times were different.”
546 See the editorials of May 17 and 19, pp. 205 and 210.
547 Editorial. Text reprinted in Actwelles III in conclusion to the series on the “Crisis in Algeria.”

226

CHAPTER

2

be blamed on a few professional agitators.” To be sure, these articles are not dis-

tinguished for their documentation or objectivity. One characterizes the recently
arrested president of “Friends of the Manifesto” as the father of the Algerian Popular Party, whose leader has long been Messali Hadj, now also under arrest. The
other refers to the Ulemmas as a nationalist political organization when it is actually a reformist religious confraternity, which in any case supported the assimilation policy until 1938.
No one has anything to gain from these hasty, ill-informed surveys, nor for that
matter from the inspired studies that have appeared in Le Monde and L’Aube. It
is true that the presence of professional agitators is an essential element for understanding the Algerian massacre, but it is also true that those agitators wouldn't have
been able to accomplish much had they not been able to take advantage of the
political crisis, to which it would be pointless and dangerous to close one’s eyes.
That political crisis, which had been going on for many years, has not miraculously disappeared. On the contrary, it has deepened, and all the news from
Algeria suggests that it has now gathered around itself an atmosphere of hatred
and suspicion that can hardly improve matters. The atrocious massacres of
Guelma and Sétif have provoked deep resentment and outrage among the
French in Algeria. The subsequent repression has made the Arab masses fearful
and hostile. In this climate, political action that is both resolute and democratic
seems unlikely to succeed.
That is no reason to give up hope, however. The minister of national economy
has laid out plans for a resupply effort that, if maintained, should suffice to alleviate the disastrous economic situation. But the government needs to extend the
ordinance of March 7, 1944, in order to prove to the Arab masses that no
amount of bad feeling will ever interfere with its desire to export the democratic
regime that the French enjoy to Algeria. What needs to be exported, though, is

not fine speeches but concrete actions. If we want to save North Africa, we need
*48 On May 15, Le Figaro published a communiqué from the ministry of the interior together with the
comment that “although the situation is not extremely grave, it nevertheless remains serious.” On May
17, LAube commented that “order has not been restored in Algeria.” L’Humanité did not deny the gravity of the events but explained them as the result of plots by prominent colonists, Vichyite officials, and
a fifth column that contrived the famine in order to provoke riots.
549 In Le Monde of May 18 and 24, Jacques Driand published two articled in a series entitled “The North
African Crisis.” The first, entitled “The French Malaise,” saw France’s weakened condition, the rise of
Algerian nationalism, and the economic crisis as reasons for the riots, pointed out that North Africans

were excluded from politics but not from war, and concluded that “the situation is not tragic” but could
become so if the French administrative structure were abandoned or discredited. The second, entitled
“Europeans and Native,” asked that repressive measures be kept to “the just and reasonable.”
In LAube for June 1 and 2, two article appeared by Paul-Emile Viard, dean of
the law faculty in Algiers,
under the title “Where Is Algeria Headed?” Paternalistic in tone, these articles stood out for clearly posing the political problem of providing representation for Algerians and calling for enforcement ofthe ordinance of March 7, 1944. Viard, no doubt responding to Camus’ article of May 20-21, which pointed out
that Ferhat Abbas had quoted Pascal in the epigraph of his first book, wrote that “you can’t turn a person
into a French citizen simply by attaching the label ‘citizen’ to him, even if he uses a sentence from
Pascal as the epigraph to his book.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

227.

to tell the world of our determination that France be represented there by its
noblest laws and by the most just of its people. We must remember this determination, and no matter what the circumstances or how heated the attacks in
the press, we must stick to it. Let us be clear that we will save nothing of what is
French in Algeria or anywhere else if we do not save justice.
As we have seen, talking this way won't please everyone. It isn’t that easy to overcome prejudice and blindness. But we still think that our position is reasonable and
moderate. The world today is seething with hatred. Everywhere, violence and
force, massacres and riots fill the air from which we thought the worst poisons had
been drained. Whatever we can do for truth—French truth and human truth—we
must also do to oppose hatred. Whatever it takes must be done to bring peace to
people lacerated and tormented by suffering that has gone on too long. For our
part, at any rate, let us try not to add anything to Algerian bitterness. Only the
infinite power of justice can help us reconquer Algeria and its people.”””

June 27, 1945°°!

M. Herriot has just made an unfortunate statement.” An unfortunate statement is one that comes at an inopportune moment. M. Herriot has spoken at a
moment that is no longer his and about a subject that may be deemed untimely.
550 In connection with the articles on Algeria, it may be of some interest to mention a communiqué that

Combat published on August 8, 1945, entitled “North African Intellectual Sentenced to Twenty Years at
Hard Labor.” The case in point was the trial in Algiers before a military court of several men accused of
crimes dating back to October 1944. Among the accused was Ben Ali Bouckort, who, “after being convicted

of reconstituting the Algerian Popular Party and accused of inciting his countrymen to riot against French
sovereignty, was sentenced to twenty years at hard labor, loss of civic rights, and confiscation of all his property.” A note from the editors added: “As the press agencies were publishing the bulletin you have just read,
a friend of Ben Ali Bouckort’s passed on to us a letter from him dated May 28: ‘I have been in prison since
October 1944. I was arrested following a search in which the manuscript of a book I had written was found.
It was a 340-page monograph about Algerian problems inspired by the doctrine of February 10, 1943.”
The editors’ note continued: “We are entitled to ask whether the memory of the riots in Constantine
led the military judges to impose a penalty whose severity looks a great deal like injustice. Clearly, Bouckort,
who has been in prison since October 1944, cannot have had anything to do with the bloody events of
the following spring. And we are entitled to ask whether sending intellectuals to jail is the best way to succeed with a policy of assimilation.”

It is plausible to think that Bouckort’s friend was none other than Albert Camus and that the comments
on the communiqué were written by him. In July 1936, Bouckort was, along with Omar Ouzegane, sec-

retary general of the Algerian Communist Party, the erstwhile local section of the French Communist
Party, which later became a regional section. Camus was at that time a member of the party (see introduction, pp. xxxi—xxxii). Furthermore, Ouzegane, with whom Camus had ties, and Bouckort both wrote
for Alger-Républicain. It is more than likely that he remained in contact with them, even though they
followed very different political trajectories.
551 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
552 Camus had been quite critical of the Radical Party, and of Herriot in particular, since 1937. On Herriot,
see the editorial of May 12, 1945, n. 476, p. 197. In a speech delivered to the Radical Federation of the
Rhéne, Herriot said: “I wonder if the present generation is fully qualified to give previous generations
lessons in morality.”

228

CHAPTER

2

Even if he were right, he is not the ideal person to charge the nation with
immorality or state that the present generation was in no position to give lessons
to the prewar generation.
This judgment is unfair in the first place because it is too general. It is true
that the French have a penchant for betting against themselves. Although this
fault is forgivable in people who have fought hard and suffered long for their
country, it is difficult to be equally indulgent toward a man whose political experience should have warned him and whose past positions should have made him
more modest.
Nothing should ever be condemned in general, and a nation less than anything else. M. Herriot should know that this generation does not claim to give
lessons in morality to the preceding one. But it has the right, won in a time of
terrible calamity, to dismiss out of hand the morality that led to that catastrophe.
To be sure, it wasn't the political views of M. Herriot and his Radical colleagues that doomed us. But their morality—a morality without obligations or
sanctions, in a France tailor-made for shopkeepers, tobacconists, and legislative
banqueters—did more to sap the soul and drain the energy of the French than
more glaring perversions would have done. In any case, it is not M. Herriot’s
morality that gives him the right to condemn the French of 1945.
This nation is searching for a new moral code: that much is true. Things are
still in a state of flux. But it has given enough proof of its honor and spirit of sacrifice to insist that the politicians who represented it in the past not offer scornful comments in rebuke. We understand quite well why M. Herriot might feel
vexed at seeing a certain prewar political morality rejected. The French are tired
of middle-of-the-road virtues; they now know what a moral conflict extended to
an entire nation can cost in the way of dislocation and pain. Hence it is not surprising that they are turning away from false elites, elites that were from the
beginning elites of mediocrity.
Whatever wisdom and experience M. Herriot may possess, many of us believe
that he no longer has anything to teach us. He may still be of use, however, since
by contemplating what he and his party once represented and weighing that
against the prodigious effort that France still must make if it is to be reborn, we
come to see that no comparison is possible and that the reconstruction of France
calls for other men, less faint of heart.
It may be that in M. Herriot’s entourage, two hours on the black market is
preferable to a week of work. We can assure him, however, that there are millions
of French people who are working and keeping their mouths shut. They are the
people by whom the nation should be judged. That is why we believe that it is
as foolish to say that France needs moral reform more than it needs political
reform as it would be to say the reverse. It needs both, precisely so that the entire
nation isn’t judged by the scandalous profits being reaped by a few wretched individuals. We here have always emphasized the requirements of morality, but it
would be foolish to allow sermons on morality to hide the need for political and
institutional reform. We need to pass good laws if we want to have good citizens.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

229

Our only hope is that, for a decent interval at least, those good laws will keep the
professors of virtue from returning to power, the professors of virtue responsible
for making the words “deputy” and “government” symbols of derision in France
for many long years.

Combat Magazine, June 30-July 1, 1945°”
Images of Occupied Germany

For a man who has lived under Hitlerian occupation, even one who knew Germany before the war, this country retains unexpected signs of bloodshed that are
hard to forget. Imagining it from afar, blanketed by foreign armies, squeezed
between now hostile borders, its cities transformed into shapeless rubble and its
people bent beneath the weight of the most awful hatred, one conjures up an
apocalyptic image appropriate to its violent past and trying present.
That, at any rate, was my vague sense of things, and en route to the German
border, bouncing over roads torn up by the war, what I saw reinforced my
premonition. Nothing that one encounters in eastern France is likely to gladden
the heart. In peacetime I would already have felt uncomfortable here, given my
preference for sun-drenched lands. In a word, I would have found it hard to
breathe. But amid the rubble and the barren fields ravaged by war and dotted
with military cemeteries overshadowed by ungenerous skies, a powerful sense of
dismay comes over the traveler as well. This is indeed the land of the dead.
And how many there are! Three times in a century millions of men have fertilized this arid land with their mutilated bodies. All died in this small space, and
for conquests so fragile that they cannot bear comparison with the numbers of
the dead.
Everything here speaks of human suffering. True, being here makes it easier to
understand Barrés.°** What a pity it is, though, that one can no longer share his
hope. We now know what our prospects are, and for a long time to come. His
was a confidence that can no longer be ours. Is it any wonder, then, that one
approaches Germany with a heart wrung by bitterness? Can we imagine that
country without thinking of it as bearing some resemblance to what was, in part,

553 Article published in Combat Magazine. Combat more than once attempted to launch a magazine that
came out on Saturdays. This never became a regular publication, in part because of difficulties connected
with the shortage of paper (leading at times to government bans on the publication of such supplements)
and in part because of the financial problems that plagued the paper in general. On August 18, Combat
published a noteworthy communiqué: “The difficulties that the Parisian press is facing in regard to the
supply of paper have forced us to suspend publication of our Saturday supplement, Combat Magazine. We
will resume publication as soon as a more intelligent paper policy is instituted by the competent authorities. In the meantime, we beg our readers’ indulgence.”
554 Maurice Barrés (1862-1923), a novelist and political essayist who was born in the Vosges and became
a spokesman for French nationalism.

230

CHAPTER

2

its own handiwork? How can we expect it not to greet us with the hideous,
drooling snout of war?

Idyllic Germany

So let me say at once that this expectation was quickly disappointed. On the contrary, what strikes you immediately upon entering French-occupied Germany is
the surprising air of happiness and tranquillity that you find everywhere, except
for the few cities that were destroyed. I hasten to say that I am speaking of the
Rhineland, of the duchy of Baden-Wiirttemberg, that is, of rural and Catholic
Germany, which suffered less from the war than the rest of the country.
Still, the contrast is surprising. For upon leaving a part of France that lies in
ruins and is inhabited by suffering humanity, you enter a fertile and prosperous
region filled with splendid children and robust, smiling maidens. There is dancing in the meadows. Variegated bouquets are everywhere, and small children
dangle cherries from their ears. To be sure, there are no men. Yet peaceful old
couples take evening strolls, women in light dresses gather in the hay, and villages resembling children’s toys look elegant and clean—all signs of a happy and
comfortable life. In sum, the traveler finds himself in an idyllic Germany and
thinks at times that he must be dreaming.
The beauty of the children, in particular, is striking. On the eve of my departure, | happened to find myself in old Montmartre and studied the children in
our streets, with their prematurely old faces, their knees bigger than their calves,
and their concave stomachs. Here, by contrast, one sees small bodies almost
naked, tanned and firm and well-nourished, their heads held high and their
laughter bright. In this respect, one quickly becomes convinced of the truth of
an American report according to which the only country in Europe to win the
war biologically was Germany. In any case, that was my first impression, and I
did not stay in Germany long enough to be obliged to change it. I offer my
impression for what it’s worth, leaving the reader free to draw whatever conclusions he might wish.

Vacation Impressions

Still, this land is occupied, and occupied by the French army. The word “occupation” has a special meaning for us, and I was curious about German reactions
now that the wheel has turned.
The French occupation is no doubt harsh. Nevertheless, it has remained

within the limits set by the justice a victor is entitled to impose, or so it seemed
to me. At first there were excesses, but since then, I learned, looting and rape
have been harshly and at times mercilessly punished. On the other hand, violations of the law of occupation are met with sanctions without a moment’ hesi-

tation, and the military government

in Germany has maintained an iron

discipline. For instance, all men are required to salute French officers, manufactured

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

231

goods have been systematically reappropriated, and space has been requisitioned
as needed. Add to that the uncertainty that Germany must endure as to its future
(whereas we were never without hope under Nazi occupation), and you might

expect the reaction to be one of despair or at any rate dejection.
In fact—and I hasten to add once again that this is only a first impression—
the most noticeable thing about the Germans under occupation is how natural
they seem. After five years in which many things happened that were anything
but natural, there is something surprising about this.
The South Germans are living among French soldiers as if they had always
lived that way. Not wearing a uniform, I found lodging with one of the locals. I
was welcomed cordially; my host came to bid me good night; and I was told that
the war was not a good thing and that peace was better, especially eternal peace.
Not one of our young soldiers is without a female companion. That only adds
to the startling impression one has on the shores of Lake Constance of watching
people on vacation, as an army of tanned and healthy young men, having made
their way from North Africa via Tunisia, Italy, and Alsace, swim, canoe, and banter with one another in spacious dormitories decorated with flowers, while oth-

ers paddle their conquests around the calm waters of the lake, with the Alps
looming in the background.
These are the first images to come to my eyes, and I offer them for what they
are worth. I doubt that I will surprise anyone, though, if I say that they made a
deep impression on me, in the first place because they were unexpected and then,
too, because I came from a country that reacted and suffered rather differently.
There is no doubt a lot to say on this topic, and someday, perhaps, I must try
to say it. All I can do here is record the state of uncertainty in which I found
myself throughout my travels in Germany, incapable as I was of reconciling what
I knew with what I saw. To give a proper idea of my confusion, I must mention
a distracting thought that came to me as I listened to my host, a man who resembled the kindly grandfather you find in some fairy tales. He was speaking to me
quite sensibly about the eternal peace that Christ brings to each individual, and

I was thinking of a woman I know who was deported to Germany and used as a
prostitute by the S.S., who tattooed the following inscription on her stomach:
“Served for two years in the S.S. camp at
x
I could not connect these two worlds, which are the very image of our
unhappy, war-torn Europe, divided between victims and executioners’ and

seeking a justice that can never be reconciled with its pain. For me, at least, that
is the meaning of the few images of Germany that I sketched above. The reader
will understand, I trust, if I leave it at that, without attempting to draw any further conclusions.
ALBERT CaMUS

555 The pairing of these two terms is striking. It recurs in the series of articles that Camus wrote in
1946. In this feature piece, quite different in tone from his editorials, Camus was aiming not for pictur-

esque description but for the moral symbolism of what he saw during his brief visit to the German
Rhineland.

232

CHAPTER

2

August 2, 1945°”°
Since the Court of Justice has acknowledged that it has been wasting its time up
to now, and since the Pétain trial is promising to take a new turn,” let us try to
speak without excessive passion about a case that has stirred up so much bitterness and distressed so many people in France.
Thus far the trial has been notable chiefly for its humor. When we say humor,
everyone should understand that we mean black humor. There is savage irony in
the fact that in a trial on which the honor and to some extent the future of
France depend, witnesses have been called for the prosecution who in fact have
no right to make accusations. We understand full well why M. Daladier has said
nothing about his trip to Munich, while M. Reynaud can’t stop explaining why
he made the peculiar choice of Pétain as his collaborator. After much effort, we
can even understand M. Mornet when he tries to explain why he agreed to
appear before the Court of Riom.’”® Yet M. Daladier did in fact go to Munich,
M. Reynaud really did bring Pétain into the government, and M. Mornet definitely did go to Riom. All this prevents them from making a proper judgment
of the armistice and even from judging it at all. The first two bear a part of the
responsibility that the trial has brought to light, and as for the third, it would be
astonishing to see him in his present position if we didn’t already know that men
like him come out on top in every regime.
Nevertheless, this irony is unbearable, as is this case, which consists in look-

ing for plots that cannot be proven and in diverting what should be a trial for
treason into a consideration of the armistice, which can be called an error but
cannot be proven to be a crime. The point is not to prove that Pétain was wrong
to believe in the armistice. That has already been proven by another man, whose
stature looms larger than ever in comparison with these wretched disputes in
which each witness pleads his own case from beginning to end. Only one witness had the right to speak, and it is a great misfortune for the country that
decency compels him to remain silent.
The whole truth remains to be established, however. It is the truth that the
trial ought to serve and not the passions of the parties or the compromised reputations of a few political men. We need to establish whether or not Pétain
served Germany, whether or not his policy made a Hitlerian victory more likely,
whether or not he is responsible for the deportations, tortures, and executions
°°6 Editorial. Text probably by Camus. The criticism of Daladier and Reynaud, the rejection of the death
penalty, the irony, and certain images may reasonably be attributed to Camus.
%°7 The Pétain trial began on July 23. It would end on August 15 with a death sentence, which was commuted two days later by General de Gaulle to life imprisonment, in accordance with the express wishes

of the court. All the papers followed the trial. Combat’ correspondent was Georges Altschuler, who submitted daily reports, but a widely reproduced photograph shows that Camus also attended the trial.
*°8 The Court of Riom was the tribunal instituted by Vichy to try those responsible for the defeat, including Blum and Daladier. The trials went badly for Vichy, but the accused remained in detention, and most
were deported to Germany. Mornet, the prosecutor in the Pétain trial, had sworn an oath to Pétain, like
virtually all other magistrates,

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

233

that have been visited upon us, and, finally, whether or not he was, willingly or
unwillingly, the servant of the enemy and the agent of his infamies. Once these
questions have been answered, a judgment must be rendered. We count ourselves
among those who await that judgment with anguish, for it will decide whether
we were right or wrong in everything that we, along with the majority of the
French who kept faith with hope, believed. But if such an expectation is to be
realized, we need judges and witnesses capable of transcending themselves and
rising above their futile passions.
To us, setting all bitterness aside, Pétain’s responsibility still seems immense.
We hope, however, that this trial will be conducted in such a way that, if that
responsibility exists, it will become clear to the entire world. We will not allow
ourselves to be carried away by the clamor of hatred. For instance, we do not
believe that the death penalty is desirable in this case. First, because we must resolutely tell the truth, namely, that every death sentence is an affront to morality,
and second, because in this particular case the death penalty would make a martyr of this vain old man and thereby enhance his image even in the minds of his
enemies. Nevertheless, we are waiting for an explicit judgment based on grounds
that everyone can understand.
These years of filth, this night of shame, cry out to be illuminated by the light
of justice. We do not appear to be headed toward that light. It may not be too
late, however, to call upon the Court of Justice to recognize that it, too, bears a

terrible responsibility, that it is charged with seeing to it that the appalling sacrifices of our elites are given their meaning or deprived of it. And it is also charged
with proving to those who followed General de Gaulle either that they were
dupes or that they fought for the truth.

August 4, 1945°”

Many things have a claim on the attention of the people of metropolitan France
these days: the Palais de Justice,” Potsdam,” and the supply problem. Still, we
must not avert our eyes from Algeria, on which the future of the nation in part
depends. Municipal elections have just been held there. They are the first indication we have of the current political temperature in North Africa.
These elections came only after a long delay, and it is a good thing that that
political error has now been repaired. But a similar consultation with the voters,

559 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, following directly on the “Crisis in Algeria” articles and the editorial of June 15.

560 Where Pétain’s trial was being held.
561 From July 17 to August 2, a conference in Potsdam brought together Stalin, Truman, and Churchill

(who was replaced on July 28 by Clement Attlee after Churchill suffered a defeat at the polls). In this

follow-up to the Yalta Conference, the three leaders set the conditions for the occupation of Germany,
instituted a policy of population transfers to replace the policy of protection for minorities, approved the
new Polish border, and issued an ultimatum to Japan.

234

CHAPTER

2

which followed the grave disturbances of recent memory, left room for a good
deal of anxiety. There was reason to fear, first of all, that the French of Algeria

would show their hostility to the Arab people by rejecting the policy of assimilation in any form, and, furthermore, that the Arabs would refuse en masse to
vote in order to demonstrate the bitterness that remained in the wake of indiscriminate repression.
Though we do not necessarily share the optimism of the unofficial communiqués, we can say that the situation, as reflected in the vote, is not as desperate
as it may have seemed. The French of Algeria have demonstrated great wisdom
by voting en masse for the lists of fighting France, whose candidates defended,
in particular, the assimilation policy and the ordinance of March 7, 1944.°* In
doing so, they showed that they did not hold the Muslim masses responsible for
the senseless acts of a few criminals. It is reasonable to think that this should help
to restore a climate of confidence in Algeria.
The dramatic change in the situation can be measured by the fact that cities
such as Sidi Bel Abbes, which have always been bastions of reaction and even fascism and on whose walls it was possible to read “Vive Hitler!” and “Vive Franco!”
signs in letters the height of a grown man, have voted to install socialistcommunist city governments.”
As for the Arab voters, the unofficial communiqué is right to say that more
Arabs voted than were expected to vote. But some 40 percent withheld their
votes, and that is a sign that should not be underestimated. Furthermore, last
Sunday’s vote has to be interpreted with caution, since according to the ordinance of March 7, a maximum of 80,000 Arabs had the possibility of expressing
themselves through the ballot box. For a nation of 8 million people, that is a
small number, too small to draw any general conclusions. One can say, however,
that a certain number of Arabs did go to the polls, and therefore the damage is
not yet irreparable.

These very modest successes may serve as encouragement to the government.
But they should be taken as encouragement to move ahead, not to sink back into
slumber. The Algerian crisis is a very long way from being resolved. The elections
show only that the policy of assimilation is not necessarily defunct and that a
small chance remains that it can be made to bear fruit. But if this is to happen,

we must show we really want it and want nothing else. As a first gesture, to be
made as soon as possible, we should extend the benefit of the ordinance of March
7 to everyone with a school-leaving certificate and to all Arabs who fought for us
in the war. This would be nothing more than justice, and that should be enough
to get it passed, since it is only natural that those who agreed to shed their blood
for us should be allowed to express themselves. What is more, such a step would
give proof of our good faith and regain some of the hearts and minds of loyal
friends whose trust we have lost as a result of long years of dilatory and unjust
policy.
°62 On this important ordinance, see “Crisis in Algeria.”
°63 The municipal elections gave the left a clear victory.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

235

August 7, 1945°

General Franco has officially announced that Spain will not ask to be seated at
the upcoming international conferences. True, the Potsdam communiqué had

already made it clear that Spain would not be invited. The general’s fine independence of spirit loses some of its luster as a result.
To be completely fair, we hasten to point out that General Franco is not
alone in contradicting himself. For even as the discussions were taking place in
Potsdam,” Sir Victor Mallet, the new British ambassador, was presenting his

credentials to the Spanish dictator. And we have it on good authority that the
Americans are continuing to invest capital in the peninsula. The U.S.S.R. has at
least been consistent. It has just broadcast an appeal calling upon the Spanish
people to disown their government.
In any case, affairs in Spain are coming to a head. Franco appears to be in
quite a difficult position. He would be in an even more difficult position if he
werent being propped up with one hand while being pushed off his perch with
the other. It is nevertheless hard to see how this support can continue without
shocking the moral sensibility of the world, although it is true that it wouldn’t

be the first time. That is why Franco’s Spain is seeking compromise. There is talk
of Don Juan,*® but that surely comes of a penchant for legends. News reports
speak of installing a military government to lay the groundwork for free elections, while in the meantime Spanish republicans are being sentenced to death.
All that is well and good, but it is time to get back to the logic of the situation and the constitutional aspect of the issue. The legitimate government of
Spain, elected by the people, is the one that was overthrown by General Franco’s
coup. It is now being reconstituted in Mexico. Its legitimacy comes from the
Cortes, which represents the popular will. The meeting of the Cortes, which
would put an end to divisions in the republican camp, would result in a new government, in which Mr. Negrin might be the prime minister.” This government

is the only one that a democracy may recognize, for it is the only one that can
proceed to a fair popular vote. If that vote indicates that the Spanish want a
monarchy, then and only then might the monarchy be accepted. Such an outcome is highly doubtful, moreover. But as a first step the democracies should recognize the constitutional government, honor the principle of legitimacy that it
embodies, and give it a mandate in order to return freedom of expression at long
last to the unhappy people of Spain.
When that has been done, it should be borne in mind that it is Franco who
has been banned from the international conferences, not Spain. Having long

564 Editorial. Text probably by Camus, continuing the themes of previous editorials on Spain, in particular those of November 21 and December 10, 1944, pp. 116 and 137.

565 See the previous editorial.
566 Don Juan, count of Barcelona, was the son of Alphonse XIII, who was exiled from Spain when the
Republic was established in 1931 and abdicated in its favor.
567 On these points, see the editorial of November 21, 1944, p. 116.

236

CHAPTER

2

fought for the common cause, suffered in silence, and set an example of pride,
the people of that poor but great country have won a place among the world’s
democracies. They would bring to the conferences the voice of honor and of the
justice for which they shed so much blood. It is a voice that the French will
understand better than others, since they can share with Spain memories of misfortune and the anguish of lost liberty.

August 8, 1945°°°
The world is what it is, which isn’t much. This is what everyone has known since
yesterday, thanks to the formidable concert that the radio, newspapers, and news
agencies have unleashed on the subject of the atomic bomb. Along with much
other enthusiastic commentary, we have been given to understand that any
average-sized city can be totally leveled by a bomb the size of a soccer ball.
American, British, and French newspapers have poured forth a steady stream of
elegant dissertations concerning the future, the past, the inventors, the cost, the
peaceful uses and military implications, the political consequences, and even the
independent character of the atomic bomb.”” We can sum it all up in a sentence:
the civilization of the machine has just achieved its ultimate degree of savagery.”
A choice is going to have to be made in the fairly near future between collective
suicide and the intelligent utilization of scientific discoveries.
In the meantime, one has the right to think that there is something indecent
about celebrating in this way a discovery that has been put to its first use by the
most formidable destructive rage that man has exhibited for centuries. In a world
that has torn itself apart with every conceivable instrument of violence and
shown itself incapable of exerting any control while remaining indifferent to justice or even mere human happiness, the fact that science has dedicated itself to
organized murder will surprise no one, except perhaps an unrepentant idealist.
These discoveries must be reported and commented on for what they are and
announced to the world so that man has a proper idea of his destiny. It is intolerable for these terrible revelations to be wrapped in picturesque or humorous

essays.
Even before now it was not easy to breathe in this tormented world. Now we
find ourselves confronted with a new source of anguish, which has every likelihood of proving fatal. Mankind has probably been given its last chance, and the
papers have seized on this as a pretext for a special edition: “Extra! Extra! Read
°68 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
569 Study of the newspaper accounts is indeed edifying: they consist essentially of scientific articles about
the making of the bomb and about the atom.
°70 This unequivocal judgment stands virtually alone among press commentaries on the use of the atomic
bomb. In Le Figaro of August 10, under the title “The Bomb,” Frangois Mauriac did speak of “universal
anguish,” “destructive genius,” and “love of death pushed to a climax.” But his article, which included references to Renan, Anatole France, Edmond Rostand, and Francis Jammes, has none of the vigor of
Camus’.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

237

all about it!” But surely the subject deserves a moment's reflection and far more
than a moment’ silence.
There are also other reasons for withholding our applause for the futuristic
romance that the newspapers have been laying before us. When we see Reuters’
diplomatic editor proclaiming that this new invention nullifies or renders obsolete the decisions made at Potsdam’”’ and makes it pointless to worry about
whether the Russians are in Kénigsberg or in Turkey at the Dardanelles, we cannot avoid drawing the conclusion that in this fine chorus there lurk certain
intentions having nothing to do with the objectivity of pure science.
Let there be no mistake about our meaning. If the Japanese surrender now

that Hiroshima has been destroyed and they face the intimidation of the atomic
bomb, we will rejoice.*”” Nevertheless, we shrink from using news as grave as this
as a basis for any decision other than to argue still more energetically in favor of
a genuine international organization in which the rights of the great powers will
not outweigh the rights of small and medium-sized nations, and in which war, a
scourge now made definitive by the fruits of the human mind alone, will no
longer be decided by the appetites or doctrines of any one state.
Given the terrifying prospects that mankind now faces, we see even more
clearly than before that the battle for peace is the only battle worth fighting. This
is no longer a prayer but an order that must make its way up from peoples to their
governments: it is the order to choose once and for all between hell and reason.

August 14, 1945°”°
We previously indicated our slight anxiety on the subject of the strategic bases
that President Truman has asked for.°”* This was more in the nature of a question than a protest, for which, given the current state of our information, we

have no basis. President Truman announced that the United States would seek
to negotiate treaties granting it the military bases it needs around the world.
Since it is likely that some of those bases will be on French territory, we feel that
the issue at least deserves our attention and that in any case it cannot be resolved
unilaterally, as Mr. Truman thinks. As is often the case these days, the interests

of France and those of international democracy converge on this point, or so it
seems to us.
571 On the Potsdam conference, see the editorial of August 4, n. 561, p. 233.

572 Hiroshima was bombed on the night of August 6, Nagasaki on August 9. On the same day, the Soviet
Union declared war on Japan, which offered to surrender on August 10. The surrender was accepted by

the Allies on August 11 and went into effect on August 14.
573 Editorial. Text probably by Camus.
574 In the editorial of August 11, devoted to Japan’s surrender offer (and which appears not to have been
written by Camus), we read the following: “This is not the time or place to express the hope that America will not give in to the heady intoxication of this power or to question the wisdom of the strategic bases
that President Truman asked for yesterday. Today's events compel us to set our anxieties and worries aside,
at least for a while.”

238

CHAPTER

2

On this point, M. Emile Buré characterizes us as doctrinaire pacifists in
LOrdre and, even though the minor anxiety we expressed was contained in an
article praising our transatlantic allies, accuses us of denouncing American imperialism.°”> M. Buré does not share our opinion, and he minces no words in saying so. Indeed, he states his position so bluntly that we have to pinch ourselves
to make sure we're not dreaming. Indeed, M. Buré reveals that, while spending

the war in New York, he wrote in a Gaullist newspaper’”® that our country could
offer, in exchange for American aid for our colonies, to grant the Americans

sovereign authority over naval bases in those same colonies. And that is not all:
“An American industrialist of French ancestry objected at the time that I was
making this offer before being asked, and I argued that in this case it was good
to make the offer in order to make sure that what was asked would not be too
great to give.”
After that, however, he continues to cast the editors of Combat in the role of

doctrinaire pacifists and unrepentant internationalists. M. Buré, who is neither
doctrinaire nor pacifist and who has a clear idea of French policy, begins by offering up strategic bases for which no one has asked and which he is unauthorized
to give. We are most definitely living in a strange world, in which the people who
mock pacifists are the same people who gladly give away pieces of their country,
in which Gaullist newspapers publish things that would make General de Gaulle
jump out of his skin, and in which French journalists receive lessons in propriety from American industrialists, who at least have the virtue of remembering
their roots.
Nevertheless, we will not spurn the title “pacifists” that M. Buré so scornfully
ascribes to us. In daily struggle throughout the Occupation, the pacifists at Combat formed an idea of war and peace that is not necessarily one that could have
been formed in New York. It is on the basis of that idea that they feel entitled to
be pacifists. They grew familiar with and accepted the responsibilities and duties
of war. We are naive enough to think that peace will be achieved when democracy is established not only within nations but among them. We are not now
moving toward such an international society, because the era is in fact one of
imperialism. M. Buré notwithstanding, there is an American imperialism, just as
there are Russian and British imperialisms. We are not so naive as to think that
those imperialisms can be ignored or even to deny that they are in some ways
justified. Nevertheless, we hold that we are under no compulsion to choose
among those imperialisms and to hand our bases over to the power of our choice,
°75 In L'Ordre, a political and business daily that resumed publication in February 1945, Emile Buré, the
papers editor, quoted a passage from President Truman's speech on the need for present and future
American bases in his August 12-13 editorial and then added: “Whereupon our doctrinaire pacifists from
Combat began sharpening their knives for an attack on nascent or, rather, growing American imperialism.
We will not follow their lead.” Buré stated that America needed colonial expansion in order to complete
the revolution that went hand in hand with the war now ending and that its request for bases was legitimate. He thought that it would be quite acceptable for France to offer the United States bases in its
colonies in exchange for American aid for the colonies.
*76 Buré pointed out that he edited the paper, which was called France-Amérique.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

239

even if such a choice were to gain us certain economic advantages. The best
course open to us is to plead unremittingly in favor of an international democracy that will harm the interests of no one while fostering solidarity among
nations. That is how we think we can best serve the cause of world peace, the
precariousness of which we sense even more acutely than before, if such a thing
is possible, now that the war is over. The contrast with the example of M. Buré
shows that our way of serving the cause of peace is also the best way of serving
France and preserving her honor.
August 15, 1945°””
Yesterday the Washington Times Herald*’® declared that “the United States did
not defeat Japan in order to return lost European colonies to their former masters.” It was

not the first American

paper to make

such a statement,

nor,

assuredly, will it be the last. The paper made it clear that it was referring to Hong
Kong, the Dutch Indies, and Indochina. Now we know where we stand. We do
not know the British or Dutch views on the matter, but in regard to Indochina
we surely have something to say.
On this subject it is not easy to give shape to the contradictory emotions we
feel. Nevertheless, we have stated our position regarding the rights of colonized
peoples and our duties toward them with sufficient clarity that we can try to
organize our reactions without opening ourselves up to the suspicion that we are
giving in to imperialist prejudice. What is at issue for us in this case is not at all
the right of the peoples of the East to independence. The issue is solely to decide
the degree to which that independence is to become a reality and whether idealism cannot be used here as the businessman’s best ambassador.
In the world we live in, one can lay it down as a principle that a nation without economic potential cannot be a free nation. In the world of San Francisco,”
the European colonies in the East have no choice other than to accept the political stewardship of Europe or the economic stewardship of the United States. It
may be that ill will toward Europe and the grave errors of the European system
of colonization are driving the peoples of the East to prefer the second of these
forms of servitude to the first, at least for the time being. But they will soon come
to see that the one leads to the other. In any case, given the world that has been
577 Editorial. Text probably by Camus.
578 The editorial of August 16 (which cannot be attributed to Camus on the basis of style) gives further

details about the Washington Times Herald. “This paper is the mouthpiece of an isolationist and reactionary newspaper trust, the Mac Cormick Press [sic: The group’s name was actually McCormick Press,
named for its owner, press baron Robert McCormick] . . . which opposed American rearmament before
Pearl Harbor, only reluctantly assented to America’s entry into the present conflict, and launched multiple attacks on all its country’s allies.”
579 The San Francisco Conference, which took place from April 25 to June 26, 1945, drafted the United
Nations Charter in the wake of the Dumbarton Oaks and Yalta Conferences. It thus established a new
world order, which was not the order advocated by Camus and Combat.

240

CHAPTER

2

offered to us, it is impossible to settle for the satisfactions of idealism as our share
while others reserve for themselves the more concrete benefits of realism.
The real solution is one that will serve the cause of the colonized peoples
without redounding to the benefit of any other nation. The goal is not to replace
one system of colonization with another. It is to get to the heart of the problem,
that is, the political and economic conditions that today make any just solution
impossible. In other words, what needs to be reformed is not Hong Kong or
Indochina but the world created by the San Francisco Conference itself.
Whether dealing with Germany or the Far East, one is regularly forced to
the same conclusion. As long as there is no international order based on equality and cooperation among peoples, no order in which economic wealth is

distributed among all nations, the world’s great problems will be susceptible only
of solutions that are imperfect or dangerous when they are not downright
scandalous.

August 17, 1945°°°
Now that the war is over, we have time to think about the peace. This is perhaps
the only thing today for which it is worth mobilizing ourselves once again. To be
sure, there is also the fate of France, but the fate of France is inseparable from the
peace, because it is inseparable from the world, because solitude is a word that
no longer makes sense, and because the world no longer consists of this nation
and that nation but is more like a great suffering body in need of healing.
Neither France nor Europe will survive another war: this is a truth of which
we must persuade ourselves. In the case of a new conflagration, neither will even
have a chance to act. As things currently stand, Europe can no longer be anything but a battlefield. This calls for deep reflection.
Since it proved impossible to establish the basis of a true international democracy in San Francisco,”*' we can say that tomorrow’s conflicts will inevitably be
conflicts of empires. And we can predict that the causes of these imperial conflicts are likely to reside in Europe. Since we are facing struggles for influence, let

us acknowledge that Europe has unfortunately been fertile ground for such
struggles, because of its divisions as well as its riches. Flanked on one side by the
Slavic world and on the other by the Anglo-Saxon world, it is equally tempting
to both empires; it is divided between them; and, with historical inevitability, it
is tempted to model itself after one or the other.
Therein lies the immediate danger. The point is not whether it is desirable for
Europe to be Soviet or American. It is to understand that to the extent it gives
itself over totally to either one of these influences, it will be inviting a counterattack by the other. If the Anglo-Saxon influence obliges Europe to slow the
movement of the deep social reforms its people want and allow reactionary
580 Editorial. Text probably by Camus.
581 On the San Francisco Conference, see the editorial of August 15 and n. 579, p. 239.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

241

cliques to have their way, the Soviet Union will intervene. If the influence of the
Soviet Union compels Europe to transform its reconstruction effort in a way that
crushes all freedom, the United States will intervene. Nothing can change that
situation one iota, and the fate of our continent depends on doing whatever it
takes to achieve a synthesis in which the civilizations of the East and the Atlantic
can find common ground, and which they will respect.

The peace of the world depends in large part on how quickly the European
spirit succeeds in reconciling justice with liberty. As each of us reflects on these
difficult issues, we must be ever mindful of the immense consequences that the
resolution of this problem would entail. We must approach our internal debates
in this deeply tragic perspective. Elections are one thing, and no doubt an important one.” But how ridiculous it is to believe that we would be able to confine
our action to these futile debates, when the fate of the world depends on a formula that has yet to be found. If Europe is to turn its mind to the search for this
formula, France has its place in this quest. We would like that place to be in the
vanguard. And we would like to be able to say of this admirable and disconcerting country that after a long history in which it has seen everything, from victories without posterity to defeat overcome, it has again found the strength to give
the world its final word and win the peace.

August 22, 1945°°°
The first National Assembly of the Press held its opening session in Paris yesterday. The press has a leading role to play in public life, yet problems that go to
the heart of its activities arouse little interest on the part of the general public. It
is a good thing that the assembly immediately turned its attention to the issues
of paper and distribution. Even if the public evinces little interest in these
matters, the investigations undertaken by the assembly will nevertheless teach
the French that what is commonly called freedom of the press depends on many
factors, not all of which are under the control of journalists themselves. In
particular, people may finally learn that the absurd paper policy™ that the ministry of information has had in place for more than a year now has undermined
the theoretical freedom that journalists acquired during the insurrection.
We will not comment further on this aspect of things, however. We would like
to express just one wish, namely, that after looking into the technical problems
that are so important for our work, the Assembly of the Press not disband without taking up the fundamental problem of resistance journalism: the method of

582 The election ordinances had just been published. Cantonal elections were set for September 23 and
30. General elections, along with a referendum to choose between a return to the constitution of 1875
and the election of a Constituent Assembly with or without full powers, were set for October 21, 1945.

583 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus.
584 See the communiqué included in the note to the article “Images of Occupied Germany” (June 30July 1), p. 229.

242

CHAPTER

2

information. A free press is a press that polices itself. If we are to be superior to
the prewar press, we must be able to criticize ourselves.”
Have we completed the anticipated revolution in this regard? Certainly not. A
look at the Paris evening papers is enough to show that most of them take the old
Paris-Soir as their model!?®° One has only to glance at their huge headlines, out of
all proportion to their actual news content, or read their articles, written in the

indicative even though the dispatch they are reporting on is in the subjunctive, or
notice the emphasis on the pungent detail at the expense of the real news. The
morning papers are on the whole more modest. But the newspapers least threatened by the temptation of the sensational are the newspapers of opinion. On the
other hand, they are more vulnerable to political passions, and that is true of us
as much as of our sister publications. They can and sometimes do lose their balance when they become more concerned with their own particular truth rather
that the truth in general and more keen to denounce the flaws of their adversaries
than to point out their strengths or acknowledge their good faith.
Only through careful reflection on these problems and stumbling blocks can
journalism regain the dignity it lost through years of disingenuous and spineless
compromise. The public still needs newspapers, but the more people need them,
the warier they become. The Assembly of the Press would do well to deal frankly
with this problem, and it could demonstrate the good intentions of the new
journalists by elaborating a professional code of conduct and establishing a board
of review to look into serious violations of that code.
There can be no doubt that the French press will not be free without paper.
Nor can there be any doubt that even with paper it will not be free unless it sets
the conditions of its own freedom. In particular, it is difficult to imagine an independent press if journalists hesitate to write what they think on occasions when
they are sure of being mercilessly insulted by thirty newspapers obedient to the
orders of a political party.

August 23, 1945°°”
The Radical Party congress has taken it upon itself to save the Republic.**
Everyone knows, of course, what superhuman efforts the party has already made
to that end, what laudable enthusiasm it displayed in passing the Daladier
°85 In the interview Camus gave to Caliban in August 1951, “One of the Finest Professions I Know,” he
said, “This profession forces you to judge yourself” (Essais, p. 1565).
*86 Camus was of course contemptuous of this paper, of which he obtained firsthand knowledge in 1940
and which remained for him the symbol of bad journalism: see the editorial of September 1, 1944, and

n. 36, p. 24,
87 Editorial. Text quite likely intended as a follow-up to that of June 27, p. 227. Reprinted in Actuelles.
*88 The Radical Party congress took place on August 20. Combat published only brief and highly critical
reports on August 22 and 23. On August 22, a report on the speeches of Daladier and Herriot was introduced with the following sentence: “Their task seems to have been to justify their personal politics and
that of the Radical Party.”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

243

edicts,*” and what a rare spirit of self-sacrifice its deputies showed in bowing
before Philippe Pétain””® as they had previously bowed before Gaston Doumergue.””' So much sacrifice and devotion entitle the Radicals to treat the resistance
in a cavalier manner today and to extol instead the virtues of M. Daladier and
M. Herriot.”
They are indeed back, and they return quite pleased with themselves. M. Daladier did not shrink from mentioning Munich.””’ Minds given to objectivity and
not averse to forgetting might well grant that he proved that he had no choice
but to go to Munich as one goes to Canossa.”” It then follows that M. Daladier
was explaining how the superior political minds of the Third Republic managed
to lead a country that had only just emerged victorious from one war to the brink
of another through a series of capitulations. But when M. Daladier summed up
his personal political history by saying that France could be proud of what it had
tried to accomplish back then, he must forgive us for thinking that he carried his
argument one step too far.
For France is not in fact proud of what it tried to do back then. And if so
many men joined a struggle they often felt to be hopeless in the years between
1940 and 1944, it was precisely because they were not proud of what M. Daladier’s
France had done and felt that something needed to be fixed.
If M. Daladier had any imagination whatsoever, he surely would not have
written the word “proud.” Whatever his intentions may have been, he must have
realized that that adjective would wound many men for whom pride was a matter
of deep concern and who for a long time suffered in silence because they could
not think of the Czechs or the workers of Vienna” without an unbearable sense
of shame. And if M. Daladier, even lacking imagination, had exhibited the
589 In Alger-Républicain, Camus had denounced the policies adopted by the Daladier government in April
1938. For his severe criticism, see the articles in Fragments d'un combat, |, pp. 229-238. On Daladier, see

the editorial of September 12, 1944, n. 63, p. 35.
590 On July 10, 1940, two-thirds of Radical deputies, 171 in all, voted in favor of granting Pétain full powers. Twenty-seven voted against. Herriot himself abstained along with nine others, and thirty-six were
absent. The day before, Edouard Herriot, who was then president of the Chamber of Deputies, called

upon all the deputies to rally around Marshal Pétain: “In its distress our nation has rallied around Marshal
Pétain, whose name we all venerate. Let us be careful not to disrupt the harmony that has developed under

his authority.” Quoted by Olivier Wieviorka, Les Orphelins de la République, p. 56. See also ibid., pp.
147-148. On Herriot, see the editorial of May 12, 1945, n. 476, p. 197.
591 Gaston Doumergue (1863-1937) represented the Cartel des Gauches and served as president of the

Republic from 1924 to 1931. He then retired from public life but was called back, with support from the
Radical Party, to serve as prime minister in 1934 after the February 6 riot. His proposal for a constitu-

tional reform that would have strengthened the executive aroused worry and led to his resignation a few
months later.
592 Daladier and Herriot were frequent Camus targets: see, among others, the editorial of May 12, 1945,
aos
x The Munich accord that Daladier signed abandoned Czechoslovakia to Hitler yet failed to preserve
peace. See the editorial of September 12, 1944, p. 35.
594 A castle in Tuscany where King Henry IV of Germany begged forgiveness of Pope Gregory VII in 1077.
595 Allusion to the crushing of the workers’ militias that demonstrated in Vienna in February 1934 under
the government of Chancellor Dollfuss.

CHAPTER

244

2

appropriate modesty, he would have recognized that the right thing to ask of
France was not that it should rejoice in what was in fact a surrender but that it
should feel incapable of taking pride in such a thing.
Obviously, though, that is not the issue for these somber ghosts. For them the
issue is the upcoming elections, and M. Daladier cannot run in his district without
portraying black as white and Munich as a glorious victory. That is what accounts
for his rage to justify himself in opposition to France, as well as his condescending
readiness to judge the new state of affairs in the country. M. Herriot took a haughty
attitude toward the Fourth Republic. The speakers exhibited disdain for the young
men who showed so little respect for so many glorious parliamentary triumphs.
Those young men were after all mere irregulars, whereas the Radical Party in
M. Herriot’s henceforth immortal phrase is the “heavy infantry” of the Republic.
What could be done, however, when the heavy infantry failed to deliver and its
generals surrendered? There was no choice but the difficult one of building another
army and saving the nation from the disaster precipitated by the infantry’s retreat.
Those irregulars turned out not to be such awful fellows after all. And they aren't
accusing M. Daladier of the crime of having slowly strangled the Republic in 1938
while at the same time besmirching its honor. Nor are they asking M. Herriot to
explain the homage to Pétain that he personally penned. All these things were only
to be expected, of course, and we're not about to be persnickety about them. We
aren't asking these men for any explanations, excuses, or briefs in their own defense.
All we ask of them is a little modesty and a lot of silence.
Of course the Radical Party has also taken the liberty of defending democratic
freedoms. So there we are, on a footing of equality with them. Yet when we contemplate what preceded this declaration and note that the congress stated its desire
to free the French from Marxist enslavement even as M. Herriot was joining the
Communist-leaning M.U.R.E,”” it is easy to see that we are not talking about the
same freedom: the Radical Party's freedom has to do only with the election campaign. As to the other freedom, the real freedom, the one that cannot do without
either pride or honor, we feel that we have the wherewithal to defend it without
the Radicals and, if need be, in opposition to M. Daladier and M. Herriot.

August 24, 1945°””
At the Radical Party congress, M. Herriot complained that he was attacked in
Combat for having dared to say that France stood in need of moral reform.”
The word “dared” is a bit excessive. For the courage in question is one that we
“

3.

¢

°

.

.

.

.

596 The M.U.R.E, or Unified Movement ofthe French Resistance, was organized at the behest of the Communists. Herriot, who had been a colonel in the Red Army since 1933 and who was liberated from his German
prison by the Red Army, served on the movement's governing council. He was also honorary chairman of
the Union de la Jeunesse Républicaine de France, an umbrella organization of Communist youth groups.
°°” Editorial. Text very likely by Camus, following up the previous day's editorial.
*°8 In one of his interventions at the congress, at which he was elected president of the Radical Party,
Herriot declared: “I will respond first to the attack of a newspaper that previously criticized me for having

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

245

demonstrated before he did, and we therefore have every right to tell him that it
doesn’t carry much weight. What is more, M. Herriot is not correct in what he
says. He was attacked in Combat not for having said that France stood in need
of moral reform but for having proposed the Third Republic as a model of
morality. It was possible at that time to believe that if the French needed lessons
in morality, it was certainly not the great parliamentarians of the Third Republic who were qualified to give it to them.
When M. Herriot pretends to deplore the anonymous authorship of our articles, he is resorting to rhetorical sleight of hand, and of the worst sort. For our
editorials, whose authors are known to everyone in the world of journalism and
which are the daily voice of our newspaper, are the collective responsibility of the
Combat team.” In regard to M. Herriot in particular, that team is only too glad
to accept responsibility for them.
M. Herriot is also wrong to mock the new press, for it is thanks to the new
press that he does not need to address his complaint to a managing editor who
had nothing to do with offending him and can deal instead with an editor who
knows what he’s talking about. In the “purification” press that so delights the
president of the Radical Party, the people who write the articles are also responsible for what they write. That is one reform that the Radical ministers invariably forgot to include in their platform, so attached were they to all sorts of
moralities, including some dubious ones. In any case, this reform will enable
M. Herriot to demand satisfaction from us. We urge him most strenuously to do so.
Of course it is perfectly clear that he wouldn't dare. He talked about it, to be

sure, but you have to speak in a stentorian voice when youre addressing a Radical congress, and it doesn’t get you very far. M. Herriot demonstrated similar
consistency when he both expressed his admiration for Pétain and nevertheless
contributed to his condemnation.®%° Who would care about that today? The
great moral rule of our former parliamentarians is in effect that no commitment
is ever binding.
In any event, we shall add to our crimes. The men who fought so that the
Radical Party could once again meet in congress and offer its apologia for
Munich think that they, too, have the right to profit from our newly won freedoms to speak their minds. Criticism of individuals is of little importance right
now. But it is quite true that it would be the ultimate misfortune of France if the

dared to say that France stood in need of moral reform. In the old days, you could ask some poor
devil of a managing editor to justify an attack. I thought that nowadays authors would have the
courage to sign their articles.” For the original criticism, see the editorial of June 27, p. 227, reprinted in
Actuelles.
599 The editorial signed by Camus on February 9, p. 170, had already proclaimed the solidarity of the editorial writers.
600 On July 31, Combat reported on Herriot’s testimony for the prosecution at the trial of Pétain. In fact,
Herriot did not oppose the Vichy regime for the first two years. It was Laval’s decision in August 1942 to
eliminate the two Chambers (whose bureaus were still functioning) that led him to change his mind. On

this point see Olivier Wieviorka, op. cit., pp. 277-280.

246

CHAPTER

2

nation of shopkeepers that generations of professional politicians created for us
were to make a comeback. Never again do we want to see the likes of these men,
petty in their virtues as in their vices, grave in their speeches but frivolous in their
actions, satisfied with themselves but dissatisfied with others. The years that lie
ahead of us will not be a time for banquets and speeches. If France does not come
up with better men and better ideas than in the past, it will sink into a mediocrity worse than death. The surprising thing is that M. Herriot can still wax indignant over the fact that we feel this so strongly. The astonishing thing, to put it
bluntly, is that along with so many others he feels no compunctions about
returning to public life.
To tell the truth, though, astonishment of this sort requires a certain naiveté.
When a class has so lost its ability to discern human qualities that it can speak of
M. Herriot as a possible successor to General de Gaulle, one can only tip one’s
hat and wait. The judgment of the people will come. It will prove to these men
that France has had it with them and that the time has come for this country, on
pain of death, to elect leaders who inspire something more than a contemptuous

smile.

August 26-27, 1945°!
We have proved to be excellent prophets: M. Herriot’s words turned out to be as
empty as we said they were. He complained to the Radical Party congress about
not being able to sue the people responsible for slandering him at Combat, and
despite the fact that we provided him with full details, he has decided not to do
anything other than write an article for La Dépéche de Paris.“ Anyone who reads
it can see that it doesn’t amount to much. Indeed, M. Herriot is still complaining that he can’t find the name of our paper's managing editor. This is because
he is so feckless in everything he does, including reading. Otherwise he would
61 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus, following up the editorials of August 23 and 24.
602 La Dépéche de Paris, which began publishing in February 1945, was the successor to the underground
paper Patrie et liberté. Billing itself “a republican daily paper,” it was an instrument of the Radical Party.
In its August 26-27 issue, Herriot published a “Response to Comba?’ with the subtitle “For the Team
Player.” Herriot said that he was not shocked to be attacked but rejected the “prohibitions on returning
to public life” issued by Combat. He added: “Though intended to be insulting, all of this is simply ridiculous. And what pedantic poverty! The young thinker who seeks to beat me down strikes me as having
more clichés [i.e., slides] in his collection than an old photographer. . . . “We are a team,’ the courageous
pamphleteer adds. . . . Don’t exaggerate your notoriety. . . . Despite your revolutionary pretensions, my
Radical friends and I are well aware that you are serving the cause of the right with your hostility to those
who defended the Republic in desperate times and who did so without wearing masks. You will never be
anything but speculative revolutionaries, amateurs without influence over the people. The moment a rapprochement among democrats seems possible, you denounce it. . . . You are only serving the enemies of
the Republic.” Herriot even went so far as to accuse Combat of “feebly imitating” the Action francaise.
Claiming to be defending deportees and prisoners from attacks by “the team player,” he wrote: “Ah, what
a resonant name: the team! So that is the new formula that you want to substitute for the old parties. Some
difference!”

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

247

have found the name he was looking for in the place appointed by law, where it

appears every day.°
That said, and to spare M. Herriot the difficulty he creates for himself by
avoiding the real issue, we are going to give him the names of the members of
the editorial committee of Combat: Pascal Pia, Albert Camus, Marcel Gimont,
and Albert Ollivier. These are names with which M. Herriot is unfamiliar,
because these men are not involved in politics and never will be. As surprising as
it may seem to M. Herriot, they do not deem themselves indispensable to their
country and will not be running in the next election. But that is why they feel
as they do. And there will be at least a few free journalists to say publicly to
M. Herriot and his ilk that they are useless and indeed, in the present situation,
harmful.
Now that everything is clear, perhaps M. Herriot will stop treating this controversy in a way that allows him to evade the real issues. For the president of the
Radicals, who as he says has a thick skin and who thickened it still more in all
sorts of situations that we take pride in having avoided, is well versed in the art
of avoiding embarrassing questions. We therefore need to confront him with
facts he would rather not see.
What facts are those? We share with many others the view that politics as it
was practiced by M. Herriot and his friends is a thing of the past. We want no
more of them. Why? Because these men had plenty of time to show what they
could do and even more what they could not do. And because, to put it bluntly,
they never did and never will own up to their responsibilities. The frivolous way
in which M. Herriot has returned to launch his election campaign after having
congratulated Marshal Pétain on having made us a gift of his person is one indication of that.°* Another is the fact that M. Herriot did not dare touch on that
subject in his article.
We have still other reasons for our opinion. M. Herriot and his party have
taken a rather haughty attitude toward the resistance. Their disdain is matched
only by their bad conscience. We have always done what we had to do to make
sure that resistance credentials not be mistaken for a badge of entitlement.
Because of these we can be as firm as we are calm in saying to M. Herriot that
no member of the resistance would have agreed to be rescued from the Germans
by Pierre Laval.°’ This is because they had a clear idea of who they were and
what their duty was.
In any case, these are the arguments that M. Herriot must refute if he wants
to prove that our position is incorrect. Once again, however, we are certain that
he won't. He will continue to shadowbox. He will again resort to his petty parliamentary ruses. He will speak emotionally about General de Gaulle while
603 The name of Pascal Pia was indeed noted each day as “managing editor.” There is also some contradiction in Herriot’s allusion to the editorial writers as a “young thinker,” which suggests that his identity
is known, while at the same time reproaching him for writing anonymously.
604 In June 1940 Pétain said, “I am making a gift of my person to France to assuage her misfortune.”
605 In August 1944 Laval had obtained Herriot's release in order to enlist his help in calling the Chamber
of Deputies back into session. Herriot refused.

248

CHAPTER

2

allowing fellow delegates to attack him for three days running and encouraging
his friends to designate him, Edouard Herriot, the man who wrote admiring letters to Marshal Pétain, as the inevitable successor to the man of June 18. He will

accuse us of furthering the right-wing agenda without fear of provoking our
readers to laughter and without scruples about writing such a thing at the conclusion of a congress dedicated entirely to the repudiation of essential structural
reforms.” To be frank, he will do as he has always done.
But we will also do as we have always done, and with all the requisite energy.
M. Herriot insisted on maintaining a humorous tone throughout his article. We
beg his pardon if we don't follow his lead. We have nothing against humor,
except for the kind that comes at the end of campaign dinners, which some people say is contagious. For us, there are some subjects that can never again serve
as a pretext for humor. There was a time when the spectacle of mediocrity in
power served only to amuse crowds and edify sages. Since then, we have shed too
many tears. No, we can no longer separate M. Herriot’s France from the memory of our abjection. And surely he will be the only person in France who continues to find that amusing.

August 28, 1945°°”
Many readers have asked us to take a position on the upcoming election and
indicate how they ought to vote. Although we do not feel very well qualified to
guide voters through the labyrinth of electoral subtleties, we have no compunction about offering our advice in this particular case, because this is a vote for
principles, not individuals. Combats position on these issues can be translated
into practical advice quite readily.
Two questions have been put to the voters. First, they are asked whether they
want a Constituent Assembly to be charged with the task of drafting a new constitution. They should know that if they say “no,” they will be indicating a preference for a return to the Constitution of 1875. We think that the answer to this
first question should be “yes.” Why? First, because the Constitution of 1875 has
outlived its usefulness: we know its defects and its qualities, and the former seem
to us to outweigh the latter. Second, because, like it or not, approval of the Constitution of 1875 will be taken as a blank check by former members of parliament whom we no longer wish to see in government. (Voters would do well to
ponder the fact that the Radical Party is calling for a “no” vote.)
The second question concerns the government’ plans to modify the powers
of the Constituent Assembly if the voters choose to have one. This plan actually
incorporates the counterproposal submitted to the Consultative Assembly by

606 The Radical Party congress called for a return to the Constitution of 1875 and prewar political
institutions.
607 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

249

M. Vincent Auriol®® and M. Claude Bourdet.®? To understand what is at issue
here, you have to remember that the now-defunct Consultative Assembly
clashed with the government over the principle of governmental responsibility.
The Assembly wanted the government to be responsible to the future Constituent Assembly, while the government, seeking what it saw as desirable stability for its policies, rejected this demand. The Auriol-Bourdet counterproposal,
which forms the essential basis of the text that will be laid before the voters, reconciles these two conflicting points of view. It establishes the principle of governmental responsibility, a crucial point for any republican, but it also sets forth
provisions necessary to ensure ministerial stability. The Assembly can withdraw
its confidence from the government, but it can do so only after a certain number of days of reflection. The government is still entirely responsible to the
Assembly, but the Assembly must be fully aware of what it is doing when it exerCises its sovereignty, and the government will not be at the mercy of a momentary whim. In any case, we believe that the answer to this second question ought
to be “yes.” (Bear in mind that the Radicals are recommending a “no” vote.)

The truth is that you have to wonder why unity was not achieved. Or, rather,
you would have to wonder if you didn’t know all too well how sausage gets made
in politics. Because ultimately there are three things about which anyone who
has given any thought to this country’s woes would have to agree: 1. We need a
new democracy. 2. It must be full democracy, which means that the government
must be responsible to the people. 3. It must be an effective democracy, and in
order for that to happen there must be no return to the ministerial instability
that plagued the Third Republic.
A “yes” vote on both questions in the referendum preserves all three principles. No consideration of any individual or party outweighs this basic fact. In the
days to come, some will try to hide this fact by offering their own interpretations
along with the usual deceptions, campaign rhetoric, and partisan speeches. But
every French citizen can hold fast to the basic principles that ought to guide his
vote. The rest is of no importance.
August 30, 1945°"°
We beg the reader’s indulgence if we begin today with a basic fact: there can no
longer be any doubt that the postwar purge has not only failed in France but is now
completely discredited.°'' The word “purge” itself was already rather distressing.
608 Vincent Auriol (1884-1966) was an active member of the S.EI.O. He served as a minister in the Pop-

ular Front government and was one of eighty deputies who refused to vote in favor of granting full powers to Pétain. He joined de Gaulle in London. Later he served as president of two Constituent Assemblies
and then as president of the Republic from 1947 to 1954.
609 Claude Bourdet, an important resistance leader, exercised his moral right to purchase the title “Combat”
and continue publication of the newspaper.
610 Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter on “Morality and Politics.”
611 As early as January 5 Camus expressed his fear that the purge would fail and that reconstruction would
therefore fail as well. See p. 163.

250

CHAPTER

2

The actual thing became odious. It had only one chance of not ending that way,
and that would have required that it be carried out in a way that was neither vengeful nor thoughtless. It seems that the straight path of justice is not easy to find amid
the cries of hatred coming from one side and the special pleading of guilty consciences coming from the other. In any case, the failure is complete.
The reason for this is that politics got mixed up in it, with all its varieties of
blindness. Too many people clamored for the death penalty, as if imprisonment
at hard labor were an inconsequential punishment. By contrast, too many others screamed “terror” when sentences of a few years were meted out to those
guilty of denunciations and other dishonorable acts. And we found ourselves
powerless to do anything about either. Maybe the best thing for now is to do
what we can to see to it that the more flagrant injustices do not further poison
the atmosphere, which is already difficult for many people in France to breathe.
Today we want to talk about one of those injustices. The same court that condemned Albertini,°!” the L.V.E.°!? recruiter, to five years at hard labor, has sentenced the pacifist René Gérin, who wrote the literary column for L’Euvre
during the war, to eight years of the same. Neither logic nor justice can account
for this. We here do not approve of René Gérin’s politics. Total pacifism seems
to us a poorly worked out position, and we now know that there inevitably
comes a time when it can no longer be sustained. Nor do we approve of the fact
that Gérin wrote for L’Euvre, even on literary subjects.
Nevertheless, the punishment should be proportionate to the crime, and men
should be judged for what they are. Hard labor is not an appropriate punishment
for a few literary articles, even in an Occupation newspaper. In other respects,
Gérin’s position has never wavered. One need not share his views, but at least his
pacifism was the logical consequence of a perfectly respectable concept of man.
A society judges itself when, owing to a lack of clear definitions and ideas, it
proves incapable of punishing genuine criminals and instead imprisons a man
who only by accident found himself keeping company with phony pacifists who
loved Hitlerism and not peace. Can a society that wants to make itself over and
claims to be in the process of doing so afford to overlook the basic need for clear
distinctions?
Gérin did not denounce anyone, nor did he participate in any of the enemy’s
undertakings. If his literary collaboration with L’Guvre was deemed worthy of
punishment, then the punishment should have been proportioned to the crime.
An exaggerated sentence of the sort just handed down fixes nothing. It merely
fosters the suspicion that the verdict was the judgment not of the nation but of
a class. It humiliates an individual without doing anyone any good. It discredits
a policy, to everyone's detriment.
6! Georges Albertini, an associate of Marcel Déat, under whom he served as chief of staff at the ministry
of labor and as secretary general of the Rassemblement National Populaire, the collaborationist, profascist party created by Déat. He wrote for L’Atelier, a collaborationist paper.
°13 The L.V.F, or Legion of French Volunteers against Bolshevism, was established shortly after Germany
attacked the Soviet Union in July 1941 and recruited French volunteers to fight on the eastern front.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

251

In any case, this sentence cries out to be reduced, not only so as to spare a man
suffering disproportionate to his mistakes but also to preserve justice itself and
to make it, in this one case at least, respectable. Although René Gérin was not in
our camp, it seems to us that on this matter resistance opinion ought to be with
us, in order to save whatever still can be saved in this realm.

September 1, 1945°'4
The postwar has begun. A year has passed since the liberation of France. First
Germany, then Japan, fell to their knees. Justice has not yet arrived, but we have
at least emerged from an abject condition in which injustice reigned. No sooner
had France emerged from the insurrection than it began its yearlong effort to
breathe normally again. We aren't quite there yet, but we're well on our way. On
the eve of the elections, we can say that we have turned a corner, and it is time
to offer an assessment of the past difficult year.
It might not be a bad idea for each of us to contribute the results of his own
experience to this collective assessment. For instance, a newspaper like this one,

which deliberately set out to become one of the voices of the new France, needs
to ask itself what it accomplished in the past year. For reasons of space, we will
confine our comments to just one aspect of the question.
We cannot emphasize too strongly that our experience has been limited. Our
ambitions were restrained. We believed that each French citizen should try to
innovate in his or her own way. Our job was to report the news. We had to break
with past practice in a domain where the past had done a great deal of harm. We
had to create the conditions necessary for honest reporting and objective discussion. As to the latter, we believed that it would be possible to create a climate in
which the various tendencies of French political life could confront one another
without clashing. Our idea was not, as some believed and others still fear, to rival
Marx and Christ. It was not our intention to make fools of ourselves. Being neither Communists nor Christians, we simply wanted to make dialogue possible
by pointing out differences and highlighting similarities. In this respect, our year
of work has ended in abject failure.
We tried, for instance, to engage in dialogue with the Communists. We still
remember the long editorial in which we tried to set forth our hesitations and
our sympathies as honestly as we could.°'? We received no response. But a few
weeks later, on a subject of no importance at all, they turned on us, even though

we had tried to strike a certain tone, one that we know touches us personally
when it comes from an adversary (and we are not really adversaries at all!). But
they would have none of it.
614 Editorial. Text very likely by Camus. This rather somber assessment no doubt reflects the general sen-

timent of the Combat staff, but the references to the editorial of October 7 and to the polemic with
Mauriac argue in favor of attributing it to Camus.
615 The reference is probably to the editorial of October 7, 1944, p. 62, which was later reprinted in
Actuelles.

252

CHAPTER

2

We then tried to engage in dialogue with the Catholics, or at any rate with one
Catholic, M. Francois Mauriac. Admittedly, some foolish things were said on
both sides, but the exchange got off to a good start; dialogue seemed possible. It
ended when M. Mauriac wrote an article in a tone that reduced us to silence.°”*
We did not conclude from these experiences that others were making dialogue
impossible. We concluded, rather, that we had yet to find the words needed to
bring us together, words that would have united us without requiring us to
renounce our differences. Despite our provisional failure, we remain convinced
that this country and this world cannot be saved until they find the right words,
the right vocabulary. We are all still shading our meaning, or at any rate hurling
back and forth words that each of us interprets differently. People sometimes tell
us that the world needs to be made over. That may be true, but we cannot make
the world new until we have given it a new lexicon. Let the realists stop shouting:
the new dictionary we need is being written little by little in the blood of warfare and the clamor of revolution. Our one hope is this, that a little thought
might go a long way toward preventing a lot of bloodshed.
The conditions under which journalists operate do not always lend themselves
to deep thought. Journalists do what they can, and if they inevitably fail, at least
they can toss a few ideas into the air for others to develop into more efficient
instruments. The ideal might be for the country’s political journalists to return
for a time to voluntary silence, but that is impossible. History forbids it. In this
respect, French public life will no doubt continue to be what it is, namely, an
arena in which powerful orthodoxies confront one another while a few solitary
voices try to make themselves heard.
In other respects, the signs are more comforting. The letters a newspaper
receives tell it not about the state of public opinion but about the opinions of its
readers. Still, a certain tone and a certain set of basic requirements about which
everyone agrees provide useful information. Thus we know that thousands of
men and women join us in our fundamental demand. We are increasingly persuaded that the cruel games of traditional politics go over the heads of the people and do not correspond to their desires. And it is the people who are right. It
is the people who, by exerting their will, will slowly but surely save France. Yes,
we have boundless confidence in the people of this country. That is the one great
certainty that we take from this first year of work.
The rest will come when it comes. Men toil, suffer, insult and maim one
another in pursuit of a goal they do not always clearly perceive. But that goal
always resides in man himself: in fact, it is man himself, and his liberation. The
entire history of the world is the history of freedom. We knew this a year ago in
the great exultation of the insurrection. Since then, we have come to know it a
little better, and we also know that the long quest for freedom is an infernal
struggle in which even good intentions can inflict wounds. This new knowledge
is nothing to be sneezed at: we have learned we must think hard, be wary of our
own impulses, and not give up hope in others. Hence we conclude that, as
616 See the article of January 11, p. 168.

AUGUST

21,

1944-NOVEMBER

15,

1945

253

disappointing as this past year has been, it was nevertheless fruitful. Tomorrow
will be better.

November 15, 1945

France is in a state of siege.°'” It is in a state of economic siege, and as long as
each of us fails to notice this, defeat is certain. What we must decide first is not
whether we should adopt a policy of power or prestige, whether we should serve
one bloc and oppose another or assert our independence as a nation. Regardless
of whether we think in terms of power or alliance, of whether we wish to be solitary or in solidarity, we need the means to make good on our intentions. Either
we will rebuild this nation, or we will cease to exist as a fact to be reckoned with.
That is why no Frenchman would underestimate the importance of the composition of the new government or the astonishing partisan disputes that preceded it. Indeed, what we must do now is utter a cry of alarm, and we must do
it long enough and loud enough to make the country and its representatives
aware of what lies ahead and of the responsibilities they now face.
What does this mean? It means that there is as little point in shouting “Program first!” as there is in shouting “de Gaulle first!” The government’s program
must contribute to reconstruction if it is to amount to anything. And even if it
is very good, it will be of no avail unless it is clearly explained. What we need as
much as a good program is a good ministry. It is on this score that General de
Gaulle and the parties will be challenged.
Because this ministry will not be good, and therefore the program will not be
useful and reconstruction will fail and the country will come apart, if the government is not united by acceptance of a common set of responsibilities. This
ministry will not be good if a liberal minister of finance refuses to give a Socialist minister of national economy the means to put the country back on its feet,
or if the department of war siphons off for itself what a Communist might have
tried to funnel into public health. The parties must fully commit themselves,

because the country will not allow them to shirk their responsibilities, nor will
the times.
Now that General de Gaulle has agreed to form a new government, the next
time is to determine the conditions that will ensure that the government’s work
will be as effective as possible. We know in advance that it will not be completely
effective, and that steps perilous to democracy will need to be taken. How can
the dangers be avoided? France must above all be saved from disaster.

617 Editorial very likely by Camus. This is the only text to which Camus can possibly be referring in his
November 19 letter to Pascal Pia. Unlike other Combat editorials of this period, which were very negative,
this one proposes concrete measures, and one cannot help but notice the formula “solitaires ou solidaires,”
which is repeated in the singular in “Jonas ou l’Artiste au travail.” Recall, however, that Camus, in this

same letter, protested the “softening and confusing corrections” to which his text had been subjected. It is
impossible to say exactly what he was referring to, however.

254

CHAPTER

2

Our opinion—which we call upon others to ponder in an appropriately serious way—is that General de Gaulle should combine the key ministries in a sort
of war cabinet, to which the other ministries will be subordinate. Foreign affairs,

finance, national economy, and interior will coordinate their efforts with reconstruction as their objective. And they will be jointly responsible for the results.
Since the country has designated three large parties to represent it,°'® these three
parties will have to divide the key ministries and their associated responsibilities.
Since the Communist Party has often called for increased production and
expressed its legitimate concern that the economy not be dominated by trusts, it
seems well suited to take charge of the ministry of national economy. However
the ministries are divided, it is essential that all decisions be unanimously
approved by the “war cabinet,” and the ministers along with their parties should
be jointly responsible for carrying them out.
In seven months®!” we should know whether France is dead or alive. Life is
like walking: the proof is in the progress. Progress will come only with resolution, responsibility, and determination. Anything else will meet with sanctions
seven months from now in the form of the people’s wrath and the foundering of
the ship of state.

618 The elections marked victories for the Communists, Socialists, and Christian Democrats.
619 The referendum on the Constitution would take place in May 1946. The first proposal was rejected.
New legislative elections were held in June.

CHAPTER 3

November 19-30, 1946
“Neither Victims nor Executioners”

Camus’ contribution to Combat in 1946 consisted of just eight articles in the series
entitled “Neither Victims nor Executioners,” but this group of articles enjoyed a very
special status, as the typesetting emphasized. The first article was preceded by the
headline “Today, Albert Camus. The Century of Fear.”
The presentation highlighted the importance of these pieces. They appeared on
page one, enclosed in a frame. Their subtitles, in large type, served as headings, and
the overall title, “‘Neither Victims nor Executioners,’ by Albert Camus,” was repeated
in the center of each text. Publication began on November 19, 1946, and continued

on November 20, 21, 23, 26, 27, 29, and 30.

.

Alone among Camus’ journalistic writings, these texts were copyrighted.’ They
were also reprinted exactly a year later, in November 1947, in the journal Caliban
(no. 11), before being included in Actuelles with the same overall title and subtitles in
a special chapter oddly dated “November 1948.” These articles were clearly conceived as a group that could stand on their own, a short essay inspired by events
but relatively detached from the news of the day. They were written with serial publication in mind: even in manuscript, each article begins with an initial title, and the
pieces are numbered sequentially and almost equal in length. Each brief chapter
contributes to a consistent overall purpose. One passage that would appear in “The
Century of Fear” was originally written for the conclusion. The typescript,” with its
deletions, emendations, and additions, makes it possible to consider variant formulations. It reveals the care taken in writing and editing these pieces. All the corrections contribute to the clarity and vigor of the writing. But the manuscript also reveals
that Camus experienced a certain difficulty in saying what he wanted to say, as can
be seen, in particular, in the major changes he made to the article “A New Social
Contract.” Further evidence of the difficulty he faced can be seen in a note he made
in October: “Distress | feel about the idea of writing these articles for Combat.”*

1 “Copyright by Albert Camus and Combat.”
2 Preserved in the Fonds Camus, CMS2, Ae1-01-07; the article of November 19 was written out entirely
by hand; the others were partially typed and corrected by hand. The article of November 26, “International Democracy and Dictatorship,” is missing.
3Only the most important or significant changes are reproduced here.
4 Carnets II, p. 183. This note was explicitly intended as a “follow-up to the preceding” paragraph, in
which he spoke of his profound disarray: “There are times when I don't think I can bear the contradiction any longer. When the sky is cold and nothing in nature sustains us. . . . Better to die, perhaps.” These
notes were clearly written between the beginning of October (“October 1946. 33 years old in one month,”
p. 180) and October 29, the date mentioned explicitly on p. 185.

CHAPTER

256

3

Clearly Camus had come a long way from the articles he had written in the grip of
enthusiasm some two years earlier. Indeed, his return to the pages of Combat after
a lengthy absence was dictated by two necessities. First, he hoped to help the
newspaper, whose financial position had become quite critical, so much so that Pia
envisioned stopping publication. Second, he was determined to sound a cry of alarm
and to raise a voice of protest against the reign of terror that was under way around
the world and against the legitimation of murder that lay behind it. “Neither Victims
nor Executioners” does not stand apart in Camus’ thinking; the anxieties it expresses
were a constant with him. The themes of these articles are to one degree or another
similar to those of “Remarque sur la révolte,”> which appeared in 1946, or the lecture entitled “The Human Crisis,”° which was delivered at Columbia University in New

York in March 1946, and the brief article “Nous autres meurtriers.”” He developed
these themes in “Le temps des meurtriers,” a lecture given in Sao Paulo,® and they
are the source from which The Rebel sprang. They resonate deeply with The Plague.
And they echo discussions that Camus had in October with Arthur Koestler,? Manés

Sperber,!° Sartre, and Malraux on the place of Marxism in the new world order.
Koestler and Sperber denounced the crimes of the Soviet regime and the “conspiracy of silence” that surrounded them; no doubt they were among the first to do so.
Sartre did not want to take sides against the Soviet Union. Malraux worried about
the political value of the proletariat. And Camus wanted to place his hope in a mod-

est, relative form of utopia, rejecting both nihilism and “political realism.”'! Like The
Rebel, “Neither Victims nor Executioners” forcefully made the case that nothing can

justify murder.

Camus had previously paired the terms “victims” and “executioners.”’? In his
article of June 30, 1945, “Images of Occupied

Germany,”

published

in Combat

> Nothing less than an outline of The Rebel (L’Homme révolté), this piece appeared in “Existence” and
was reprinted in Essais, pp. 1982-1997. Many notes in the Carnets show the degree to which Camus’ concerns revolved around the themes of rebellion and murder.
6 “The Human Crisis,” the French text of which seems to have been lost, was published in La Revue des

Lettres modernes, Série Albert Camus 5, 1972, pp. 157-176, by Peter Hoy. A French translation appeared
in La Nouvelle Revue frangaise. In Albert Camus, voyageur et conférencier, le voyage en Amérique du Sud,
Archives Albert Camus no. 7, 1995, Fernande Bartfeld was able to reconstitute fragments of this text from
the lecture on “Le temps des meurtriers” (see the next note).

7Published in Franchise, no. 3, November—December

1946, and reprinted in Bartfeld, Albert Camus,

voyageur, pp. 47-49.
8 Published in Bartfeld, Albert Camus, voyageur, pp. 50-72.
» Koestler, Arthur (1905-1983). An English-speaking Hungarian, whose book Darkness at Noon, published in France in 1946 under the title Le Zéro et l'Infini, forcefully denounced the rigged Moscow trials,
Koestler had been a Communist and participated in the Spanish civil war.
'0 Sperber, Manés (1905-1984), was an Austrian-born essayist and novelist who published Analyse de la

tyrannie in 1938. In his work he considered the commitment of intellectuals in the face of totalitarian
regimes.
‘1 See Carnets Il, pp. 185-186.

' This association calls to mind Baudelaire’s poem “L/Heautontimorouménos”: “Je suis la plaie et le
couteau /.. . Et la victime et le bourreau” [I am the wound and the knife / . . . the victim and the exe-

cutioner.” But Baudelaire has in mind the torments of the individual conscience.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

257

Magazine, he evoked “unhappy, war-torn Europe, divided between victims and
executioners.”!3 In September 1945 he made this note: “We are in a world in which
we must choose to be either victim or executioner—there is no other choice. And
the choice is not easy.”!4 The November 1946 articles offered a response to this
dilemma in the form of a refusal to choose. Camus here seeks a political and moral
way out of what seems to him a historical dead end. In France, the “spirit of the
resistance” is a thing of the past, relations with the Communists are beset with
conflict, and partisan differences have turned virulent. Churchill had just used the
expression “iron curtain” to describe the barrier between the Soviet Union and
the West.
Hence these articles were entirely in tune with the news of the day, yet they were
written with such lucidity and foresight that they reflect today’s concerns and sensibility to an astonishing degree.

November 19, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

The Century of Fear!°

The seventeenth century was the century of mathematics.'° The eighteenth
century was the century of physical science, and the nineteenth the century of
biology. Our twentieth century is the century of fear. Fear isn’t a science, you
may be thinking. Well, to begin with, science is no stranger to fear, since the latest theoretical advances have led science to repudiate itself, and since its practical applications threaten the entire earth with destruction. Furthermore, even if
fear can't be considered a science in itself, there is no question that it is a method.
Indeed, what is most striking about the world we live in is first of all the fact
that most people, broadly speaking, are deprived of any future (other than
believers of one sort or another).'’ No worthwhile life is possible without projection onto the future, without promise of development and progress. To live
with one’s back to a wall is a dog’s life. But people of my generation and of the
generation just now taking its place in factories and classrooms have lived and
are living more and more like dogs.

13 See p. 229.
14 Carnets Il, p. 141.
15 The original text, entirely handwritten, includes a number of phrases that have been scratched out. No
typescript has survived. Several passages from this introductory article appeared in the typescript of “A
New Social Contract,” which Camus clearly intended originally to be the conclusion. This shows that the
whole series was conceived as a single essay.
16 This observation previously appeared in a footnote to Camus’ preface to Chamfort’s Maximes et anecdotes (Monaco:

Incidences,

1944), reprinted under the title “Introduction to Chamfort”

pp. 1099-1109.
17 Actuelles: the parenthetical phrase is omitted.

in Essais,

258

CHAPTER

3

Of course this is not the first time that people have faced a materially
obstructed future. In the past, however, they used to overcome obstacles by
speaking out or shouting out their discontent. They appealed to a different
set of values, on which they pinned their hopes. Today, no one is talking (apart
from those who repeat themselves), because the world seems to us to be led by
forces blind and deaf to warnings, advice, and supplications. Something in us

succumbed to recent experience. That something is man’s eternal confidence,
which always fostered the belief that we could elicit human reactions from other
human beings by speaking to them in the language of humanity.'* We have
witnessed lying, humiliation,

killing, deportation, and torture,

and in each

instance it was impossible to persuade the people who were doing these things
not to do them, because they were sure of themselves and because there is no way
of persuading an abstraction,” or, to put it another way, the representative of an
ideology.”°
The long dialogue among human beings has now come to an end. And of
course a man who cannot be persuaded is a man who makes others afraid. So
that alongside people who stopped speaking because they deemed it pointless to
try, a vast conspiracy of silence has arisen and continues to spread, a conspiracy
accepted by those who quake in fear and who find every reason in the world to
hide their quaking from themselves, and encouraged by those who find it in their
interest to do so. “You must not talk about the purge of artists in Russia, because
that would play into the hands of the reactionaries.” “You must keep silent about
the British and American decision to keep Franco in power because to talk about
it would play into the hands of communism.” As I said earlier, fear is a method.

Between the very general fear of a war for which everyone is preparing and the
very specific fear of lethal ideologies,”' it is therefore quite true that we live in terror. We live in terror” because persuasion is no longer possible, because man has

18 An earlier formulation of this, which appears in the typescript of “A New Social Contract,” combined
a passage indicated below (see note 22) with the end of this sentence: “Yes, we live in terror because per-

suasion is no longer possible, became man shrinks from living in a world in which it is no longer possible to hope that we can elicit human reactions from other human beings by speaking to them in the language
of humanity.” This whole passage was crossed out.
19 In The Plague the scourge is several times compared to an abstraction that has to be combated.
20 In the manuscript, after “ideology” begins a new sentence, with no paragraph break: “And ofcourse . . .”
The intervening sentence is omitted.
21 Manuscript: the word “lethal” is omitted.
2 Typescript of “A New Social Contract”: “Yes, we are in terror because man has been delivered entirely
into the hands of history . . . of messianism without subtleties of any kind.” The passage then continued; “But we cannot escape from abstraction, and kill the fear somewhat, by means of rational argument
modest in its conclusions and the efforts of passion. As restrained as our hopes may be, they justify trying. ‘I think that we ought to be fanatical,’ a now-fashionable revolutionary once said, ‘but that doesn’t
exclude either wisdom or common sense.’ Use common sense, then, in pondering these facts. In the long
struggle ahead, we can never have enough of such quiet fanaticism.” This entire passage was deleted. The
revolutionary alluded to is Saint-Just. Camus quotes this passage in Carnets II, p. 162.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

259

been delivered entirely into the hands of history and can no longer turn toward
that part of himself which is as true as the historic part, and which he discovers
when he confronts the beauty of the world and of people's faces.’? And because
we live in a world of abstraction, a world of bureaucracy and machinery, of
absolute ideas and of messianism without subtlety. We gasp for air among people
who believe they are absolutely right, whether it be in their machines or their
ideas.* And for all who cannot live without dialogue and the friendship of other
human beings, this silence is the end of the world.
In order to escape from this terror, we need to be able to think and to act on
the basis of our thoughts. But the problem is that terror does not create a climate
conducive to thinking. My view, however, is that rather than blame our fear, we
should regard it as a basic element of the situation and try to remedy it. Nothing is more important, for this affects the fate of a large number of people in
Europe, people who, having had enough of violence and lies, having seen their
fondest hopes dashed, and being loath to kill their fellow human beings even in
order to persuade them, are equally loath to see themselves persuaded in the
same manner. Yet this is the dilemma that the vast masses of Europeans face,
those who belong to no party” or who are uncomfortable in the party they have
chosen, who doubt that socialism has been achieved in Russia or liberalism in
America, and yet acknowledge the right of people on both sides to assert their
version of the truth while denying those same people the right to impose that
truth by murder, either individual or collective. Among those who wield power
today, these people are without a kingdom. They will be able to gain recognition
for their point of view (without necessarily securing its triumph) and reclaim
their homeland only when they can consciously formulate what they want and
express this in terms simple enough and strong enough to bind a range of energies. And if fear is not the right climate for proper reflection, then they must first
come to terms with fear.
In order to come to terms with fear, we need to understand what it signifies
and what it rejects. It signifies and rejects the same fact: a world in which murder is legitimate and human life is considered futile. Therein lies today’s primary
political problem. Before dealing with the rest, we have to take a position on this.
Before we can build anything, we need to ask two questions: “Yes or no, directly
or indirectly, do you want to be killed or assaulted? Yes or no, directly or indirectly, do you want to kill or assault?”*° Anyone who answers yes to these questions is automatically caught up in a web of consequences that is bound” to

23 Cf. Carnets 1, p. 152: “Women’s faces, joys of sunshine and water, that is what they are killing.”
24 Tn the manuscript, the next three sentences do not appear.

25 Manuscript: who belong to no party, who do not believe that socialism . . .
26 Manuscript: killed or tortured.
27 Manuscript: a web of consequences that is bound (and I was thinking of the socialists) to change the

way in which...

260

CHAPTER

3

change the way in which the problem is posed. My aim is to detail just two or
three of those consequences. In the meantime, honest readers may wish to ask
themselves these questions and answer them.”*
ALBERT CAMUS

November 20, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

Saving”? Bodies *°
After saying one day that, given the experience of the last two years, I could no
longer accept any truth that might place me under an obligation, direct or indirect, to condemn a man to death, various people whose intelligence I respect told
me that I was living in utopia, that there was no political truth that might not
someday lead to such an extremity, and that one was obliged either to run that
risk or to accept the world as it is.
This argument was forcefully presented. But the people who presented it
expressed themselves with such force, I believe, because they lack imagination
when it comes to other people’s deaths. This is one of the faults of our century.
Just as we now love one another by telephone and work not on matter but on
machines, we kill and are killed nowadays by proxy. What is gained in cleanliness is lost in understanding.
Still, the argument has another strong point, albeit indirect: it raises the issue

of utopia. In short, the world that people like me are after is not a world in which
people don’t kill one another (we're not that crazy!) but a world in which murder
is not legitimized. We are therefore living in utopia and contradiction, to be sure,

since the world we live in is one in which murder is legitimized, and we ought to
change it if we don’t like it. But it seems that it can't be changed without running
the risk of committing murder. Murder thus leads to murder, and we will continue to live in terror either because we resign ourselves to it or because we seek
to eliminate it by means that replace one form of terror with another.
Everyone, in my view, should think about this. For what strikes me amid all

the polemics, threats, and eruptions of violence, is everyone’s good intentions.
Everyone, on the right and on the left, apart from a few rogues, believes that his
truth is likely to make men happy. And yet the conjunction of all these good
intentions leads to this infernal world, in which men are still being killed, threatened, and deported, preparations are being made for war, and it is impossible to

say a word without instantly being insulted or betrayed. One cannot help
*8 Manuscript: . .. and answer it. For my part, I have learned over the past two years in particular that
there is no truth I would place above the life of ahuman being.
This sentence was deleted and then inserted at the beginning of the manuscript of the next article, which
proves that they were conceived as a whole.
29 Manuscript: in French, sauvez instead of sauver.
30 Text partially handwritten, partially typewritten.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

261

concluding that if people like us live in contradiction, they are not alone, and
those who accuse them of utopian thinking may be living in a utopia of their
own, different no doubt but in the end more costly.
We must therefore admit that the refusal to legitimize murder forces us
to reconsider our notion of utopia.*! In that regard, it seems possible to say the
following: utopia is that which is in contradiction with reality. From this point
of view, it would be completely utopian to want people to stop killing people.
This would be absolute utopia. It is a much lesser degree of utopia, however, to
ask that murder no longer be legitimized. What is more, the Marxist and capi-

talist ideologies, both of which are based on the idea of progress and both of
which are convinced that application of their principles must inevitably lead to
social equilibrium, are utopias of a much greater degree. Beyond that, they are
even now exacting a very heavy price from us.*
In practical terms, it follows that the battle that will be waged in years to come

will not pit the forces of utopia against the forces of reality. Rather, it will pit different utopias against each other as they try to gain a purchase on the real, and
the only choice remaining will be to decide which form of utopia is least costly.*?
My conviction is that it is no longer reasonable to hope that we can save everything, but we can at least hope to save the bodies* in order to keep open the possibility of a future.
We see, therefore, that the refusal to legitimize murder is no more utopian
than today’s realistic attitudes.” The only question is to decide whether the latter are more or less costly. This is a question that we need to resolve as well, and

that is my excuse for believing that it may be useful, with utopian principles in
mind, to set forth the conditions necessary for pacifying minds and nations. If
we ponder this matter free of fear as well as pretension, we may be able to help
create the conditions for a just philosophy and for a provisional accord among
those of us unwilling to be either victims or executioners. Of course the remaining articles*® will not seek to state a definitive position but only to correct some
misleading notions that are abroad in the world today and to attempt to state the
problem of utopia as accurately as possible. The goal, in short, will be to define

the conditions for a modest political philosophy, that is, a philosophy free of all
messianic elements and devoid of any nostalgia®’ for an earthly paradise.
ALBERT CaMus”®
31 Manuscript: After “notion of utopia,” a new sentence: “To stay with generalities before moving on to
the concrete, we will say simply that. . .”
32 Manuscript continues: “In practical terms, the battle that is now beginning . . .”
33 Manuscript continues: “We can no longer hope. . .”
34 Manuscript: “... save the bodies. We see, therefore . . .”
35 Manuscript: “today’s so-called realistic attitudes. It remains to be seen if they are more or less costly.”
36 Typescript: “Of course the [three] (crossed out) [four] (crossed out) remaining...”

37 Manuscript: “devoid of any notion of an earthly paradise.”
38 As with all the articles in this series, the following notice appeared at the end: “Copyright by Albert
Camus and Combat. Rights of reproduction reserved for all countries.” This distinctive feature deserves
special mention, as noted earlier.

262

CHAPTER

3

November 21, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

Socialism Mystified*?
If we admit that the state of terror in which we have lived for the past ten years,
whether acknowledged or not, is not yet over, and that this is today the single
greatest factor in the malaise of individuals and nations around the world, then
we need to look at how terror can be combated. This raises the problem of western socialism. For terror can be legitimized only if one adopts the principle that
the end justifies the means.*° And this principle can be embraced only if the efficacy of an action is taken to be an absolute end, as in nihilist ideologies (everything is permitted, success is what counts) or philosophies that take history as an
absolute (first Hegel, then Marx: since the goal is a classless society, anything that
leads to it is good).

Therein, for example, lies the problem faced by French Socialists. They have
discovered that they have scruples. They have seen violence and oppression at
work, after having had only a fairly abstract idea of what those things were. And
they asked themselves if they would be willing, as their philosophy demanded,
to practice violence themselves, even if only temporarily and for a quite different
purpose. In a recent preface to Saint-Just, a writer*! spoke of men who had felt
similar scruples in terms dripping with contempt: “They shrank from the horror.” Truer words could not be spoken. And for that they earned the disdain*® of
souls strong enough and superior enough to embrace horror without flinching.
But at the same time they gave a voice to the anguished appeal stemming from
the millions of mediocre men and women among whom we count ourselves, the
people who are the very stuff of history and who must some day be reckoned
with, all the disdain notwithstanding.
A more serious approach, we think, is to try, rather, to understand the contradictory and confusing situation in which our socialists find themselves. It then
becomes obvious that not enough thought has been given to the crisis of conscience in French socialism as revealed by the party's recent congress.“ It is quite
clear that our Socialists, under the influence of Léon Blum and even more under

39 Text partly handwritten and partly typed.
40 Camus returns to this point at length in The Rebel.
41 The allusion is to Jean Gratien’s preface to the CEuvres of Saint-Just (Paris: Editions de la Cité Universelle, 1946).

42 Manuscript: “earned the contempt.”
43 Manuscript: “even if one is contemptuous ofit.”
44 The 38th Congress of the SFIO (and not the 18th, as indicated in a note in the Essais, p- 1513), which

took place from August 29 to September 1, 1946, witnessed a clash between Léon Blum’s “humanism”
and Guy Mollet’s “Marxism.” In astill-famous speech, Blum attacked the “totalitarian vestiges” in the “slogans rather than convictions” championed by Mollet, and in very Camusian terms called for “democracy
and justice,” but he was not backed by the majority. Mollet succeeded Daniel Mayer as the party’s secretary general.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

263

the threat of events, gave unprecedented priority to moral issues (the end does
not always justify the means).** Their legitimate desire was to invoke a small
number of principles more important than murder. It is no less obvious that the
same Socialists want to maintain Marxist doctrine, some because they believe

that it is impossible to be a revolutionary without being a Marxist, others because
they are understandably loyal to the history of the party, which persuades them
that one cannot be a Socialist, either, without being a Marxist. The last party
congress had highlighted these two tendencies, and the principal task of this congress was to reconcile them. But there is no reconciling the irreconcilable.
For it is clear that if Marxism is true, and if there is a logic to history, then
political realism is legitimate. It is equally clear that if the moral values favored
by the Socialist Party are fundamentally right, then“ Marxism is absolutely false
because it claims to be absolutely true. From this point of view, the well-known
idea that Marxism will ultimately be transcended in favor of a more idealist and
humanitarian philosophy is merely a joke, an inconsequential dream. Marx cannot be transcended, because he pursued the logic of his system to the ultimate
end. Communists are rationally justified in using the lies and violence of which
the Socialists want no part, and they are justified by the very principles, the very
irrefutable dialectic, that the Socialists nevertheless wish to maintain. One can’t
help being astonished by the sight of the Socialist congress ending with a
straightforward juxtaposition of two contradictory positions,’ the sterility of
which was repudiated in the last elections.
In this respect, the confusion persists. A choice was necessary, and the Socialists would not or could not choose.
I chose this example not to condemn the Socialists but to illuminate the paradoxes of our time. To condemn the Socialists, one would have to be superior to
them. This is not yet the case. On the contrary, this contradiction seems to me
to be shared by all the people I’ve mentioned, who want a society that is both
happy and worthy, who want men to be free in a condition that can at last be
described as just, but who still hesitate between a freedom in which they know
full well that justice is finally duped and a justice in which they see clearly that
freedom is eliminated at the outset.” This unbearable anguish is generally
derided by those who know what has to be believed and what needs to be done.
But I am of the opinion that rather than mock this unbearable anguish, we
should use our reason and insight to understand what it means, to interpret the
45 Typescript: “If we grant that the avowed or unavowed state of terror in which we have been living for

the past ten years is not yet over, we can understand the legitimate desire of the socialists to refer . . .”
46 Typescript: “then the Marxist theory of mystified consciousness is false and with it the whole critique
of idealism and Marxism itself [deleted]. From this point of view...”

47 Typescript: “contradictory positions. In this respect, . . .”
48 The reference is obviously to the elections of November 10, 1946 (and not November 1948, as indicated in a note on p. 1513 of the Essais), in which the SFIO finished third, behind the Communists and

the M.R.P.
49 The balance between justice and freedom would become one of the themes of The Rebel.

264

CHAPTER

3

virtually total condemnation of the world that provokes it, and to identify the

feeble hope that underlies it.”°
Indeed, hope resides in this contradiction itself, because it is forcing or will
force the Socialists to choose. Either they will admit that the end covers the
means, hence that murder can be legitimized, or else they will renounce Marxism

as an absolute philosophy and limit their attention to the critical aspects, which
is often still valuable. If they choose the first alternative, their crisis of conscience
will be over, and situations will be clarified. If they choose the second, they will
demonstrate that the end of ideologies is upon us, that is, the end of absolute
utopias that destroy themselves owing to the heavy price they eventually exact
when they seek to become part of historical reality. It will then be necessary to
choose another utopia, one that is more modest and less ruinous. In any case, the
refusal to legitimize murder makes the question unavoidable.”"
Yes, this is the question that must be asked, and no one, I believe, would dare
answer it lightly.
ALBERT CAMUS

November 23, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

The Revolution Travestied

Since August”? 1944, everybody in France has been talking about revolution—
and always sincerely, no doubt about that. But sincerity is not in itself a virtue.
There are kinds of sincerity so confused that they are worse than lies. What we
need today is not to speak the language of the heart but simply to think clearly.
Ideally, a revolution is a change of political and economic institutions intended
to increase freedom and justice in the world. Practically, it is a series of often
unfortunate historical events that brings about this change for the better.
Can we say that this word is used today in its traditional sense? When people
in France hear talk of revolution, what they envision, assuming they keep their
wits about them, is a change in the mode of ownership (generally taken to be a
move to collective ownership of the means of production) achieved either
through legislation by the majority or through seizure of power by a minority.
It is easy to see that this set of ideas makes no sense in the current historical
situation. For one thing, the seizure of power by violent means is a romantic idea

*0 Typescript adds: “I have pondered—to put it simply, after a year of journalism—my own inability to
have anyone shot in the name of some truth or illusion of truth. Like many other people today, I have
concluded that I cannot accept any truth” [the rest of the sentence is missing in the manuscript]. Perhaps
Camus noticed that he was repeating a sentence from “Saving Bodies.”
>! Manuscript skips next phrase and continues at “No one, I believe . . .”

°2 Typescript with some handwritten additions.
°3 Typescript: April 1944.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

265

consigned to fantasy by advances in the technology of weaponry. The repressive
apparatus can avail itself of the force of tanks and planes. Hence it would take
tanks and planes merely to equal its power. 1789 and 1917 remain dates, but
they are no longer examples.
Yet even if we assume that such a seizure of power is possible, and regardless
of whether it is achieved by force of arms or by legislation, it would be effective
only if France (or Italy or Czechoslovakia) could put itself in a box and cut itself
off from the world. Indeed, in our current historical situation, in 1946, a change
in property relations would have such an impact on, for example, American
loans that our economy would find itself under threat of death. A right-wing
revolution would be no more likely to succeed because of the comparable impediment that Russia creates for us with™ millions of Communist voters and with
its position as the greatest continental power. The truth—and I apologize for
stating plainly what everybody knows but nobody says—is that we, as Frenchmen, are not free to be revolutionaries. Or at any rate we can no longer be solitary revolutionaries, because there is no place in the world today for either
conservative or socialist politics within the borders of a single nation.
Hence the only revolution we can talk about is an international one. To be
precise, the revolution will either be international or it will not happen. But what
can this phrase mean today? There was a time when it was possible to believe that
international reform would come about through successive or simultaneous
national revolutions—a series of miracles, as it were. If the foregoing analysis
is correct, however, the only revolution that is conceivable today is one that
would extend an already” successful revolution. This is something that Stalin
saw quite clearly, and it is the most benevolent explanation that one can give of
his policy (the other alternative being to deny Russia the right to speak on behalf
of revolution).
What this comes down to is to look at Europe and the West as one nation, in

which a large and well-armed minority might come to power after lengthy struggle. But since the conservative force (namely, the United States) is equally well

armed, it is easy to see that the notion of revolution has now been replaced by
that of ideological warfare. To put it more plainly, there is no possibility of an
international revolution today without an extremely high risk of war. Any future
revolution will be a foreign revolution. It will begin with a military occupation,

or, what amounts to the same thing, a threat of occupation. It will make sense
only when the occupying power has won a final victory over the rest of the
world.
Within nations revolutions are already quite costly, but in view of the progress
they are supposed to bring, people generally accept the need for the damage they
do. Today, the cost to humanity of any war must be objectively weighed against
the progress one might hope to see from the seizure of world power by Russia or
America. It is of the utmost importance, I believe, that in weighing the pros and
54 Typescript: “with five million.”
55 Typescript: “already” is omitted.

266

CHAPTER?

3

cons we use a little imagination for once and try to envision what a planet that
holds some 30 million still-warm bodies would be like after a cataclysm that
would claim ten times as many lives.
Let me point out that this manner of reasoning is perfectly objective. It takes
only reality into account, taking no position for the time being on ideological or
sentimental judgments. In any case, it should give pause to those who speak
lightly®® of revolution. What this word portends today must either be accepted
or rejected in toto. If you accept it, you must consciously acknowledge responsibility for the war to come. If you reject it, you must either admit that you prefer
the status quo, which is a completely utopian position insofar as it assumes that
history is immobile, or else you must redefine the word “revolution,” which
means accepting what I shall call a relative utopia. Having thought about the
question for a while, I have come to the conclusion that those who want to
change the world effectively today have to choose among carnage, the impossible dream of bringing history to an abrupt halt, or the acceptance of a relative
utopia that leaves some chance of human action.” It is not difficult to see,
however, that the relative utopia of which I speak is the only real possibility, the
only one inspired by the spirit of reality. What fragile possibility is there of saving ourselves from carnage? This is the question to which we shall turn in our
next article.
ALBERT CAMUS

November 26, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners
International Democracy and Dictatorship z

Today we know that there are no more islands and that borders are meaningless.
We know that in an ever-accelerating world, in which the Atlantic can be crossed
in less than a day and Moscow communicates with Washington in a few hours,
we are forced to embrace solidarity or cooperation depending on the situation.”
What the 1940s taught us was that harm done to a student in Prague also injured
the worker in Clichy, that blood shed on a riverbank in Central Europe could
bring a Texas farmer to spill his blood in the Ardennes, a place he had never seen.
There is no longer any such thing as isolated suffering, and no instance of torture anywhere in the world is without effects on our daily lives.

°6 Typescript: adds the word “today” after “lightly.”
57 The notion of “relative utopia” is central to The Rebel,
°8 There is neither a typescript nor a manuscript of this text in the archives.
°° Here and throughout the article it is possible to see a worried anticipation of globalization. Camus also
joined the movement in support of Gary Davis, the self-proclaimed “citizen of the world.” See the reports
on his activities in Combat during November 1948, and Camus’ two articles, “What Is the UN Accomplishing?” December 9, p. 301, and “Responses to the Incredulous,” December 25-26, 1948, p. 304.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

267

Many Americans would like to go on living within the confines of their society, which they judge to be good. Many Russians, perhaps, would like to carry
on with their statist experiment separate from the capitalist world. They cannot
now and never will. By the same token, no economic problem, no matter how
minor it seems, can be resolved today without international cooperation.
Europe's bread is in Buenos Aires, and Siberian machine tools are manufactured
in Detroit. Today, tragedy is collective.
Hence we all know, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that the new order we are

seeking cannot be merely national or even continental, much less Western or
Eastern. It has to be universal. It is no longer possible to hope for incomplete solutions or concessions. Compromise is what we have now, and that means anguish
today and murder tomorrow. Meanwhile, history and social change are accelerating. The twenty-one deaf men—future war criminals—who are discussing peace
at this very moment are engaged in monotonous dialogues, quietly sitting in the
middle of a torrent that is sweeping them toward an abyss at a thousand miles an
hour.°° Yes, the new world order is the only issue of the day, overshadowing all the

disputes about the constitution and the election law. It is the issue that cries out
for us to use our intelligence and our resolve to do something about it.
What can we do today to achieve world unity and to bring about an international
revolution that will improve the distribution of human resources, raw materials,
commercial markets, and spiritual wealth? I see only two possibilities, two ultimate
alternatives. The world can be unified from above, as I said the other day, by one
state more powerful than the rest. Either Russia or America can play this role.
Neither I nor anyone I know has anything to counter the contention of some that
both Russia and America have the means to rule the world and to unite it around
an image of their own societies. I am loath to accept this as a Frenchman and still
more as a Mediterranean. But I will not deal with this emotional argument.
Here is my only objection, one that I discussed in a recent article: such unification cannot take place without war or, at the very least, an extreme risk of war.
I will even grant, though I do not believe, that this might not be atomic
war. Even so, the war of tomorrow would leave mankind so impaired and so
impoverished that the very idea of a world order would surely be anachronistic.
Marx could justify the war of 1870°' as he did because it was the war of the
Chassepot rifle and was localized. From the standpoint of Marxism, a hundred
thousand deaths are nothing compared with the happiness of hundreds of millions. But the certain death of hundreds of millions of people is too high a price
to pay for the supposed happiness of those who remain.” The dizzying progress

60 Since July 29, the peace conference that was to define the borders of the countries that had allied themselves with Germany had been meeting in Paris at the Luxembourg Palace.
61 According to Roger Quilliot, Camus was probably referring to letters from Marx to Engels, Paul
Lafargue, and Kugelmann in which he explained that the war had taught the proletariat how to use arms

and that the Prussian victory would lead to a “centralization of state power . . . useful to the centralization of the working class.” See Essais, pp. 1513-1514.
62 This would become one of the themes of The Rebel.

268

CHAPTER

3

of armaments—a historical phenomenon unknown to Marx—forces us to look
at the means-ends problem in a new light.
In this case, moreover, the means would shatter the ends. Whatever the desired

end may be, as noble and necessary as it conceivably is, and regardless of whether
or not it seeks to bring happiness to humankind or to establish justice and freedom, the means to that end represent a risk so conclusive, so disproportionate to
the likelihood of success, that we objectively refuse to run it. That brings us back
to the second means of achieving universal order, which is by mutual agreement
of all parties. We will not ask if this possible, because here we take the point of
view that nothing else is possible. So first we must ask ourselves what is involved.
This agreement of all parties has a name: international democracy. Everybody
at the U.N. talks about this, of course. But what is international democracy? It
is a democracy which is international. Forgive me for this truism: the most obvious truths are also the most distorted.
What is national democracy, and what is international democracy? Democracy is a form of society in which the law is above those who govern, the law
being the expression of the will of all, represented by a legislative body. Is that
what people are attempting to establish today? They are indeed elaborating for
us an international law. But that law is made and unmade by governments, that

is, by the executive. We are therefore in a regime of international dictatorship.
The only way out is to place international law above governments, which means
that that law must be made, that there must be a parliament for making it, and
that parliament must be constituted by means of worldwide elections in which
all nations will take part. And since we do not have such a parliament, the only
option open to us is to resist this international dictatorship on an international
level using means not in contradiction with the ends we seek.
ALBERT Camus

November 27, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

The World Moves Quickly
It is obvious to everyone that political thought increasingly finds itself overtaken
by events. France, for example, began the war of 1914 with the resources of 1870
and the war of 1939 with the resources of 1918. But anachronistic thinking is
not peculiar to the French. For now it will suffice to note that, to all intents and
purposes, today’s political systems seek to settle the world’s future by employing
principles shaped in the eighteenth century in the case of capitalist liberalism and
in the nineteenth century in the case of so-called scientific socialism. In the former case a philosophy born in the early years of modern industrialism, and in
the latter a doctrine contemporaneous with Darwinian evolutionism and Renanian optimism, seek to reduce to equations the era of the atomic bomb, sudden
63 Typescript with handwritten corrections and additions.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

269

upheaval, and widespread nihilism. There can be no better illustration of the
increasingly disastrous gap that exists between political thought and historical
reality.
Of course the mind is always a step behind reality. History races ahead while
the mind meditates. But this unavoidable gap is widening today as the pace of
history accelerates. The world has changed far more in the past fifty years than
in the previous two hundred. And today we see everyone focused on the issue of
establishing borders, when people everywhere know that borders are now
abstractions. Yet it was the principle of nationalities that apparently held sway at
the Conference of the Twenty-One.
We™ must take this into account in our analysis of historical reality. Today we
shall focus on the German question, which is a secondary issue compared with
the clash of empires that hangs over us. Yet if we were to come up with international solutions to the Russian-American problem, we would still be in danger
of being ignored. The clash of empires is already close to taking a back seat to
the clash of civilizations. Indeed, colonized civilizations from the four corners of
the earth are making their voices heard. Ten or fifty years from now, the challenge will be to the preeminence of western civilization. It would therefore be
better to anticipate this by opening the World Parliament to these civilizations,
so that its law will truly become universal law and the order that it consecrates
will truly become the world order.
The questions that have arisen lately in connection with the right of veto are
misleading, because the opposing sides in the U.N. debate are misleading. The
Soviet Union will always have the right to reject the will of the majority as long
as it consists of a majority of ministers and not a majority of peoples represented
by their delegates and until all nations are represented. If a meaningful majority
should ever be assembled, everyone will either have to obey it or reject its law,
which is to say, openly declare its will to dominate.
By the same token, if we never lose sight of the acceleration of history, we
stand a chance of finding the right way to approach the economic issues of the
day. The question of socialism did not look the same in 1930 as it did in 1848.
The abolition of private property gave way to techniques for collectivization of
the means of production. Those techniques involved not only the fate of private
property but also the increased scale of economic issues. And just as there will be
no political solution that is not international, so, too, will any economic solution
have to deal with international means of production such as oil, coal, and uranium as a first priority. If there is to be collectivization, it must deal with the
resources that are indispensable to everyone and should in fact belong exclusively
to no one. Everything else is just political speechifying.””

64 Typescript: “Well, we must . . .”
65 On this point, too, Camus’ premonitory clarity of mind is worth noting.
66 Manuscript: “will to power.”
67 This entire paragraph was added by hand.

270

CHAPTER

38

This approach to the question looks utopian to some, but for those who refuse

to accept the risk of war, there is no choice but to embrace these principles and
defend them wholeheartedly. How do we get there from here? The only way
imaginable is for former socialists to come together with individuals who today
find themselves politically isolated around the world.
There is in any case one further and final response to the accusation that these
principles are “utopian.” For us, the choice is simple: either utopia or war, which
is where outmoded ways of thinking are taking us. The choice today is between
anachronistic political thinking and utopian thinking. Anachronistic thinking is
killing us. Wary as we are (and as I am), realism therefore forces us to embrace

the relative utopia I am proposing. When this utopia has been absorbed into
history® like so many others before it, people will no longer be able to imagine
any other reality. For history is nothing other than man’s desperate effort to turn
his most perspicacious dreams into reality.
ALBERT CAMUS

November 29, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

A New Social Contract”

Let me summarize what I have said so far. The fate of people of all nations will
not be settled until the problems of peace and world organization have been
settled. There can be no effective revolution anywhere in the world until this revolution has taken place. Anyone in France who says anything different today is
either wasting his breath or has a personal stake in the outcome. I will go even
farther. Not only will there be no lasting change in the mode of property ownership anywhere in the world, there will not even be any solution to the simplest
problems—supplying people with their daily bread, ending the hunger that is
wracking bellies across Europe, ensuring an adequate supply of coal—until peace
has been created.”°

68 In Actuelles, the word “history” is capitalized here and in the next sentence,
6 Partially typewritten text with handwritten additions and numerous corrections. The text was
intensively revised. It was first conceived as a conclusion to the series, and in fact one section was moved
to the final article “Toward Dialogue,” for which no separate manuscript or typescript of a final draft
exists. Another section, which was at the end of this article, was moved to “The Century of Fear.” See
notes 15, p. 257, and 18 and 22, p. 258. Long passages were deleted from the final version. Others are
not found in the manuscript (everything from “Any thought that recognizes” to “of a doomed society”).
The Rebel includes an analysis of Rousseau’s Social Contract under the title “A New Gospel” (Essais,
pp. 523-526).
70 In the typescript, this is followed by the following two paragraphs (with a few handwritten corrections):
“For people pondering these questions, I therefore see no more urgent need than to commit all their
energy, resistance, and time, their ballots (for as little as they are worth), their talent, and their resources

to demand a worldwide solution to alleviate the burden of misery and fear. And this movement must

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

A

Any thinker who honestly acknowledges his inability to justify lies and murder will be led inescapably to this conclusion if he cares at all about truth. He
will have no choice but to assent to the argument as set forth thus far.
In so doing he will acknowledge that: 1. domestic politics taken in isolation is
essentially of secondary importance and in any case intellectually incoherent; 2.
the only real issue is the creation of an international order, which will finally
bring about lasting structural reforms tantamount to a revolution; 3. the only
strictly national issues that remain are administrative problems that must be
dealt with for now as effectively as possible, until a more general and therefore
more effective solution can be achieved.
It must be granted, for instance, that the French Constitution can be judged
only in terms of what it does or does not contribute to the creation of an international order based on justice and dialogue. Seen in this light, the indifference
of our Constitution to the most basic of human liberties deserves to be condemned. It must be granted that the provisional organization of a more efficient
logistical system is ten times more important than the issue of nationalizations
or the votes tallied by this or that party. Nationalizations will not endure if they
are limited to one country. And while it is true that the logistical problem cannot be resolved within a purely national framework either, it is nevertheless a
more pressing issue that calls for expedient solutions, even if they are temporary.
Taken together, these observations may yield the criterion for judging domestic
politics that has thus far been lacking. L’Aube may well publish thirty editorials
a month opposing the thirty editorials of L’Humanité, but none of those pieces
can make us forget that both newspapers, along with the parties they represent
and the men who lead them, agreed to the annexation of Brigue and Tende without a referendum,’' which means that they were allies for the purpose of destroying international democracy. Whatever their reasons, good or bad, M. Bidault

and M. Thorez both opted for the principle of international dictatorship. Hence

develop not only within each country but above all in the international arena, initially by way of preaching. That is the primary task, the most urgent necessity we face, and the only one that can be effective or
truly realistic.
“Otherwise, there is little that we can expect from governments, which will find themselves overwhelmed by their burdens until this issue is resolved. And governments themselves are well aware of this.
Their primary task seems to be to survive, and then, depending on which parties join in coalition, to give
assurances to the foreign power of their choice. On all other matters any possible solutions are therefore
provisional. The only two issues that count are that of creating an international order that will at last bring
about durable structural reforms tantamount to revolution, and that of devising some temporary system
for meeting daily needs and managing the flow of resources. And since those who are in charge of international organization today have managed to get themselves stuck in a dead end, individuals, working both
within their own countries and across borders, must one by one enter into a new social contract that will unite
them again in accordance with a more reasonable set ofprinciples.” The italicized portion of the last sentence
was moved to a point later in the text. See n. 73, p. 272.
71 The Treaties of Paris, signed in February 1947 between the victorious powers and the former allies of
Germany, provided among other things for the surrender by Italy to France of the villages of Brigue and
Tende. The annexation took place after a referendum at the end of the year.

QZ

CHAPTER

38

regardless of how we may judge their decision, they represent not political reality but rather utopian thinking of the most unfortunate kind.
Yes, domestic politics does not deserve to be accorded so much importance.
You cannot cure the plague with remedies for a head cold.” A crisis that is tearing apart the entire world cannot be resolved without a universal solution. There
must be order for all so that the burden of misery and fear that each must bear
can be reduced: that, for now, is our logical objective. This demands action and
sacrifice, and that means people. And while there are many people nowadays
who condemn violence and murder in their heart of hearts, there aren't many

willing to recognize that this obliges them to reconsider the way they think and
act. Yet those who are willing to make the effort can expect to find reasonable
hope along with rules for action.
Admittedly, not much can be expected from the governments now in power,
since these live and act by lethal principles. Hope therefore requires us to take the
more arduous path, to start over and build anew a living society within the doomed
society we are living in now.’? Hence individuals, working both within their own
countries and across borders, must one by one enter into a new social contract that
will unite them again in accordance with a more reasonable set of principles.
The peace movement I mentioned should be able to link up with communities
of labor inside nations and with international study groups. These working communities, organized in a cooperative way and on the basis of free contract, would

bring relief to as many people as possible, whereas the study groups would attempt
to define the values on which the new international order’* should be based while
at the same time advocating for that order at every available opportunity.
More precisely, the task of these groups should be to meet the confusions of
terror with clear language and at the same time to set forth the values that a
72 Tarrou makes the same point in The Plague: “They are never a match for epidemics. And the remedies
they imagine are hardly up to treating a head cold.” (La Peste, p. 118.)

73 The passage excised from the manuscript earlier was moved here.
74 In the typescript, another sentence was inserted here: “Again, this relative utopia is the only chance.”
This was followed by a lengthy passage, of which only the last words would make it into the final text.
“This, by the way, is so un-utopian that elements of such groups can be seen in the real world today. The
example given here is only an example, intended to serve as a general idea of what I have in mind. A good
model for the kind of contractual organization that is rethinking our society's mode of production is the
working group that Marcel Barbu has established in Valence. In France we have many highly intelligent
and distinguished minds, but few, so far as | know, have noticed the importance of Barbu’s experiment
and its true significance for the present age. He has created a community of 150 men of various beliefs
(including Marxists, Christians, and unaffiliated members) who say that they are happy to be there. It has
been in existence for eight years. Other, similar communities have been established. People say that they
will fail, but for the moment they are surviving, and in any case they will have rescued a few of misery’s
hostages for at least eight years. This community has not promised all these workers dignity and inner
peace within four generations; it has given them these things in the space of a few years. Once again, ulti-

mate liberation depends on international reform. But experiments like Barbu’s, which is creating a new
type of human relationship based on the free choices of human beings with respect for differences and liberty for all, shows that in the meantime it is possible to make some progress toward overcoming universal disorder and hatred. This progress can be made permanent only when a worldwide organization has
been achieved. Until then it is threatened. But it makes hope possible.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

273

world at peace will find indispensable: their first objectives could be to formulate
an international code of justice whose first article would abolish the death
penalty everywhere”? and to give a clear statement of the principles necessary for
any civilization based on dialogue. This work would meet the needs of an era

that can find no philosophy which offers the grounding necessary to satisfy the
craving for friendship that Western minds are experiencing today. Clearly, however, the point of this exercise should not be to elaborate a new ideology. It
should be simply to search for a new way of life.
In any case, these are themes for reflection, and I cannot explore them in any
depth in the space available. But to put things more concretely, let us imagine a
group of people determined, in all circumstances, to set example against power,
preaching against domination, dialogue against insult, and plain honor against
wily cunning; a group of people who would refuse all the advantages of society
as they find it today and accept only the duties and responsibilities that tie them
to others; and who would attempt to redirect teaching, above all, and, in addition, the press and public opinion in keeping with the principles of conduct I
have just set forth. These people would be acting not in a utopian way but rather
in accordance with the most genuine realism. They would be laying the groundwork for the future, and in so doing they would immediately begin to break
down some of the walls that we find so oppressive today. If realism is the art of
taking both the present and the future into account at the same time, of obtaining the most while sacrificing the least, then who can fail to see that the most
unmistakable reality belongs to these men and women.
Whether these people will come forward or not,’° I do not know. It is likely
that most of them are pondering the situation right now, and that is good. Yet
there can be no doubt that the effectiveness of their action depends on their finding the courage to give up some of their dreams for now in order to hold fast to
what is essential, which is to save lives. At this point, moreover, before it is all
over, it will perhaps’ be necessary to raise our voices.

ALBERT CAMUS

“These are the relations that must be extended whenever possible, because what is at stake is the building
of a living society within the doomed society in which we are living now. Men who would assert in everyday political debate that the only real issue is to build an international society; who would prove that all
other disputes, both constitutional and electoral, are pointless, and who would insist on international solidarity and organization; who would simply define the common

and provisional values they find indis-

pensable for rejecting murder and pursuing their goals; who would demand general abolition of the death
penalty in the West; who would reject all the advantages of society as they find it today and accept only the
duties and responsibilities that tie them to others, who would in all circumstances prefer preaching to domination and dialogue to insult, and who would bring to the press and above all to the schools she principles
of conduct set forth here; those men...”
75 Although Camus had often previously expressed his revulsion at the death penalty, this was perhaps the
first time he phrased it this way.
76 In the manuscript, the phrase “I do not know” was omitted, and the sentence continued with the next
sentence as its second clause.
77 Manuscript: “it might perhaps be necessary.”

274

CHAPTER

3

November 30, 1946

Neither Victims nor Executioners

Toward Dialogue ’®
Yes, it might be necessary to raise our voices.’”? I have thus far refrained®° from

calling upon the power of the emotions. What is crushing us today is a historical logic that we created out of whole cloth, on the knots in which we are about

to choke. Emotion is not what is needed to slice through the knots of a logic
gone awry. Only reason can do that—reason that knows its limits. Yet I do not
want to end with the suggestion that the future of the world can dispense with
the powers of indignation and love. I am well aware that it takes a lot to get people mobilized and that it is hard to gird oneself for a battle in which the objectives are so limited and there is barely a glimmer of hope. But the point is not to
dragoon people into acting. On the contrary, the key is that they must not be
dragged and that they must have a clear idea of what they are doing.
To save what can still be saved just to make the future possible: that is the
great motivating force, the reason for passion and sacrifice. What is required is
simply that we reflect and clearly decide whether we must add to the sum
of human suffering for still indiscernible ends, whether we must acquiesce
while the world blankets itself with arms and brother again kills®! brother, or

whether, to the contrary, we must economize as much as possible on bloodshed
and pain simply to give other generations, better armed than we are, their
chance.*”
I, for one, am practically certain that I have made my choice. And having chosen, it seemed to me that ought to speak, to say that I would never count myself

among people of whatever stripe who are willing to countenance murder, and I
would draw whatever consequence followed from this.*’ Now I have said my
piece, and I shall end. But before that, I would like readers to know something

of the spirit in which I have been writing thus far.
We are being asked to love or to hate one or another country or people. But
a few of us are only too well aware of our similarity to our fellow human beings
to accept this choice. The right way to love the Russian people, in recognition of

78 No separate manuscript exists for this text, but it incorporates a passage originally intended for “A New
Social Contract.”
79 Repetition (with slight alteration) of the final clause of the previous article.

*° The whole passage from “I have thus far refrained” to “indignation and love” appears in the typescript
of “A New Social Contract,” where it is followed by a passage that would ultimately appear in “The Century of Fear,” which is crossed out and replaced by the heavily corrected handwritten text that is reproduced here, beginning with “I am well aware.”
81 Manuscript: “brother oppresses brother.”
82 Manuscript: “bloodshed and pain [and] reject terror simply to ensure the existence of other generations
that will be better armed than we are.” The manuscript ends here.
83 Here again, the affinity with The Rebel deserves mention.

NOVEMBER

19-30,

1946

275

what they have never ceased to be—what Tolstoy and Gorky called the world’s
leavening—is not to wish upon them the vagaries of power but to spare them
a new and terrible bloodletting after all they have suffered in the past. The same
is true of the American people and of the unfortunate people of Europe. This is
a fundamental truth, but of a kind all too often forgotten in the tumult of
the day.
Indeed, what we need to resist today is fear and silence and the division of
minds and souls that these entail. What we must defend is dialogue and communication worldwide. Servitude, injustice, and falsehood are scourges that
interfere with such communication and prevent such dialogue. That is why we
must reject them. But those scourges are today the very stuff of history, and
many people therefore look upon them as necessary evils. It is also true that we
cannot escape from history, since we are in it up to our necks. But we can aspire
to do battle within the historical arena in order to save from history that part of
man which does not belong to it. That is all I wanted to say. Before closing, in
any case, I would like to try to define my attitude, and the spirit in which I wrote
these articles, a little more clearly, and I ask my readers to reflect on what I am
about to say with open minds.
A vast experiment has now set all the nations of the world on a course
governed by the laws of power and domination. I do not say that this experiment
should be prevented from continuing. It needs no help from us, and for the
moment it cares nothing for those who oppose it. Hence the experiment will go
on. I simply raise one question: what will happen if this experiment fails, if the
logic of history on which so many people are now relying proves wrong? What
will happen if, despite two or three wars, despite the sacrifice of several generations and not a few values, our grandchildren, supposing they exist, find
themselves no closer to achieving the universal society? The survivors to the
experiment will not even have the strength to bear witness to their own agony.
Since the experiment is continuing and it is inevitable that it will continue
for some time to come, it is not a bad thing that some people set themselves the
goal of preserving, in the apocalyptic period that awaits us, the modest way of
thinking that does not claim to solve all problems but is always ready at a
moment’s notice to ascribe a meaning to everyday life. What is essential is that
these people weigh carefully, once and for all, the price that they will be obliged
to pay.
Now I can end. What I think needs to be done at the present time is simply
this: in the midst of a murderous world, we must decide to reflect on murder and
choose. If we can do this, then we will divide ourselves into two groups: those

who if need be would be willing to commit murder or become accomplices to
murder, and those who would refuse to do so with every fiber of their being.
Since this awful division exists, we would be making some progress, at least, if

we were clear about it. Across five continents, an endless struggle between violence and preaching will rage in the years to come. And it is true that the former
is a thousand times more likely to succeed than the latter. But I have always

276

CHAPTER

3

believed that if people who placed their hopes in the human condition were

mad, those who despaired of events were cowards. Henceforth there will be only
one honorable choice: to wager everything on the belief that in the end words

will prove stronger than bullets.*4
ALBERT CaMuUS

84 These last words inevitably recall the interview that Camus
gave to Demain in 1957, which appeared
under the title “Our Generation’s Wager.”

CHAPTER 4

March 17-June 3, 1947

After the departure of Pascal Pia, Camus served for two and a half months as editor
in chief of Combat. He published six editorials and two articles, all titled and signed.
There is a certain unity to these texts. They reflect their author's disillusionment and
fears in regard to France’s domestic, colonial, and international policies. Like the previous articles, moreover, they attest to Camus’ exalted conception of journalism.
By January his name was appearing in the columns of the newspaper, but it was
as a writer that he responded to Jean Desternes’s survey of American literature.
Although this text obviously does not have the same status as the others, it seems
legitimate to include it in its chronological place, in that it serves as a reminder that
the journalist was a/so a novelist: he was finishing The Plague, which would appear
in June. The publication of the book was greeted warmly, including an article by
Maurice Nadeau. On June 14, the paper announced that “Albert Camus has
received the Prix des Critiques,” and the announcement was accompanied by a
picture and a comment by Dominique Arban: “At Combat, each of us feels that
something good has happened to us personally.”

January 17, 1947
“What do you think of American literature?
— ‘Literature of the basic,’ answers Albert Camus.”!

Of course it’s a fashion. But every fashion has its reasons. Americans are
astonished by the success their writers have been enjoying in Europe. ([Erskine]

Caldwell sells ten times as many books in Paris as in New York.) I’m not.
The American technique in novel writing is one of easy fluency—hence it will
always do well.” But if you compare a Steinbeck to a Melville,* you'll see that the

1 Jean Desternes’s survey of American literature, which began on January 3, was published in the literary
section of the paper.
2 In an interview published in Les Nowvelles littéraires on November 15, 1945, Camus had said that “the

American technique in novel writing seems to me to lead to a dead end. True, I used it in The Stranger.

But that was because it suited my purpose, which was to describe a man who was apparently without conscience. If the method is generalized, it leads to a world of automata and creatures of instinct. That would

be a considerable loss. So even while giving the American novel its due, I would give a hundred Hemingways for one —— or one Benjamin Constant. And I regret the influence of American literature on
so many young writers.”
3 Camus’ admiration of Melville is well-known. See the ae he wrote to Les Ecrivains célebres (Paris:
Editions Mazenod, 1952), vol. 3, reprinted in Théatre, Récits, Nouvelles (Paris: Gallimard [Pléiade], 1991),
pp. 1899-1903.

278

CHAPTER

4

American literature of the nineteenth century, whose greatness was universal, has
been replaced by a magazine literature.
But how do you explain the influence of what Americans are producing on our
literature?
I see two explanations, one of which is obvious, while the other is more personal, and I offer it for what it is worth. The first is the taste for efficiency and
speed, a predilection that is very widespread nowadays and which I do not disdain, but which has lately been introduced into narrative techniques. The narrative is silent about everything that until recently constituted the proper subject
of literature, namely, to put it crudely, the inner life. Man is described but never
explained or interpreted. The result is that you can write a novel today using only
your memory and your eyes. All the rest—inward experience, meditation,
knowledge of man and of the world—is not necessary. The novel is thus placed
within reach of everyone. If you can see, you can write, and since everyone can
see, everyone can write, etc.

And the second explanation?
This is more in the nature of an impression, which I offer in the most tentative way. Here it is: we get a misleading impression of American novels when we
read them in French, because we have a tradition of (and taste for) compression,

insinuation, and understatement, so we take a technique that never says anything
important and impute to it the intention to say a range of things that may never
have been intended. We read Of Mice and Men’ in the same spirit in which we
read La Princesse de Cleves.’ But the characters in American novels, unlike the

prince de Cleves, are really basic beings. If the prince de Cléves says nothing, it
is because his pain is so acute that in the end he will die of it. If Steinbeck’s
George says nothing, it is because he has nothing to say, other than an overwhelmingly powerful but confused feeling, which is never truthfully articulated.
In other words, the art of the American novel strikes you as more elementary than
universal?
Exactly, it is universal only at the level of the elementary.° The technique is
peerless when it comes to describing a man with no apparent inner life (and I
used it in this way). But to use it generally, as we are seeing today, would be tantamount to eliminating nine-tenths of what we treasure in art and life. This
would be a tremendous loss. The [American] literature that we read (with the

4 By John Steinbeck.
> In July 1943, in a special issue of the journal Confluences (nos. 21-24) devoted to “Problems of the
Novel,” Camus published a very fine articled entitled “Lintelligence et l’échafaud” on the classical French

novel, in which he gives a great deal of space to Madame de Lafayette and expresses his admiration for La
Princesse de Cleves. See ThéAtre, Récits, Nouvelles, pp. 1887-1894. See also Carnets II, pp. 60-62. When
Mauriac responded to the same survey (Combat, January 26-27), he said: “Albert Camus told me recently
that there was nothing better than La Princesse de Cleves.”
6 See, in Carnets IT, p. 114, this note from 1943: “On the American novel: it aims for the universal. Like
classicism. But whereas classicism aims for an eternal universal, contemporary literature, owing to circumstances (interpenetration of borders), aims at a historical universal. This is not man for all times but
man for all places.”

MARCH

17-JUNE

3,

1947

279

exception of Faulkner’ and two or three others who, like him, have had no success over there) is eminently useful as a source for cultural study, but it bears only
the most distant relationship to art.
Is there a social explanation for this phenomenon?
There is always a social explanation for what we see in art. Only it doesn’t
explain anything important. Nevertheless, it seems clear to me that the commercialization of literature, the influence of advertising, the prospect of making

millions of dollars on one book if it is basic enough and self-indulgent enough
to become a best seller are partial explanations. Writers are not saints, and even
if they were, they would not be writers. How many European writers would hesitate if given the choice between becoming a millionaire manufacturer of books
and remaining a great but unknown talent? If there are great writers in America
today, there is a good chance that we don’t know who they are. Think of the
bitter detachment and independence of the great Melville, who died in squalor,
unknown to his contemporaries, surrounded by his neglected masterpieces.
Think of Poe, who first won praise in Europe, or Faulkner, whose novels appear
in editions of a few thousand while the unspeakable Forever Amber® sells
millions.
There has been a debate around For Whom the Bell Tolls, has there not?
Yes, and quite a pointless one. Hemingway should be given his due. The Sun
Also Rises is a very good book. But his book about Spain is a children’s book compared with Malraux’s Espoir (Man’ Hope).” I was very disappointed that he chose
to stick an MGM style love story into the middle of the prodigious events that
took place in Spain. You can’t mix Hollywood with Guernica.
Are you completely hostile to American literature?
No, because I’ve found in America both the reasons for this literature and the

promise that it will someday be surpassed, if it hasn’t been already. And I am in
sympathy with some of those reasons (in my country, in North Africa, people
also live in this brief and violent way), as I am with the promise. America is
bursting with still unused vitality, and it is not done surprising the world. But it
may surprise the world in quite facile and violent ways (as one says that a color
is “violent”), or it may do so by resurrecting the tranquil and boundless genius
that has already produced Melville and Hawthorne.'® America will choose. But
the best thing we can do for it is not to imitate its most vulgar works but to stick
to the rigorous realm of art where its greatest minds have already staked out a
place.
To set an example?
No, we can no longer serve as an example for America. It has its own course
to follow, as we have ours, which is no longer easy. But we can sometimes tell

7 In 1957 Camus adapted Requiem for a Nun for the stage.
8 By Kathleen Winsor. The book was a great success in France.
9 Camus greatly admired Malraux.
10 Camus probably felt some affinity with Nathaniel Hawthorne. In Carnets Il, p. 296, he reproduced a
comment Melville had made about him: “He did not believe, and he could not be satisfied with unbelief.”

280

CHAPTER

4

America that it is wrong, to help it out, and in the end we may be right. Art is
the only realm in which honesty and toughness are sometimes rewarded. When
The Grapes of Wrath and Tobacco Road have been forgotten, people will still be
talking about Moby Dick and The Scarlet Letter.'' Our role is to say so, if that is
what we think.
Perhaps one ought to modify this slightly. The best works are not always the
most influential works, but the worst works in a country’s literature sometimes
serve as vehicles for what is good in the greatest works. And to complete the circle, bad influences may thus stimulate great works. There is in art a kind of justice or miracle, you might say.
Conclusion?
Stay calm.

March 17, 1947

The Deaf and Dumb Republic’?

The therapeutic silence is over for now.’
After a hiatus of more than four weeks, our newspaper is back on the newsstands. To be sure, various benevolent observers had predicted its demise. Clearly
these reports were premature. Other reports, from sources no less friendly, hinted
that Combat had suffered the ultimate misfortune of virtue by selling itself to
wealthy libertines.
Alas, it seems that the only virtue that Combat can claim for itself is the kind

that lacks intelligence, by which we mean the kind that is stupid enough to
risk dying of hunger. Poor but free before the strike, Combat is back, poorer than

ever but still free and determined to stay that way. Just as it lived on the income
from its sales and advertising a month ago, it continues today to rely solely on
its readers.
But we will save that subject for later. For now we owe it to our readers only
to provide certain information and to the government to relate certain truths.
This interminable strike has been a veritable financial hemorrhage for all newspapers. It has threatened their very survival, and this has been especially true of
independent papers. A series of governments now bears the immense responsibility of never having adopted a statute regulating the press despite our incessant
appeals, and the extended duration of this latest strike has only increased the
likelihood that newspapers backed by money will replace those dailies that have

'| The Grapes of Wrath is by John Steinbeck, Tobacco Road by Erskine Caldwell, Moby Dick by Herman
Melville, and The Scarlet Letter by Nathaniel Hawthorne.
12 Editorial.
'3 Because of a printers’ strike, Combat did not appear from February 15 to March 17. This long hiatus
undermined its precarious financial position and ultimately led to its demise.

MeATRIGCH)

4175-2
U NIE 3),

1:9:4:7

281

managed to remain free. The present government has no excuse to offer in this
regard.
It has no excuse because, despite the obligations of an austerity policy
approved by both the newspapers and the unions, it refused from the outset to
assume its responsibilities. In the early days of the strike, Prime Minister
Ramadier" refused to intervene in the conflict, which he described as “not being
of a political character.” The two parties in contention, both working within the
framework of the austerity policy, tried to reach an agreement in which wage
increases would be granted only in return for worker agreement to improvements
in the production process. In agreement with the government, newspapers were
scheduled to appear seven days a week. On March 10 and 12, two agreements
were signed, only to be rejected by the government. On March 14, the government even reversed its decision to authorize a seventh day of publication. Afterward, the ministers involved accompanied M. Vincent Auriol” on a trip to
Toulouse, the urgent character of which is well-known.
In keeping with an old tradition, the government therefore took the position
that a policy of nonintervention in fact meant intervention, but only in a negative sense. Neither liberal nor dirigiste, it chose to let the market have its way
while blocking all progress toward a workable solution. To put it rhetorically, this

might be considered an attitude but not a doctrine. And since plain talk is essential, we will say that the government, which does not exist so far as doctrine is
concerned, seems to us suspect in its attitude.
At a time when striking butchers no longer honor any meat ration and legislators who presume to lead the nation without being able to control themselves
try to pacify Indochina by participating in infamous duels,'° while a few of us
persist in worrying anxiously about the fate of the freedom that was for years the
primary concern that kept us going, the general silence of the press, the suppression of press forums on the radio along with broadcasts featuring journalists
who cover parliament, and surreptitious censorship of broadcast editorials do not
suggest that the policy adopted is one that can be openly avowed. It is merely a
policy of silence of the sort that totalitarian regimes execute more skillfully and,
to be honest, with greater candor.

M. Ramadier reportedly stated that the silence of the press saved the Republic from a dark conspiracy, which, to hear him tell it, made use of this newspaper. This is news to us, but it sheds a new light on the singular notions of a
republican prime minister so taken with the eloquence of his ministers as to
believe that no one else serves the cause of democratic truth, and indeed that
anyone else in the country who speaks out can only be strengthening the hand
of what are commonly referred to as reactionary conspiracies. The Republic of

14 Paul Ramadier had been prime minister since January 22, 1947.
15 Vincent Auriol was elected president of the Republic on January 16, 1947.
16 Allusion to a duel with pistols in which Gaston Defferre was involved.

282

CHAPTER

4

which M. Ramadier dreams, in short, is a deaf and dumb one that can be subjected with impunity to the therapeutic methods of Sganarelle.’”
We, for our part, believe that there is no democracy without dialogue’® and
that every policy needs to be balanced and constrained by the judgments it warrants. Since we have regained our freedom of speech, it should be used today to

forcefully denounce an attitude that deliberately runs the risk of destroying the
only values that seem to us worth fighting for along with the only privilege that
we defend with all our might, namely, the privilege of saying here, every day, in
total freedom, what we think is just and what we believe deserves to be
condemned.
ALBERT CAMUS

March 21, 1947

Radio 47'°

I do not have the privilege of knowing M. Max Régnier.”® For want of time and
perhaps also of taste, I rarely listen to the Radio Nationale. I did, however, listen
to its news during the newspaper strike, out of an innocent desire to be
informed. But innocence is never well treated in this world, and I learned fairly
quickly that what distinguishes our radio network is its mysterious faculty of
announcing events that never took place and its unusual readiness to present systematically biased reports. In that department it has to be granted that our radio
beats our daily press by several lengths, which I would have thought humanly
impossible.
In short, I never listened to M. Max Régnier. Like everyone else, I know that

his program was highly successful, and I was happy for him, since I have a disinterested taste for satirical songwriters. I also know that M. Régnier is accused
of having undermined the credit of the state by inconsiderately relating certain
declarations made by our minister of finance. If true, M. Régnier was surely in
the wrong. Being ignorant of the facts, however, I hesitate to judge the substance
of the case. Still, the method of banning what one was incapable of preventing
may be worthy of a word or two of comment.
The most remarkable effect of this tactic has certainly been to give increased
importance to a program that would otherwise have been less effective. In this
respect, the government has not acted politically enough. In another respect,

'7 Allusion to Moliére’s play Le Médecin maleré lui.
'8 Tt is hardly necessary to point out how much Camus insists on the need for dialogue in politics as
elsewhere.
19 Editorial.
20 The daily radio broadcast of the very famous satirical songwriter Max Régnier had just been canceled.
He had made a number of jokes about the fall of the franc and the scant resources of the Banque de France
and was in effect accused of “undermining the credit of the state.”

MARCH

17-JUNE

38,

1947

283

however, it may have acted far too politically. Such touchy intolerance of a few
jokes may be justified by a desire to protect the public credit, but it seems less
legitimate when it is also directed against the last glimmers of freedom left in
broadcasting. The case of M. Régnier is of no importance in itself, but the whole
range of measures of which this decision is one is far more shocking.
Of course it is always possible to prohibit the open forum of journalists covering parliament. (In a related note, I call M. Ramadier’s attention to the fact
that the Paris Forum remains a credit to broadcasting and that it should therefore be canceled.) One can always truncate the editorials cited in the press
reviews, cancel after the first infraction any program that does not use the sound
of marching feet as its background, and generally impose sanctions on any emission that to any degree makes up for the partisan character of a clearly subservient broadcast medium. But in doing so one deprives oneself of the right to
denounce conspiracies against the Republic, and one runs the risk of imitating
M. Daladier, who in 1939 imagined that he was sending Frenchmen off to fight
for democracy while at the same time he did away with that democracy by means
of edicts and emergency decrees.”!
One of our great statesmen is supposed to have asked the following question,
which has a particular resonance in this age of propaganda: “So you believe in
the news, do you?” We count ourselves among those who nurse certain reasonable illusions in this regard. Yes, we believe in the news. Standing with the imbeciles, by which I mean those who are not prepared to commit murder in order
to win an argument, free speech is the only thing we have left to defend what we
believe to be true. That is why we cannot allow that freedom to be tampered
with, whether out of inadvertence, stupidity, or calculation, for it is a freedom

that is defended as much by song and public debate as by philosophical treatises
and political speeches.
ALBERT CAMUS

March 22, 1947

No Excuse for This?”

Yesterday's issue of this newspaper contained a courageous later to M. Ramadier
from Father Riquet,” a resister and deporte. I have no idea what Christians may
think about this letter, but my conscience will not allow me to let it pass

21 Camus’ contempt for Daladier has been evident throughout these editorials. See the article of
September 12, 1944, n. 63, p. 35, and of May 12, 1945, p. 196.
22 Article, set off in a framed box in publication. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter “Deux ans aprés.”

23 Father Michel Riquet, a resister deported to Mauthausen and later Dachau, was then pastor of
Notre-Dame of Paris, a position in which he remained until 1955. His widely noticed sermons dealt with
the major issues of the day from a Christian point of view. In the Joanovici case, convents and religious
homes were searched by the police, and monks and nuns accused of harboring former members of the
Milice

284

CHAPTER

4

without comment. Indeed, it seems to me that unbelievers should feel even more
obliged than others to express outrage at the unspeakable attitude that a part of
the press has adopted in this case.
I have no desire to justify anything whatsoever. If it is true that certain religious conspired against the state, they should indeed be subject to the laws that
this country has adopted. To date, however, France has not, to my knowledge,
countenanced the idea that responsibility might become collective. Before so
many journalists and party hacks denounced convents as dens of murderers and
traitors and the entire Church as the center of a vast and obscure conspiracy, one
wishes that they had simply taken the trouble to remember.
Had they done that, they might have recalled a time when certain convents
camouflaged a very different sort of conspiracy with their silence. They might
have held up as an example to the tepid and faltering the actions of a few heroic
souls, who without lengthy discussion quit their pacific communities for the tortured ones of the camps of destruction. Since we were among the first to
denounce the failings of certain religious dignitaries,“ we have the right to point
this out at a time when other journalists neglect the duties and dignity of their
profession and transform themselves into slander-mongers.
Whatever responsibility must be borne by a government that has clearly
revealed only what suited itself and that chose the most propitious moment for
doing so, the responsibility of journalists is greater still, for they denied what they
knew and averted their eyes from what remains our sole justification, namely, the
suffering we shared for four years. For newspapers that enjoyed the honor of
publishing underground, this is an unforgivable failing, an affront to the noblest
of memories, and a challenge flung in the face of justice. When Franc-Tireur,”
responding to Father Riquet without printing his letter, screams, “Who is still
faithful to the spirit of the Resistance? Those who are trying to save the torturers of deported priests from justice or those who want to punish them?” it forgets that if there is one justice that should be applied to the enemy, there is
another, superior in spirit, that ought to be applied to brothers in arms. In
strictest justice, an effort should have been made not to lump a vast number of
innocents together with a handful of the accused while gleefully ignoring all
whose throats had been slit. There is definitely no excuse for this.

were arrested. The minister of the interior, Edouard Depreux, accused them of“protecting militiamen and
other collaborators.” On March 21, Combat published Father Riquet’s letter of protest to Prime Minister
Ramadier. In this letter, which also appeared in L’Aube, Riquet recalled his own enlistment in the Resistance and deportation and spoke out against the climate of slander, hatred, and inquisition he saw as a
leftover from the German occupation.
*4 See the editorials of September 16 and December 26, 1944, pp. 38 and 152.
5 On March 18, 1945, Franc-Tireur ran the following headline: “La Santé [Prison] Will Not Be Short of

Chaplains.” On the front page, under the title “And Now for the Cassock Conspiracy,” the paper published
a long article by Madeleine Jacob, which spoke of “networks” going all the way to the Vatican and noted:
“Tt was already public knowledge that the convents steadfastly offered the widest and most solicitous asylum to all who had belonged to the Milice, the L.V.E, the Gestapo, and, to put it in a nutshell, Vichy. The
beneficiaries of this asylum merely had to know which door to knock on with which secret knock,”

MARCH

17-JUNE

3,

1947

285

But what good does it do to protest, really? The calculating spirit is deaf; we
are preaching to the wilderness. Who cares anymore about the Resistance and its
honor? After two years in which so many hopes were wrecked, it is with a heavy
heart that we repeat what we have said in the past.”® Still, we must. We speak
only about what we know, and we feel ashamed for those we love, and for them
alone. I can hear the mockery already. “Guess what! Combat now stands with the
Church.” That, of course, is without importance. As unbelievers, the only hatred
we feel is for hatred itself, and so long as there is a breath of freedom in this country, we will go on refusing to join those who scream insults and stand only with
those who bear witness, whoever they may be.”
ALBERT CAMUS

April 22, 1947

The Choice”®

It seems that one must choose.” Nothing is more urgent, to believe those who
press us to make a choice. With them this is an idée fixe. “What are you waiting
for? Are you for the R.PE* or against it? There is something a little comical
about such insistence. After all, the house is not yet on fire. Fragrant flower carts
wend their way through springtime Paris,*! and the air is mild. The leisure of liberty is almost palpable. In political heads, however, an obsessional fever rages,
and so we are forced to set down some basic truths. Here they are.
Combat, if memory serves, was not created to be the newspaper of a party. It
was created so that a few men could come together to exercise free criticism while
respecting the nuances of their respective opinions. Nothing more and nothing
less. Just because General de Gaulle has organized a movement does not mean
that we have to clamber up on stage alongside him. Until further notice, the
R.PE is nothing other than a new element in the political life of this country. It
is therefore appropriate that it be treated exactly the same as the other parties. In

26 Tt was no doubt this sentence that justified the title given to this chapter in Actuelles. This was not an
error, contrary to Roger Quilliot’s contention in a note (Essais, p. 1511).

27 See La Peste, p. 278: “This chronicle . . . could only stand as witness to what had to be done.” See also,
among other texts, “Le Témoin de la liberté,” a lecture given in December 1948 and reprinted in Actuelles.
Essais, pp. 399-406.
28 Editorial.
29 This editorial led to a break between Camus and Albert Ollivier, who, as a backer of de Gaulle and supporter of the R.PE, had wanted to respond to it. See his letter, quoted in the introduction, p. xxxi.
30 General de Gaulle had just founded the Rassemblement du Peuple frangais. Spurred on by René
Capitant and André Malraux, among others, this “movement,” which refused to consider itself a party,
saw itself as united “in the effort to renovate and reform the state.” It drew people hostile to communism,

including many former resisters. It lasted ten years.
31 Cf. La Peste, p. 11: “Spring was evident only in the quality of the air and the baskets of flowers that
modest vendors brought in from the suburbs.”

286

CHAPTER

4

that light, excommunication and worship strike us as equally puerile attitudes.
After all, a certain number of Frenchmen share our view that the national
dilemma is not entirely summed up by the choice between de Gaulle and Thorez
and that it is still permissible to maintain one’s sangfroid.
As one might expect, our columns will not be used to insult General de
Gaulle. We, at least, have not lost our memories. But the justice we accord him
is compatible, we believe, with independent judgment. Just as we were able to
criticize him in the most uncompromising way (and frequently alone) when he
presided over the government, so, too, will we judge the R.PE by its actions and

not by its principles, several of which remain vague. These are simple ideas, but
simplicity nowadays seems rather unusual. One has to be more specific.
It is no secret that the party to which we feel closest is the Socialist Party (with
all the disappointments that entails). Despite this, the Socialist position in practice has not always thrilled us, and we have never hesitated to say so in an appropriately objective form. Similarly, while General de Gaulle is for us the man who
restored the French Republic (which gives him certain rights), he is also the man

who agreed to the election law from which today’s parties derive their strength.
This, in our view, makes it difficult for him to offer a truly telling critique of the
system organized by those same patties.
I can hear the objection that will be raised to this line of argument: we treat
ourselves too handsomely. I’m not certain of this, and we here can attest that our
role is not the easiest. In the end, though, it may be good for this country that a
forum continues to exist far from the deafening tumult of partisan voices, a

forum where independent minds can still bear witness without pretentiousness
or fear. It is good that freedom can still be exercised, at least for a little while, and
even if it must swim against the tide. In the age of lies, even the clumsiest frankness is preferable to the best-orchestrated ruse. Here, at least, it is still possible to
breathe, as lonely as the effort may sometimes seem. Those are our reasons. Now
as in the past, the purpose of Combat is to avoid the blindness born of enthusiasm as well as hatred and preserve what few grounds continue to sustain our
fragile hope.
ALBERT CaMUS

April 30, 1947
Democracy and Modesty”
The new parliamentary year has begun.*? Wheeling, dealing, and chicanery are
about to resume. The same problems that have eluded us for the past two years
will face the same dead ends. And every time a free individual tries to say in

* Editorial. Reprinted in Actuelles, chapter “Deux ans apres,” with the erroneous date “February 1947.”
33 The beginning of the parliamentary year coincided with the end of the Easter recess.

MARCH

17-JUNE

3,

1947

287

simple language what he thinks of all this, an army of watchdogs of every ilk and
stripe barks furiously to drown out any response.
None of this gladdens the heart, of course. Fortunately, those who nurse only
reasonable hopes continue to have healthy hearts. Those people in France who
have experienced the full brunt of the past ten years have at least learned not to
fear for themselves but only for others. They have come to terms with the worst.
They remain calm and steady. Let us therefore repeat calmly and steadily, with
the unalterable naiveté that others so kindly see in us, the basic principles without which, in our view, no acceptable political life is possible.
There may be no good political regime, but democracy is surely the least bad
of the alternatives. Democracy is inseparable from the notion of party, but the
notion of party can easily do without democracy. That happens when one party
or group imagines itself to be in possession of the absolute truth. That is why the
Assembly and deputies today need to ingest a dose of modesty.
Today's world offers any number of grounds for modesty. Is it possible to forget that neither the National Assembly nor any government possesses the means
to solve the problems that beset us? The proof of this assertion can be seen in the
fact that in dealing with those problems, our legislators have invariably run up
against international disagreements. Are we short of coal? The reason is that the
English refuse to let us have coal from the Ruhr and the Russians refuse to let us
have coal from the Saar. Are we short of bread? M. Blum and M. Thorez hurl
back and forth statistics about the tons and quintals of wheat that either Moscow
or the United States should have shipped to us. There is no better proof that the
role of the Assembly and government can for now only be an administrative one
and that France, in short, is dependent on others for what she needs.

The only thing to do is to acknowledge this, draw the necessary consequences,
and try, for instance, to work together to define the international order without
which no domestic problem can ever be resolved anywhere. In other words, we
need to forget about ourselves for a while. If we did, deputies and parties would
acquire some of that modesty that good and genuine democracies require. After
all, a democrat is a person who admits that his adversary may be right, who
therefore allows him to speak, and who agrees to consider his arguments. When
parties and people are so convinced by their own arguments that they are willing to resort to violence to silence those who disagree with them, democracy no

longer exists. Modesty is therefore salutary in republics at all times. France no
longer possesses the means of power. Leave it to others to say whether that is
good or bad. It is in any case an opportunity. Until we either regain our power
or renounce it, the possibility remains for us to set an example. But France can
set an example for the world only if it proclaims the truths it is able to discover
within its borders. In other words, it must demonstrate by the actions of its government that domestic democracy cannot be complete until an international
34 Here Camus returns to the theme of many of the editorials of 1944 and 1945. In November 1948 he
published an article in Caliban entitled “La démocratie, exercice de la modestie,” which continues this
text. See Essais, pp. 1580-1583.

288

CHAPTER

4

order has been established and that such an international order cannot be democratic unless it renounces violence and its attendant distress.

As the reader will already have divined, these meditations are intentionally
untimely.”
ALBERT CAMUS

May 7, 1947
Anniversary

On May 8, 1945, Germany signed the most important surrender agreement in
all history. General Jodl*® stated at the time that he believed “the surrender document places Germany and the German people in the hands of the conquerors.”
Eighteen months later, Jodl was hanged at Niiremberg. It was not possible to
hang 70 million Germans, however; Germany is still in the hands of the conquerors; and this anniversary of the surrender is not a day of rejoicing. Victory
also has its inescapable obligations.
The problem is that Germany is still on trial, and that makes it difficult, especially for a Frenchman, to say or do reasonable things when it comes to the
German question. Two years ago, on Dénitz’s orders, the Flensburg radio*’
broadcast an appeal in which the provisional leaders of the defeated Reich
expressed their hope that “the atmosphere of hatred that envelops Germany
everywhere will gradually give way to a spirit of reconciliation among nations,
without which there can be no recovery.” This lucidity came five years too late,
and D6nitz’s hope was only half realized. The hatred of Germany has given way
to a bizarre sentiment in which wariness and a vague rancor are mixed with an
old indifference. As for the spirit of reconciliation—
The three minutes of silence that followed the announcement of Germany's
surrender has thus been extended to an endless state of dumbness, in which
occupied Germany continues to live in stunned disbelief, somewhat scornfully
neglected by the rest of the world. No doubt this is due to the fact that Nazism,

like all predatory regimes, could expect anything from the world but to be forgotten. It began our apprenticeship in hatred. Perhaps that hatred could have
been set aside, since human memory evaporates as rapidly as history moves
on. But the calculation and cold, meticulous precision of the Hitlerian regime

3° The phrase “untimely meditations” is taken from Nietzsche, and Camus had used it before as the title
of an article published in Soir-Républicain on November 6, 1939, and signed “Nero.” See Fragments d’un
combat, p. 637. Here it ironically contradicts the volume title.
%6 Alfred Jodl was a general who was very close to Hitler and who played an important role in devising
German strategy in World War II. As Dénitz’s chief of staff, he signed the surrender agreement for
Germany in Rheims on May 7, 1945. Tried at Niiremberg for war crimes, he was sentenced to death and
hanged.
*7 Dénitz announced the German surrender from the city of Flensburg in Schleswig-Holstein.

MARCH

17-JUNE

3,

1947

289

continue to weigh on countless hearts. The functionaries of hatred are not as
quickly forgotten as the possessed. This is a valuable warning to all of us.
So there are some things that people of my generation can never forget, but I
don’t think that any of us would want, on this anniversary, to trample a defeated
enemy underfoot. Absolute justice is impossible, just as eternal hatred and eternal love are impossible. That is why a return to reason is essential. The Age of
the Apocalypse is over.** That of mediocre organization and compromise without grandeur has begun. Wisdom and a predilection for happiness counsel that
the latter is to be preferred to the former, even though we know that mediocrity
leads to apocalypse. But this respite allows time for reflection, and today that
reflection should dissuade us from reviving dormant hatreds and lead us instead
to establish a proper order in Germany.
Regardless of our inward passions and of the memories of our rebellions, we
know full well that there can be no peace in the world without a pacified Germany, and there can be no pacification of Germany if it is forever banished from
the international order. If dialogue with Germany is still possible, it is reason that
insists upon its resumption. We must add just as forcefully, moreover, that the
German problem is in fact a secondary one, though some seek to transform it
into the most important issue of the day in order to divert our attention from
what is glaringly obvious, namely, that Germany today is not so much a threat
as a prize in the contest between Russia and America. The only urgent problems
of our time are those that bear on the relations—agreement or hostility—
between these two powers.*” If agreement can be reached, Germany and several
other countries will face a reasonable future. Otherwise, Germany will be submerged in a broad general defeat. What this means is that France should prefer
the application of reason to the politics of power in all circumstances. The choice
today is between actions that will probably be ineffective and those that will certainly be criminal. This, in my view, is not a difficult choice to make.
In any case, the effort to employ reason is proof of self-confidence. It is proof
that we feel strong enough, come what may, to go on fighting and pleading for
justice and freedom. Today’s world is not a hopeful place. We may soon find ourselves once again facing the Apocalypse. But the surrender of Germany—a victory against all reason and against all hope—will stand for many years to come
as a symbol of the impotence of force that Napoleon once described in such
melancholy terms: “In the long run, Fontanes, the spirit is always mightier than
the sword.”“° In the long run, yes—but of course it is a good rule of conduct to
believe that the free spirit is always right and will always triumph in the end, for

38 Camus may have in mind not only the Apocalypse of the New Testament but also the section of
Malraux’s Man’ Fate that follows “The Lyric Illusion” and is entitled “Experiencing the Apocalypse.”
39 Once again it is worth pointing out the clarity of Camus’ political vision.
40 Camus was quoting from memory a sentence he had recorded in his notebooks, with which he began
an article entitled “Pour preparer le fruit,” which appeared in La Tunisie frangaise in January 1941.
This text was reprinted in 1954 under the title “Les Amandiers” in L’Eté. ““Do you know,’ said Napoleon
to Fontanes, ‘what I admire most in the world? It is the impotence of force when it comes to founding

290

CHAPTER

4

when the spirit ceases to be right, all mankind will be wrong and human history
will have lost all meaning.
ALBERT CAMUS

May 10, 1947
Contagion

There can be no doubt that France is a far less racist country than others I have
had a chance to visit. That is why it is impossible not to denounce the signs of
this stupid and criminal malady that have lately reared their heads in one place
or another.
A morning newspaper ran this banner headline on page one: “Raseta the murderer.” That is one sign, because quite obviously the Raseta case is currently
under investigation, and it is impossible to publicize such a serious charge in
such a manner before the investigation is complete.*”
I should say at once that the only nonsuspect news I have about events in
Madagascar consists of accounts of atrocities committed by the rebels and reports
on certain aspects of the repression. I therefore feel nothing but equal repugnance
for the methods of both sides. The question, however, is whether or not M. Raseta
is a murderer. There can be no doubt that no honest man would presume to make
up his mind about this until the investigation is complete. In any case, no journalist would have dared to use such a headline if the alleged murderer had been
named Dupont or Durand. But M. Raseta is Malagasy, so he must somehow or
other be a murderer. Such a headline is therefore of no consequence.
Nor is this the only sign of racism in France. No one is surprised to learn that
the unfortunate student who killed his fiancée used the presence of “sidis,”** as
they say, in the forest of Sénart to divert suspicion from himself. If Arabs go for
a walk in the woods, it cannot be simply because spring has arrived. It can only
be to murder their contemporaries.
By the same token, you can always be sure, sooner or later, of finding a
Frenchman, often an intelligent Frenchman, eager to tell you that Jews are prone

something. There are only two powers in the world: the saber and the spirit. In the long run, the saber is
always defeated by the spirit.” Carnets I, p. 186; Essais, p. 835. In the Carnets, Camus wrote garder (to
keep) instead of fonder (to found). In the article and the essay, Camus commented: “Clearly conquerors

are sometimes melancholic.” Here he retains the idea of “melancholy.”
“1 Riots had erupted in Madagascar on March 29. Combat reported on these disturbances throughout the
month of April. The government tended to minimize the events somewhat, and most of the press followed
suit, with the notable exception of Franc-Tireur, which accorded ample space in its pages to Dr. Raseta,
one of the leaders of the Democratic Movement of the Malagasy Revolution, which would ultimately be
dissolved. On April 9, Combats “special correspondent,” Marie-Louise David, stressed the seriousness of
the events in her in-depth analysis. Raseta, a deputy from Madagascar, was assaulted in the corridors of
the Palais-Bourbon. A warrant was issued for his arrest even before his parliamentary immunity was lifted.
This measure led to a break with the Communist ministers, who voted no confidence in the government.
® [The word is an insulting slang term for North African immigrant—Trans.]

MARCH

17-JUNE

8,

1947

291

to exaggerate. Of course this Frenchman has a Jewish friend who’s not of that
sort, but still—As for the millions of Jews who were tortured and burned, our
Frenchman naturally disapproves of such methods, to put it mildly. It’s just that
Jews exaggerate, and they have no business supporting one another, even if they
learned their solidarity in a concentration camp.”
Yes, these are signs. But they are not the worst. One year ago in Algeria, methods of collective repression were used.“ And Combat recently revealed the existence of the “spontaneous confession chamber” in Fianarantsoa.”” This is not the
place to get into the root of the problem, which is of a different order entirely.
The nature of the solution is worth reflecting on, however.
Three years after being subjected to a policy of terror themselves, Frenchmen
are reacting to this latest news with the indifference of people who have seen too
much. Yet the facts are there, the clear and hideous truth: we are doing what we
reproached the Germans for doing.*° I am well aware that we have been offered
an explanation, namely, that the Malagasy rebels have tortured Frenchmen. But
the cowardly crimes of our adversaries do not excuse our becoming cowardly and
criminal in turn. I haven't heard that we were building crematory ovens to avenge
ourselves on the Nazis. We put them on trial, as far as I know. Clear, firm justice
is the proof that a society is ruled by law, and it is justice that should represent
France.
In fact, the true explanation lies elsewhere. If the Hitlerians applied their
shameful laws to Europe, the reason was that they believed their race to be superior, hence the law for Germans could not be the same as the law for enslaved
peoples. If we French revolted against their terror, it was because we believed that

all Europeans were equal in rights and dignity. But if Frenchmen can now hear
of the methods used in some instances by other Frenchmen against Algerians and
Malagasies and not react, it is because they are unconsciously certain that we are
in some way superior to those people and that it makes little difference what
means we choose to demonstrate that superiority.
I do not propose to resolve the colonial problem here, nor do I mean to offer
any excuses. My purpose is simply to call attention to signs of a racism that dishonors so many countries already and from which we need to protect our own.
Therein lay, and should lie, our true superiority, and some of us are terribly afraid
that we are losing it. If it is accurate to say that the colonial problem is the most
complex of all the problems we face, and if it is going to shape the history of the
next fifty years, it is no less true to say that we will never be able to solve it if we
allow the most pernicious of prejudices to influence our judgment.”

43 Certain passages in this article anticipate the tone of La Chute.
44 Allusion to the events of Sétif. See “Crisis in Algeria” in May 1945, pp. 198 ff.
45 On May 2, Marie-Louise David wrote: “The repression was and still is terrifying. I will mention only
the ‘Gestapo-style’ torture chamber in Fianarantsoa, to use the description offered by a torturer assigned
to make the rebels talk.”
46 No other newspaper published a similar condemnation.
47 Camus’ tone here is reminiscent of his position on Algeria.

292

CHAPTER

4

It is no part of my purpose, however, to plead for a foolishly sentimental
approach that would embrace all races in one undifferentiated effusion of affection. People are not all alike. I am well aware of the deep differences of tradition
that separate me from an African or a Muslim. But I also know what unites me
to them, and that is something in each of us that I cannot despise without debasing myself. That is why it is necessary to say clearly that these signs of racism,
whether glaring or covert, point up what is most abject and senseless in the
human heart. Only when we have vanquished that flaw will we win the difficult
right to denounce the spirit of tyranny and violence wherever it arises.
ALBERT CAMUS

June 3, 1947

To Our Readers*®

The political and managing editors and staff of the daily Combat are resigning
today, although the newspaper will continue to appear. This calls for a certain
amount of explanation, and I shall try to be clear.
The number of Combats readers today should be sufficient to ensure the existence of a newspaper without ambitions. But to be frank, the conditions under
which daily newspapers operate have evolved to the point where only large circulation papers can break even. I leave it to readers to ponder what this law of
economics portends for freedom of thought. Despite the fact that Combat is currently losing money, it made enough in previous years that it should have been
able to continue for another year in the hope of increasing its circulation by reorganizing and redoubling our effort to attract new readers. This was well within
the realm of possibility. But the printers’ strike evaporated the few million francs
that represented the fruit of the assiduous labor of our collective. Of course we
could have sought money from outside and could even have obtained money
without seeking it. There was no shortage of offers, as you may imagine (and
many of them were both honorable and generous). Nevertheless, we did not

think we were entitled to accept them, in view of the situation in which we

‘8 This editorial marked the end of Camus’ Combat. It was followed immediately by a text by Claude
Bourdet entitled “Combat Continues.” Bourdet wrote: “Combat is more than a newspaper. It is the most
sacred heritage ofa sinister and glorious period.” After saying a brief word about the underground Combat, Bourdet hailed the “great daily newspaper” it had become, “whose courage and independence are now
proverbial . . . having succeeded in winning the esteem ofjournalists the world over.” He pointed out that
he was among those responsible for putting together the paper's original staff and that he shared their
“concern for independence” and “absence of prejudice.” He pledged that “neither the political line nor the
tone” of the newspaper would change. He listed the collaborators who would continue to work with him
and concluded with the following: “It is clearly understood that if Camus and those comrades who are
about to take a well-deserved rest wish to return to daily journalism, the pages of Combatwill remain open
to them as before.”

MARCH

17-JUNE

3,

1947

293

found ourselves. For some weeks now, the Combat staff has tried with diminished means to fight on in an attempt to save the paper and protect our employees jobs. In the end, however, we had to acknowledge that we, the present
editorial staff, had reached the end of our tether.
We are not the exclusive owners of the name Combat, however. The newspaper
belongs, morally and legally, to all who wrote, printed, and distributed it during
the Occupation. Once we decided to give up our own claim to the name, we
were therefore obliged to turn it over to the militants of the “Combat” movement. With the approval of the Fédération des Amicales “Combat,” our comrade
Claude Bourdet, one of the founders of the underground newspaper, who was
arrested and deported on account of his activities and whose political leanings
have always been close to those of this paper, has decided to take charge himself
of the job of running it. As we leave our posts, therefore, it is to Claude Bourdet
that we entrust an enterprise whose meaning for us I do not need to describe.
There was also another reason for our decision, of considerable importance: our
concern to save the jobs of our employees and protect the livelihood of our staff.
I will not insist on this point, but it will serve to give readers a precise idea of the
responsibilities we bore.
The political and managing editors of the paper are thus withdrawing and
turning the operation over to new leadership. We want this to be perfectly clear.
We offer our sincerest wishes for the success of a venture we have cherished. But
just as the comrades who will put out the paper in the future should bear no
responsibility for positions we have taken, so, too, should our departure relieve
us of responsibility for any positions they may take in the future. It should nevertheless be clearly understood that Claude Bourdet intends to pursue the line of
objectivity and independence that he has always followed. Otherwise, the staff of
the paper remains as it was.
It remains for me to thank our readers for the confidence and devotion they have
shown us throughout. There are several ways to thrive in journalism. I hardly
need mention that we who joined this daily poor are leaving it just as poor. Our
only wealth has always been concentrated in our respect for our readers. If we in
turn have on occasion earned their respect, this was and will remain our only luxury. It is of course possible that we made mistakes over the past three years (who
does not make mistakes when obliged to speak daily?). But we never abdicated
any of the responsibilities that constitute the honor of our profession. The fact
that this newspaper is not like other newspapers was for all these years a source
of pride for us. There is no other decent way to express our feelings as we leave
e
.
Combat today.

LBERT

CaMUS

CHAPTER 5

1948-1949

In 1948, two things led to the reappearance of Camus’ name in the pages of Combat as both subject and author: the creation of L’Etat de siége (State of Siege) and
the action of Garry Davis, the “citizen of the world,” whom Bourdet and Camus
supported.
The newspaper gave considerable publicity to the performance of State of Siege
at the Théatre Marigny.' On October 27 it reported on the play’s dress rehearsal, and
the next day it published a photograph of Camus together with Jean-Louis Barrault
and Maria Casarés. On October 29 there was an article by Jacques Lemarchand,”
accompanied by a Maurice Henry drawing. On November 19, Combat published an
excerpt from the play. On November 23 there was a report on a lecture by Barrault,4
who championed the idea of a work created in conditions of “total freedom.” It was
therefore logical for Camus to choose Combat to respond, two days later, to an article that Gabriel Marcel published on State of Siege in Les Nouvelles Littéraires. This
was a particularly logical choice in light of the fact that Camus’ response was more
political and moral than literary and continued the argument he had begun developing in his editorials about Spain and his series “Neither Victims nor Executioners.”
Camus’ departure from Combat did not mean that he had given up on making
his political views Known, particularly his dream of an international organization of
socialists and pacifists. Although he did not join the “Rassemblement démocratique
révolutionnaire,”

or R.D.R., a political movement

in which various socialists were

joined by Jean-Paul Sartre, David Rousset, and Georges Altman, he did take a keen
interest in it and supported it with articles in La Gauche? and Franc-Tireur. It will
come as no surprise that his position in this regard was close to that of Combat, as
it was to Combat’s position with respect to Garry Davis, who attempted to create an
international movement to promote world peace. In May, Garry Davis renounced his
American citizenship and proclaimed himself a “citizen of the world.” In September,
he camped out in front of the Palais de Chaillot, where the U.N. held meetings from
September until December of 1948. He claimed the status of “citizen of the world”
and hoped to gain a hearing at the U.N. Around him he formed a “Council of Solidarity,” which included intellectuals, writers, artists, and journalists, among them

1 The director was Jean-Louis Barrault, who also played the role of Diego. The music was by Arthur
Honegger, and the sets were designed by Balthus. Maria Casarés played Victoria.
2 Lemarchand “wondered if Jean-Louis Barrault hasn't obliged Camus to present a different play from the
one he wrote” and deplored the fact that the words of the text took a back seat to the direction.
3 The excerpt was from the first scene between Diego and Victoria.
4 By Emile Scotto-Lavina, who noted that the audience did not respond strongly to the play, which closed

after only twenty-three performances.
5 A bimonthly publication of the R.D.R.

296

CHAPTER

5

Georges Altman, Claude Bourdet, André Breton, Albert Camus, Jean Hélion,
Emmanuel Mounier, Jean Paulhan, Abbé Pierre, Raymond Queneau, Vercors, and
Richard Wright. In November and December Combat devoted considerable space
to rallies in support of Davis in which members of this council participated, and the
newspaper frequently summarized or published in full Camus’ remarks on these
occasions. On November 19, Davis attempted to interrupt a U.N. session with a
demand for world government. He was arrested. In the November 20-21 issue,
Maurice Henry reported on Camus’ remarks at an impromptu press conference
given after the arrest by writers belonging to the council who had been present in
the hall:
Camus stressed the importance of Garry Davis’s arrest, which leaves the U.N. in an unten-

able position. The man was arrested in effect for advocating the cause that the U.N. claims
to champion. The author of The Plague added that the Council of Solidarity had decided to

do everything it could to support the movement that the arrest of Garry Davis cannot fail to
ignite.

Emile Scotto-Lavina’s report on December 14 of the international writers’ meeting
at the Salle Pleyel, which was attended by Sartre, Rousset, Breton, Wright, and Carlo
Levi as well as Camus, took a sentence of Camus’ as its title: “This century is searching in vain for reasons to love, which it has lost.” It included excerpts from his speech,
the text of which was later published in La Gauche and reprinted in Actuelles under
the title “Witness for Freedom.” For Combat there was no doubt a symbolic value
attached to the name “Camus.” On December 7, Combat published the text of
an appeal to the U. N., “For Peace,” signed by five hundred intellectuals. It noted
that “among the personalities most familiar to readers of this newspaper, A. Camus,
H. Calet, J. Lemarchand, Roland-Manuel, Maurice Nadeau, and Bernard Voyenne
signed this petition.”
A year and a half after his departure, readers clearly had not forgotten Camus.
And Camus himself remained an attentive reader of the paper: he noticed
that it mentioned him among the members of the jury for the Prix de la Villa
d’Este.° The next day, the paper printed a correction, quoting from a note Camus
had sent:
Combat, which is always well informed, is for once a little too well informed. It has me down
as a member of a literary jury, for the Prix de la Villa Este, which | had never heard of until

now. This is very flattering, but the fact is that |am not now a member of any jury and do not
expect to become one any time soon. Tell your readers this when the opportunity arises, for
the sake of the foundation giving the prize as well as for the principle of the thing.

6 See the November 29, 1947, issue. The Prix de la Villa d’Este was a literary prize. The jury included
George Duhamel, André Maurois, and the Tharaud brothers. After quoting from Camus’ note, the writer
of this piece concluded that “since Camus added that he would buy us a drink soon, we won't wait a day
longer to print this correction.” This shows that Camus maintained friendly relations with some members
of the paper's staff.

1948-1949

297

Camus’ signature appeared along with André Breton’s on a petition published in
the February 26-27 and March 10 issues, which pleaded for a commutation of the
death sentences of ten Greek intellectuals (former resisters sentenced to death by
the Germans) who again faced the death penalty after being convicted of trying to
leave Greece secretly. Combat supported the petition and reported that it had
resulted in a commutation of the sentences. Finally, in March 1949, Combat published a letter from Camus and René Char protesting the sentencing of Algerian
war veterans. Unless | am mistaken, this was the last text that Camus published in
Combat. After the exclusion of Claude Bourdet, the paper quickly became the exclusive property of Henri Smadja, and it thereafter had nothing in common with the

paper of Pia and Camus.”

November 25, 1948

Why Spain?®
RESPONSE TO GABRIEL MARCEL

I will respond here to just two passages in the article you wrote about State of
Siege in Les Nouvelles littéraires” 1 do not wish to respond to the criticisms that
you and others have made of the play as a theatrical work. When one presents a
play or publishes a book, one submits to criticism and agrees to accept the censure of one’s contemporaries. Whatever one might wish to say in response, it is
better to remain silent.
Nevertheless, you abused the critic’s privilege when you went so far as to
express your surprise that a play about totalitarian tyranny should be set in Spain,
whereas you would have preferred that it be set in Eastern Europe. You further
authorize me to reply when you write that this choice reflects a lack of courage
and honesty. True, you are kind enough to suggest that I was not responsible for

7 In February 1950 Camus wrote: “It would be better for the name to disappear than for it to be exploited
by the current management. . .. The name without M. Smadja, or M. Smadja without the name.” Letter
quoted in Y. M. Ajchenbaum, A J/a vie, a la mort, p. 326.
8 Text reprinted in Actwelles, standing alone, with the erroneous date “December 1948.”

9 Marcel’s criticism was on the whole quite harsh. On November 4, Les Nouvelles littéraires published a
caricature by Ben, and on November 11 it published Marcel’s article, entitled “Theater: Albert Camus’s
‘State of Siege.’” The Christian existentialist philosopher, who was also a playwright, ripped both the play
and its author to shreds, speaking of “a veritable academicism in the maniac,” asserting that “the whole
thing is entirely artificial, entirely cerebral,” and concluding that “after this I can no longer think of this
writer as a dramatic author.” The passage that provoked Camus’ response is worth quoting: “I don’t think
it was very courageous or even honest to have set the action in Spain, in Cadiz, rather than in some
Dalmatian or Albanian port, for example, or some sub-Carpathian town. I cannot help thinking that this
circumstance is probably not the fault of M. Camus himself, whose bravura is obvious. Any impartial and
well-informed person will agree that for some time now the news most apt to plunge those who retain a
concern for human dignity and freedom into despair has not been coming from the Iberian peninsula. It
appears that an effort was made to find a substitute in order to calm the wrath of those who, like it or not,

are the work’s primary targets in 1948—I repeat, in 1948.”

298

CHAPTER

5

the choice in question (to speak plainly, you are thus blaming wicked Barraulkt,
whose name you have already blackened with countless crimes). But the sad
truth is that the play is set in Spain because I, and I alone, chose to set it there
after giving the matter due consideration. I must therefore take your accusations
of opportunism and dishonesty as being directed at me. This being the case, it
should not surprise you that I feel compelled to respond.
Very likely I would not bother to defend myself against these charges (for to
whom can one justify oneself nowadays?) if you hadn't touched on a subject
as grave as the situation in Spain, for I really don’t need to tell the world that I

wasnt trying to please anyone in particular when I wrote State of Siege. |wanted
to attack head-on a type of political society that has been or is being organized
on both the right and the left along totalitarian lines. No impartial observer can
doubt that this play takes the side of the individual, of flesh in the noblest sense,

and ultimately of mortal love against the abstractions and terrors of the totalitarian state,’” whether it be Russian, German, or Spanish. Men of somber learn-

ing reflect daily on the decadence of our society and look for its deeper causes,
which no doubt exist. But for simpler souls, the evil of the present age is characterized by its effects, not by its causes. It is called the state, whether police or
bureaucratic. Its proliferation everywhere on a variety of ideological pretexts
make it a mortal danger for all that is best in each of us, as does the insulting
security it derives from mechanical and psychological methods of repression. In
this sense, contemporary political society is contemptible, regardless of its content. That is all I said, and that is why State of Siege is a declaration of independence that aims to spare no one.
Having said all this as clearly as I can, your question remains: Why Spain? I
confess that if I were you, I would be rather ashamed to ask it. Why Guernica,''
Gabriel Marcel? Why this place, where for the first time Hitler, Mussolini, and
Franco demonstrated to a world still asleep amid its comforts and its miserable
morality what totalitarian methods were like? Why this place, which affected us
as well? For the first time, people of my generation saw injustice historically triumphant.’* Innocent blood flowed while Pharisees chattered on, as, frankly, they
are still doing today. Why Spain? Because a few of us refuse to wash that blood
from our hands. Whatever reasons there may be for anticommunism, and I
know some good ones, we will never accept it if it goes so far as to forget the
injustice done to Spain, an injustice which, with the complicity of our governments, has been allowed to continue to this day. I have stated as forthrightly as

'0 This echoes one of the themes of “Neither Victims nor Executioners,” as well as the premises of the
chapters of The Rebel concerned with “state terrorism.”
'! Guernica, a city in northern Spain, was bombed by German planes on April 27, 1937, killing some

2,000 people. This massacre, which took place on a market day, foreshadowed the bombings of World
War II and inspired a famous painting by Picasso.
!2 We have already seen what Spain meant to Camus. He often said that the Spanish civil war was the
beginning of World War II.

1948-1949

299

I could what I thought of the Russian concentration camps.'? Yet those camps
are not about to make me forget Dachau, Buchenwald, or the nameless agony of

millions of people and the dreadful repression that has decimated the Spanish
Republic. Yes, despite all the commiseration our illustrious political leaders have
offered, all these things must be denounced together. I am not about to make
excuses for the hideous plague in Western Europe just because the same plague
is also wreaking havoc in the East. You write that for people who are wellinformed, the news most likely to dash the hopes of those who believe in human
dignity is not now

coming from Spain. You, Gabriel Marcel, are not well-

informed. Just yesterday, five political opponents of the regime were sentenced
to death. But you make yourself ready to be ill-informed by cultivating forgetfulness. You forget that the first armies of the totalitarian war were steeped in
Spanish blood. You forget that in 1936 a rebel general, acting in the name of
Christ, assembled an army of Moors to set against the lawful government of the
Spanish Republic; you forget that he led an unjust cause to victory in the wake
of unforgivable massacres and thereupon launched an atrocious repression that
has gone on for ten years now and is not over yet. Yes, indeed, why Spain?
Because you and so many others have lost your memory.
And also because I, together with a small number of other people in France,
still find it impossible at times to be proud of my country. To my knowledge,
France has never handed Soviet dissidents over to the Russian government. That
will come, no doubt; our elites are prepared to do anything. When it comes to
Spain, on the other hand, we have already done such things. Owing to the most
scurrilous clause in the armistice, we surrendered Spanish Republicans, including the great Luis Companys,“ to Franco on Hitler’s orders. And Companys was
shot while this terrible traffic went on. That, of course, was Vichy; it wasn’t us.
We merely put the poet Antonio Machado” in a concentration camp in 1938, a

camp he left only to die. Yet on the day the French state set itself up as recruiting sergeant for the totalitarian executioners, who spoke out? Nobody. No doubt
because, like you, Gabriel Marcel, those who might have protested found that
none of this amounted to much compared with what they most detested in the
Russian system. So their attitude was, “What difference can one more death by
firing squad make?” But it’s a vile wound that a firing squad leaves in a man’s
face, and gangrene ultimately set in. Gangrene has won out.

13 Combat added the following note: “See La Gauche, October 1948.” This note was omitted when the
piece was reprinted in Actuelles. Camus published several articles in that organ of the R.D.R. The one in
question was entitled “We Will Never Be for the Socialism of Concentration Camps,” which appeared in

Actuelles under the title “Second Response,” in the chapter entitled “Two Responses to Emmanuel d’Astier
de la Vigerie.”

14 On Companys, see the editorial of January 7-8, 1945, n. 404, p. 167.
15 Antonio Machado

(1875-1939) was a Spanish poet who supported republican Spain. He died in

Collioure shortly after leaving the refugee camp at Argeles.

300

CHAPTER

5

So where are the murderers of Companys? In Moscow or in this country?
The answer is, Here. So we must admit that we shot Companys, that we are

responsible for what followed. We must admit that we are humiliated by this and
that the only way to repair the damage is to preserve the memory of a free Spain
that we betrayed, as we did in our own petty place and way. To be sure, there is
not a single major power that did not betray Spain, except Germany and Italy,
who shot Spaniards in the face rather than the back. But that cannot be a consolation, and free Spain continues, by its silence, to ask us for reparations. I have
done what little I can, and that is what you find scandalous. If I had more talent, the reparation would have been greater: that is all I can say. Cowardice and
deceit in this case would have been to condone the status quo. But I shall say no
more on this subject and suppress my feelings, out of respect for you. There is
just one thing I would add: no man of sensibility should have been surprised,
given that I wanted to give voice to the flesh and to pride as against the shame
and shadows of dictatorship, that I chose the Spanish people. I couldn't, after all,
choose the international subscribers to the Readers Digest or the readers of
Samedi-Soir and France-Dimanche.
No doubt you are waiting eagerly for me to bring this piece to a conclusion
by explaining why I gave the role I did to the Church. On that point I will be
brief. You judge that role to be odious, whereas in my novel it was not. But in
my novel I was obliged to do justice to the Christian friends whom I met during the Occupation and with whom I joined in a just fight. In my play, by con-

trast, I had to say what role the Church played in Spain. If I portrayed that role
as odious, it was because in the eyes of the world it was odious. As harsh as that
truth may be for you, you may take consolation from the fact that the scene that
bothers you lasts no more than a minute, whereas the one that continues to
offend the conscience of Europe has been going on for ten years. And the entire
Church would have been mixed up in the unbelievable scandal that saw Spanish
bishops bestowing their benedictions on the rifles of firing squads if two great
Christians had not spoken out immediately: one of them, Bernanos, is now
dead,’ while the other, José Bergamin,”” lives in exile. Bernanos would not have
written what you have written on this subject. He knew that the declaration with
which my scene ends—“Christians of Spain, you have been forsaken”—was not
an insult to your faith. He knew that to have said anything else, or to have
remained silent, would have been to insult the truth.
If I were to rewrite State ofSiege, 1 would still set it in Spain. For me, that is the
bottom line. It should be clear to everyone that the play condemns not just Spain
as it has been and as it is today but also, through Spain, all totalitarian societies.

16 Camus was of course an admirer of Georges Bernanos, as we have seen.

'7 José Bergamin (1895-1983) was a Spanish writer and critic, a Catholic who backed the Spanish Republic. He was obliged to flee first to Mexico and later to South America. He tried to return to Madrid in
1958 but was forced to flee again and died in France.

1948-1949

301

I would not do so, moreover, at the cost of shameful complicity. We can keep
the right to protest against terror only if we speak out in this way. That is why I
cannot share your view when you say that we are in absolute agreement on the
subject of political order, because you are willing to keep silent about one terror
the better to combat another. Some of us are unwilling to keep silent about anything. What makes us sick to our stomachs is our political society in its entirety.
There will be no salvation, moreover, until everyone who is still worth anything
has totally repudiated it in order to begin looking for a path to renewal somewhere other than in its insuperable contradictions. Until then we must fight.
And we must fight with the knowledge that totalitarian tyranny is built not on
the virtues of totalitarians but on the vices of liberals. Talleyrand’s gibe is contemptible: a blunder is not worse than a crime. In the end, however, the blunder

ends up justifying the crime and providing the criminal with his alibi. This
plunges the victims into despair and is on that account culpable. Indeed, it is
precisely this that I cannot forgive in contemporary political society: it is a
machine that makes people desperate.
You will no doubt find a great deal of passion in this letter for a small pretext.
So let me speak for once in my own name. The world I live in disgusts me, but
I feel myself in solidarity with the suffering people in it. There are many ambitions that I do not share, and I would not be comfortable if I were obliged to
avail myself of the paltry privileges reserved for those who compromise with the
world in order to make their way. To my way of thinking, though, there is one
ambition that all writers ought to possess: the ambition to bear witness and to
cry out whenever possible, to the extent that our talent permits, on behalf of
those who share our servitude. That is the ambition that you attack in your article, and I will go on denying you the right to do so as long as the murder of a
human being elicits your outrage, apparently, only to the extent that the victim
shares your ideas.
ALBERT CAMUS

December 9, 1948

What Is the UN Accomplishing?'®
Q. What are you doing here?
A. What we can.

18 This text was published with the following brief introduction: “Below is the text of remarks delivered
at the Salle Pleyel on December 3 by the author of The Plague.” It was reprinted under the title
“I Respond” in La Patrie mondiale, a newspaper created, according to an announcement published in
Combat, on December 22 by “a group of young people” and “aided” by certain writers, who were none
other than the members of the Council of Solidarity with Garry Davis, Camus among them. Its goal was
to “combat all war psychosis and replace it with a peace psychosis.”

CHAPTER

302

5

Q. What are you accomplishing?
What is the UN accomplishing?
. Why isn’t Davis going to speak in Soviet Russia?

Pie
Because they won't let him in. In the meantime, he is speaking to the Soviet
delegate along with the rest.
. Why don’t you give up your French nationality?

PO That is a valid if somewhat perfidious objection, which is to be expected
since it comes from friends. Here is my answer: Davis gave up a good
many privileges when he relinquished his American citizenship. To be French
today carries with it more burdens than privileges. If your standards for
yourself are high, it is very difficult to renounce your country when it is in
trouble.

. Doesn't Davis's gesture seem to you rather theatrical and therefore suspect?”

> It is not his fault if plain facts are today considered theatrical. Not to say
that the two cases are the same, but Socrates, too, put on a constant show in
the marketplace of his time. No one managed to prove him wrong other
than by condemning him to death. And that indeed is precisely the form of
refutation that is most widely used in contemporary political society. But it is
also the way in which that society customarily admits its degradation and
impotence.
. Don’t you see that Davis is serving American imperialism?

PO By giving up his American citizenship, Davis took his distance from that
imperialism and all the rest. This gives him the right to condemn imperialism,
a right that it seems to me difficult to grant to those who want to impose limits on all sovereignty except that of the Soviet Union.
Don’ you see that Davis is serving Soviet imperialism?

aeThe answer is the same as to the previous question but the other way around.
I would add this: the two forms of imperialism are like twins. They grow
together and cannot do without each other.
Sovereignty is a reality. Don’t you see that realities must be taken into account?

ae Cancer is also a reality. We nevertheless try to cure it, and nobody has yet had
the effrontery to say that to cure a cancer that has attacked an overly sanguine
temperament, the patient should eat more steak. Of course doctors have never
taken themselves for popes in possession of the whole truth. That is their
advantage over politicians.

'9 After turning in his American passport and proclaiming himself a “citizen of the world,” Garry Davis
camped out in front of the Palais de Chaillot, where the UN was in session. He hoped to be allowed to
speak.

1948-1949

303

Q. Still, is it anything other than utopian to think that sovereignty can be limited
in the historical circumstances that exist today? (Objection presented by Le
Rassemblement in an unsigned article.”’)

A. Pll let General de Gaulle answer Le Rassemblement. In speaking of the Ruhr,
he said that no one was obliged to have a good solution to the problem ready
in order to be able to recognize and reject a bad one. In any case, Davis is proposing a solution, and you are declaring it to be utopian. You remind us of the
father who invokes “realities” to warn his children against being too adventurous. Sometimes, though, the child honors the family by disobeying the father
and quitting the family grocery. In other words, history is never anything other
than utopia made flesh.

. Don't you see that the USA is the only obstacle to the establishment of socialism in the world? (Sometimes this question is put differently: Don’t you see
that the Soviet Union is the only obstacle to freedom in the world?)
If you have the war you foresee with an obstinacy worthy of being put to better use, the destruction and suffering it will cause, which will greatly overshadow the destruction and suffering due to World War II, will make it
impossible to predict what the future will bring. I would not bet much on
either liberty or socialism in a Europe reduced to rubble and filled with people not without the strength even to cry in pain.
. Does that mean you would choose surrender before war?

ae)I know that some of you are only too glad to offer a choice between hanging
and the firing squad. That is your idea of freedom. We are doing what we can
to see to it that such a choice does not become inevitable. You are doing what
you can to make it inevitable.

Q. But if it is inevitable, what will you do?
A . If you succeed, as I do not think you will, in making it inevitable, we will have
no choice but to suffer the world’s agony. The rest is mere journalism, and of
the worst kind.

I am done, but before I go, I would like to put one question to those who dis-

agree with me. It’s my turn now. Are they so sure in the depths of their hearts
that the political belief or doctrine that inspires them is infallible enough for

them to heedlessly reject the warnings of those who remind them of the woes of
millions of people, the cries of the innocent, and the simplest forms of happiness, and who ask them to weigh those poor truths in the balance against their
hopes, no matter how legitimate? Are they sure enough of being right to risk
20 Le Rassemblement was the weekly newspaper of the R.PE. In January 1948 it took over from LEtincelle
(created in April 1947). As successor to Jacques Baumel, Albert Olllivier served as managing editor after

June 1948. He had been working for the paper since February 1948, attacking both social democrats
and Christian democrats. Other writers who had quit Combat also wrote for this paper, including Jean
Chauveau and Pascal Pia.

304

CHAPTER

5

even one chance in a thousand of making atomic war more likely? Indeed, are
they so sure of themselves, and so prodigiously infallible, that we must concede
everything to them? That is the question we put to them, a question they have
heard before, to which we are still awaiting an answer.
ALBERT CAMUS

December 25-26, 1948

Responses to an Unbeliever?'

ALBERT CAMUS TO FRANCOIS MAURIAC~”
To answer you is to astonish myself. You, however, won't react as Le Populaire

did, when it took as an attack a mere expression of my surprise on learning that
the Socialists not only were not the first to support one man’s solitary peace initiative but were instead quick to heap ironies on it.’ One is very alone in the
Church, you wrote. Imagine the feelings of those who lack faith as consolation
for the shortcomings of their churches!
A number of writers, myself among them, were sounded out about offering
our support and protection to a man who had single-handedly taken courageous
21 This text was published in a two-page special edition produced by the Centre de Recherche et d’
Expression Mondialiste, which was close to the R.D.R. and to the Council of Solidarity supporting Davis.
It described itself as “a first attempt at an international newspaper” and an “effort to create a free forum
of world conscience, which will deal with the new issues common to all people.” Under the title “People of
the World,” this two-page paper appeared every two weeks for a few months in 1949. The December 25-26
edition included, in addition to Camus, articles by Richard Wright, Henry Usborne, and Emmanuel

Mounier. The title of this piece did not lack for humor, given that it was addressed to the very Catholic
Frangois Mauriac, whose “unbelief” concerned the possibility of a worldwide movement of the sort envisioned by the “Davis committee.” Camus was also responding to reactions to his article of December 7 in
Franc-Tireur, entitled “Lembarras du choix” (see Essais, pp. 1583-1586) and to his Combat article of
December 9, “What Is the UN Accomplishing?” reproduced above.
22 In Le Figaro of December 11-12, under the title “Nous nous éloignons infiniment de ce que nous
aimons,” Mauriac answered Camus’ article “What Is the UN Accomplishing?” He began by saying that,
although he had been tempted to follow Garry Davis, he was held back by a “reflex of common sense,”
and went on to analyze Camus’ remarks: “Albert Camus, in Combat, easily dismisses all the objections to
Davis but one: “Don't you see that Davis is serving Soviet imperialism?” Mauriac quotes the comment
about the two forms of imperialism being twins and says that he doesn’t understand its “scope.” He then
says: “The only reason for the U.N. to exist is precisely to create the conditions under which the Soviet
Union and America cannot do without each other and agree to work together to save the world.” He adds
that he has signed a petition on this subject, which he says “is something different from launching an
unstoppable movement, setting in motion uncontrollable forces indifferent to any contingencies that may
arise, including Soviet imperialism.” He compares Davis to Chamberlain, who was also a peace-loving
man,
3 It was the December 4—5 issue of Le Populaire that “heaped ironies” on the December 3 meeting in a
brief report on “Salle Pleyel, aviary of peace,” in which it remarked, “Peace is a bird, but which one?
Was it Camus-the-blackbird, ironic and passionate? ‘Le Populaire,’ he says, ‘asks why Garry Davis is not
going to speak in Soviet Russia. The answer is that they won't let him in, by Jove!’ No, handsome blackbird, Le Populaire is glad that the Garry Davis affair could become an issue in Paris and doubts that it ever

could in Karkhov.” The paper then went on to deal with “Mounier-the-osprey” and “Vercors-the-stork.”

1948-1949

305

and significant action only to be rewarded with sneers from newspapers that as
you know never miss an opportunity to do honor to this country. What we were
asked to do was in effect to defend Davis against the bureaucracy and call attention to his act of bearing witness. This we felt we could not refuse. Thereupon
we were

immediately

denounced

as Chamberlains,

Daladiers,

even

Marcel

Déats.* Leave aside the fact that one of my former collaborators at Combat
wrote with no obvious signs of shame in Le Rassemblement that I repented of having been a resister.”” Of course I know that he has no idea what he’s talking
about. And leave aside the fact that I find myself once again under indictment,
as it were, by the likes of M. Pierre Hervé.”° Some callings are irresistible, and as
we should have learned by now, the police mentality has its apostles. But you
astonish me.
Although I see no reason for the disdainful way in which you speak of the
Davis Committee intellectuals, | readily grant that the profession of writer is no

guarantee of infallibility. This truth applies to all writers, however. It is also
the case that one can be a writer without suffering from a total lack of intellectual courage. I am not authorized to speak on behalf of my friends, but I never
heard any of them describe Soviet imperialism as a contingency. At least some of
them recognize it as a fact, and they will never acquiesce in the socialism of

On December 8, Henri Noguéres responded to the Franc-Tireur article “Lembarras du choix” with a piece
entitled “Pacifisme et publicité.” He protested what he called Camus’ “underhanded attack on Le Populaire
on the pretext of pacifism”: Camus, he said, had argued that “the Communists interpret every wish for
peace expressed in this form [that is, as a refusal to choose between taking the American or the Russian
side] as objective aid to the Americans. Le Rassemblement (and Le Populaire for that matter) respond

immediately that, objectively speaking, to use your word, naive prudence of this sort serves Russian imperialism.” Treating Camus as a “notable propagandist for pacifism,” Noguéres criticized him for “tossing Le
Populaire in the common grave along with all the other warmongers,” for “counting the Socialists among
the enemies of peace,” and for pretending to believe that those who did not want to fight either the Russians
or the Americans were few in number. He then asserted that such people “do not by any means regard
[Camus] as their spokesman.”

2% Chamberlain and Daladier of course signed the Munich treaty in 1938 in the hope of preserving peace
by sacrificing Czechoslovakia, while Déat was an advocate of collaboration with the Germans.
25 In Le Rassesmblement of December 11 a note entitled “M. Albert Camus Repents” quoted a passage
from Camus’s December 7 article in Franc-Tireur (“Uembarras du choix”): “Despite the terrible bitterness

and shame we may feel at the thought of vast prison camps in which countless human beings cling to life,
we must not lose sight of the fact that peace gives us a chance to see these injustices repaired, while war
does not.” This was followed by a comment: “Here you have the illusion that M. Albert Camus is nursing in Franc-Tireur: he no longer believes that totalitarian ventures should be resisted by force.” This note
was not signed. Was the “former collaborator at Combat’ Albert Ollivier or Jean Chauveau?

In the same issue of Le Rassemblement, Pascal Pia, commenting on the December 3 meeting and the
reactions of the Communists, offered a pointed comment on “the last word in ‘third-force’ philosophy due
to M. Albert Camus.” On December 18, in an article entitled, “March with the People or Force the Peo-

ple to March?” Pia attacked the pacifism of Camus and Sartre (whose article had appeared in Franc-Tireur
on December 10): “There is no point to an antiwar campaign unless it is to discourage in advance all
resistance to a totalitarian state that aims to control our country. The recent “Peace and Freedom’ sessions
sponsored by the Communist Party were inspired by no other concern than this.”
26 Pierre Hervé was a Communist journalist.

306

CHAPTER

5

concentration camps (which in fact has more to do with concentration camps
than with socialism). To put it plainly, they will not shade the facts. Their hon-

esty therefore leaves them defenseless against your question. If Garry Davis succeeds in making his ideas known, which is likely to happen only in the West,
won't that just hasten the victory of Russian imperialism?
Let me first approach the problem from the other side. Suppose you're completely right. What should you do? What you aren't doing. For if the Russian
threat takes precedence over all others in both time and space, and if reluctance
to go to war risks making war more likely, then we should drop everything else
and take whatever steps are necessary in the full knowledge that they may lead
to war. We should immediately enlist the support of the only force that can stop
or even slow the Russians, namely, the United States, and that means that we
must accept their foreign policy (whether we do so cheerfully or not changes
nothing in the end). Since the Russians have put [foreign] Communist Parties in

the vanguard, we must combat Communism by throwing our support to the
only movement in France capable of opposing Communism by force, namely,
Gaullism. As far as I know, you are not doing either of these things, and I do not
say this for the pointless pleasure of catching you out but rather to urge you to
show a little more indulgence toward our own inconsistency, assuming it exists.
In any case, you have to admit that once we begin to think in terms of imperialism, aggression, and tactics—in terms of the Cold War, in other words—the
position I have just set forth is the only logical one. If I’m not mistaken, it is the

position of some of de Gaulle’s sincere supporters.
Personally, I regard this logic as inevitable the moment one begins to think as
you do. But I have something against the consequences of that logic, and I am
going to draw out some further implications of the position that ought to be
yours. In Cold War terms, everything in France should be subordinated to the
struggle against the Communist Party, and this implies imposing certain limits
on the way we think, rightly or wrongly, about democracy. Everything else
should take a back seat to the need to enhance our military power, which will
have its drawbacks for our economy. When I say that the brunt of the economic
consequences will be borne, in the first instance, by workers of all classes, I don’t
think I’m exceeding the limits of the plausible. In foreign policy, if we, as realists, are to take part in the Cold War, you'll need to overcome some of your scruples. If Tsaldaris”” better serves the cause of anti-Bolshevism, you'll need to close
your eyes to the executions in Athens, to the island prison colonies, and to the
politics of repression. And that is not all. You were among the first to speak out

27 Tsaldaris, the Greek prime minister, pursued a repressive policy against the Communists. After the
troubles of 1944 (see the editorials of November 29 and December 5 and 9, 1944, pp. 126, 133, and
135), Greece endured civil war from the end of 1946. Camus intervened on several occasions to
defend condemned Greek intellectuals (see “UVenfant grec” of 1955 in Camus editorialiste a VExpress,
pp. 118-121).

1948-1949

307

against Franco’ rebellion. For that you deserve credit. But since Franco has given
military assurances to the United States and stands as an obstacle to Russian
ambitions, you'll need to support him, hope that he thrives, and on occasion
shake his hand. If you don't, you'll be serving Russian imperialism. In short, if
you don’t agree from the beginning to an aggravation of social injustice, limitation of our liberties, executions in Greece, and Franco's prisons, you will be serv-

ing Russian imperialism just as we do.
There are additional consequences, moreover, that seem to me just as hard to
swallow. In my view, those who believe that the Cold War is the only way of
avoiding the other kind of war without serving Russian imperialism face a
dilemma as embarrassing as the one we face. If Russian imperialism is what they
say it is, there can be no doubt that time is on its side, that the Russians will one
day have atomic weapons along with a restored economy, and on that day they
will be ready to rule the world. The proponents of the Cold War are therefore
obliged to accept the idea of preventive war or else find themselves speechless
when challenged by others more realistic than themselves: “By not declaring war
right away, you are serving Russian imperialism.” If you follow the logic of the
argument whose premises you accept, there is no escaping the conclusion: “Anything is preferable to Soviet domination, even immediate atomic war.”
Given such a consequence, I am sure that you can understand our hesitations.
How can we applaud such mad confidence when we know the depths of our
ignorance, when we are forced to compare a menace we know well with another
that we can only imagine. There has been no dearth of warnings, however. When
Niels Bohr,”*® who is of necessity well-informed, writes that “a million people
could be blown up and lose their lives in a single day; these figures are frightening, yet they may still fall short of the reality,” it seems to me that one needs to
weigh the pros and cons a little longer than you and others have done. I am
aware that Paulhan”? finds it foolish to say that wars are dreadful because they
destroy human beings. I personally subscribe to this foolishness, but even if we
discount the dead, our conception of liberty may find it hard to adapt to a gutted Europe or a France that will never recover from a Third World War, as you
know and everyone else knows.
In any case, an argument that leads to a choice between cemeteries and concentration camps may be rigorous, but, rigor aside, I cannot get past the idea that
something must have been left out. Maybe it is true that rigor will someday lead
to this unenviable choice. On that day each man will do what he must. After all,

28 Niels Bohr (1885-1962) was a Danish physicist, the founder of atomic theory, for which he won the
Nobel Prize in 1922.
29 Jean Paulhan (1884-1968) was a writer and critic regarded as the “gray eminence of letters.” From 1925
to 1940 he directed the Nouvelle Revue Francaise. In 1943 he joined the Resistance. As an editor at

Gallimard he played a key role in the publication of L’Etranger and Le Mythe de Sisyphe in 1942.

308

CHAPTER

5

the men of my generation are prepared for the worst, and in any event it is quite
true that I am not inclined to accept just any peace. But what we do or don’t do
then will of course be important only to us. Gulls, too, screech when it storms,
but I imagine that they do so for their own pleasure.
Given the situation we are in, do you still find it useful to pour scorn on people who are searching for what little hope there may still be of preserving both
peace and freedom and who are still trying to think clearly? For that is all we are
about. You can poke fun at Davis’s effort to put salt on the dove's tail. Obviously
there is a way of capturing the dove of peace without making a fool of oneself
with grains of salt; you can blast it at point-blank range. While rigorously effective, such a method is clearly not one of which Davis wishes to avail himself. He
has refused to accept the fine rigor of the killing machines and for the time being
has been content to expose the falsehoods and absurdities of our international
society. The dreams that you and others ascribe to him surely do not come from
what he has said or done. You have been ill-informed, something that happens
to every journalist.
You seem, in fact, to look upon Davis as a conscientious objector. Where did
you get that idea? I have never heard Davis say that war must always be avoided.
He said that he would be the first to enlist as a pilot in an international police
force. He simply believes that there is a still a possibility that there will be no war
and that there is still a chance that tyrannies can be ended without taking Europe
along with them. He has said what everyone thinks, that the only organization
charged with preserving world peace is paralyzed by unbending sovereignties.
His gesture has brought this essential contradiction to light. He has also shown
every international organization of the present or future what the true goals of a
League of Nations should be. That is all, but it is a great deal, and that is what
we believed merited our support. Just tell me what will give the U.N. delegates

more to think about, assuming that they are still capable of thought: the petition
that you and five hundred other intellectuals signed, or Davis's act.
I think the answer is Davis’s act, and I'll tell you why. I believe that it is still
imperative to try to save Europe and France from an unparalleled catastrophe. We
have to save as many lives as we can in order to preserve the energies that may
change the face of war and peace. Since war and surrender are not yet our options,
since France cannot fight without weapons supplied by others, I see usefulness
and decency in any enterprise that does not bet on the inevitability of war and
does not lead to a choice between two shameful alternatives, surrender on the one
hand or silence on the killings in Greece and the repression in Spain on the other.
At a time when everyone is forced to wager, it seems preferable to me to wager on
a reasonable hope. Neither Davis nor his supporters claim to be bringing the truth
to the world. They know full well that their ultimate path lies elsewhere, as does
their true calling. They have merely uttered a cry of alarm, as befits their station,
and it is perfectly possible that they are crying in the wilderness. But before smiling at what they have done, at least consider the filthy air of shame and calculation that surrounds the truths and faiths that have been imposed on today’s world.
May you at least—you least of all—not cast the first stone.

1948-1949

309

March 14, 1949
Only Privates Are Traitors

A LETTER FROM ALBERT CAMUS AND RENE CHAR?”

We read in Combat that two Algerian soldiers have been sentenced to death by a
court-martial in Algiers for desertion under fire. Their entire platoon surrendered to the enemy nine years ago in the Meuse in the midst of a general rout of
French forces. We ask you to compare this merciless sentence (recalling the climate of 1940) with the far more moderate punishments meted out to generals
accused of having offered their services to the enemy after being made prisoners
of the German army. We further ask you to inform your readers that it is
extremely rare for Algerian subjects to enjoy the rights of French citizenship,
even though they are subject, as we have just seen, to the same duties. It is our

hope, at least, that these comparisons will enable readers to appreciate the singular lesson in morality that our courts have just administered to the people of
France and Algeria.

30 This brief protest, cosigned by René Char, was, I believe, Camus’ last publication in Combat.

it

*tea

eet

wera

rer

eG

4

fxbe

o

er

Mie

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

1944-1948

Although it would be impossible to provide a complete summary of events in
this tumultuous period of history, I thought it essential to present a succinct
chronology as a complement to Camus’ articles. Even when his pieces are not
directly related to the events mentioned, it is important to know the context in
which they were written. This chronology borrows freely from those published
by Jacques Julliard in La IV’ République: Naissance et Mort (Paris: CalmannLévy, 1968), and Jean-Pierre Rioux in La France de la IV’ République: I: Lardeur
et la nécessité, 1944-1952 (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1980).

1944

The Consultative Assembly, created in Algeria, and the
Provisional Government of the French Republic return to Paris.
Articles by Camus

Events
August 1944

21: “Combat Continues . . .”
21: “From Resistance to Revolution”
»

20-30: Liberation of French territory
as far as the foothills of the Vosges,
with persistent pockets of resistance.
20-25: Liberation of Paris.

21: Start of Dumbarton Oaks
conference, which will lay the founda-

tions for the U.N. A place on the
Security Council is reserved for
France, which is not represented at
the meeting.

22: “Time for Justice”
23: “They Shall Not Pass”
24: “The Blood of Freedom”
25: “The Night of Truth”
29: “Intelligence and Character”
30: “The Age of Contempt”
31: “Critique of the New Press”
4

Continued

CHRONOLOGY

312

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

September 1944
1: “The Reform of the Press”
2: Provisional Government in Paris
holds first meeting of Council of
Ministers.

2: “The Democracy to Come”

4: “Morality and Politics”
6: First use of V2 rockets in the

6: “The End of a World”

bombing of London.
7: “Our Brothers in Spain”

9: General de Gaulle shakes up his
government, forms a government of

8: “Justice and Freedom”
8: “Critical Journalism”

national unity. Yves Chataigneau is
named governor-general of Algeria.
10: “The new government is
constituted.”
12: “Comrade, you write us...

»

12: De Gaulle, in a speech at Chaillot,

says that major sources of wealth must
revert to collective ownership.

14: Allied forces enter Germany.

15: “In 1933, an eager, frenetic
personage...”

15: Special courts of justice replace
courts-martial and military tribunals,
marking the beginning of the official
purge.

16: “A wire service report... >
17: “What are the people of
Germany doing?”
19: “The National Liberation
Movement...”
~ 20: “We spoke the other day about

the German people . . .”
22: “As everyone knows, newspapers
are today subject to military
censorship . . .”
23: “Four years ago . . . Germany
lost the war...

»

23: Decree incorporating the FFI
(internal resistance forces) into the

regular army.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

313

26: “With the arrest of Louis
Renault...”
27: “Please forgive us, but we are not

yet done with the case of Renault.”
28: “One can read the communiqué
of the Council of Ministers
elsewhere.”

29: “We are emerging from
euphoria.”

29: Jefferson Caffery arrives to
represent the U.S. to de facto French
authorities (the Provisional Govern-

ment had been recognized de facto
since July 11).
30: “Mr. Churchill has just
delivered a speech .. .”
October 1944

1: “People say, “Tell us in a few

words, what is it you want?”

3: “The Daily Mail has just
published an interesting article on
the French press by Allan Forbes.”
4: “Tt is no secret that the Under-

ground Press Federation . . .”
5: “We have said before in this

Space

i.

5: Law on the right to vote for
women.

6: “There was plenty of noise . . .”

7: “In Algiers on March 26,
1944...”

7: End of Dumbarton Oaks
conference.

8: “Yesterday, the National Council
of the Resistance. . .”
11: “The situation of the press poses
problems.”
12: “There is much talk of order

right now.”

12: Edict concerning the composition
of the Consultative Assembly, expanded
to include delegates from the internal
resistance and former deputies.

13: “It is impossible to exaggerate the
importance of the statements . . no

Continued

CHRONOLOGY

314

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

14: “Mr. Churchill said in his most
recent speech...
»

15: “We beg our readers’
indulgence . . .”
17: “We must return once again
to the recognition of the French

government.”

18: “Let us say a few words about
the purge.”
19: “France’s participation in
the allied military government .. .

18: Law concerning the confiscation
of unlawful profits.
»

20: “We are not in agreement

with M. Francois Mauriac.”
21: “Yes, the drama that France
faces...”

21: “Money versus Justice.”

22: “The Daily Express has just
published . . .”
23: De jure recognition of the Provi-

sional Government by the Allies.
23-25: Congress of NLM cadres.

Attempt to unify the various
resistance movements around the

program of the NCR.
24: “We wish to protest here. . .”

25: “We hesitated to respond to the
invitation...”

27: “It was difficult for us to speak,
as we did yesterday, about René
Leynaud.”
28: Banning of the patriotic militias
over the objections of the NCR.
29: “The day before yesterday, the
minister of information delivered a
SPeeeie en.
31: “We can discuss the case of M.

Stéphane Lauzanne. . .”

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

315

November 1944

2: “The Council of Ministers has just
established . . .”
3: “Governing is good.”
3: “Pessimism and Courage”

4: “Two days ago, Jean Guéhenno
published . . .”
5: “The Officiel has published the
text of an executive order... .”
7: “For several weeks, some in

France have been waiting...” >

8: “The Consultative Assembly met
yesterday for the first time.”

7: First meeting of the expanded
Consultative Assembly. Félix Gouin is
elected president. Franklin Roosevelt is
reelected in the United States.

7-8: Extraordinary congress of the
S.FI.O. Discussion of merger with the
Communists.

9: “Mr. Roosevelt’s election is good
news.”
10: “Yesterday, the Congress of
the Socialist Party held its first
meeting.”
11: “Our friends from Défense de la
France are troubled .. .”

14: “It is worth noting that the first
issue to be debated .. .”

15: “There is something irritating
about the many news reports . . .”
16: “The Government has decided
to confiscate the property of
Renaule...."
19: “We need to look closely at what
has happened in Belgium.”
21: “It is once again time to update
the situation in Spain...”
22: “It is time for some self-criticism.”
Continued

CHRONOLOGY

316

23: “To judge by what one reads in

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

23: French troops enter Strasbourg.

the Paris press, everyone in France
is socialist ...

»

24: “The more one thinks about
lteete
°

»

25: “Yes, our armies are on the
Rhine...”

26: “This is what we have come to:
Belgian blood has been shed

26: M.R.P. holds its organizing
convention.

in Brussels...”

27: Communist leader Maurice Thorez
returns to Paris.

28: “We get word from many
quarters) ae

28: Creation of “civic chambers”
as courts of the purge.

29: “Only just liberated, Europe is in
turmoil.”
30: “The ministry of information is

preparing a decree...”
December 1944

1: “The problem of the press . . .”
3: “General de Gaulle has had talks
with Marshal Stalin.”

3: Beginning of civil war in Greece.

5: “There is a sort of tacit agreement
between M. Mauriac and us...”
9: “Yesterday, before the House of
Commons, Mr. Churchill . . .”

10: “Yesterday, many newspapers
rather too hastily announced the
resignation of General Franco.”

10: Signature of Franco-Soviet pact.

13: “One reads almost everywhere
that we are at war.”

13: Law nationalizing the coal mines
of northern France.

14: “Two days ago, the Consultative

Assembly . . .”

15: “The Consultative Assembly
yesterday took up the problem . . .”

15-17: Meeting of the Départemental
Liberation Committees, on which all
the underground resistance movements

were represented.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

EVENTS

PRINCIPAL

317

16: “There is a belief in some
quarters that the new press . . .”
17: “When a revolution has broken
out, what must be done to

destroy it?”
18: “The text of the Franco-Soviet

18: First issue of Le Monde.

pact has now been made public.”
19: German offensive in the Ardennes.

20: “As von Rundstedt was
launching his offensive . . .”

20: The Communist and Socialist
Parties establish a liaison committee.

22: “France has endured many
tragedies...”
23: “French Renaissance (Suetonius)”
24: “The Poet and General de Gaulle
(Suetonius)”
26: “The Pope has just delivered a

26: Law on punishment of

message . . .

collaborators (indignité nationale).

»

29: “Broad questions of policy .. .”

30: “Judge Not”
31: The Communist-dominated
Lublin Committee proclaims itself the
provisional government of Poland.

31: “The Thirteenth Caesar
(Suetonius)”

1945

General de Gaulle forms a government of National Unity
Félix Gouin presides over expanded Consultative
Assembly (Gouin president)
De Gaulle Government (November 21, 1945—January 20, 1946)
January 1945
i:

“ ] 945

1-5: Germans threaten Strasbourg.

»

2: “Panem et circenses (Suetonius)”

2: “We have read with the requisite
respect and approval . . .”

3: “The Agence Frangaise de
Presse has just published a
communiqué...

»

Continued

318

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

5: “The press has lately been
preoccupied with injustice.”
6: Increase in salaries of government

6: “MinisterTiberius (Suetonius)”

officials after massive protests.
7-8: “Spain is growing fainter.”
11: “Justice and Charity”
16: Nationalization of Renault
factories that did work for the
Germans; constitution of a nationalized
enterprise.

21-23: Central Committee of the
Communist Party meets in Ivry:
“Unite, Fight, Work” (Thorez).
23: Germans retreat in the Ardennes.

23-28: First NLM congress. Refusal to
merge with the Communists.
27: Charles Maurras is sentenced to life

in prison. Soviet forces liberate
Auschwitz.
February 1945

3: Minority of the NLM merges with
National Front to form the United
French Resistance Movement, with ties
to the Communists.

9: “To judge by what is being said

4-12: Yalta Conference (Churchill,

about us, it would seem that

Roosevelt, Stalin). Status of United

Combat...”

Nations, Germany, and liberated territories is decided. De Gaulle refuses to
meet with Roosevelt on his return trip
6: Execution of Robert Brasillach.
13-14: Bombing of Dresden.

16: “Along with other difficult issues,
the Crimea Conference . . .”

17: “Here, at least, we aren't living
amidst'lies 72°
22: Law on the creation of comités

d entreprise.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

319

Tunisian political parties declare themselves in favor of internal autonomy.
28: Pré-Bail Accord.

March 1945

4: Allies reach the Rhine. Creation of
the Arab League in Cairo.
9: “For two days, M. Teitgen . . .”

9: Japan attacks in Indochina.

11-12: “Yesterday we published . . .”

11: North Vietnam and Cambodia
proclaim independence.

13-18: First trials before the High
Court of Justice.
16: “In Témoignage chrétien...”
18: “Breaking our general rule, we

trust that we may just this once
speak out ./. .”
27: “It is rather vexing and a bit
ridiculous . . .”
29: “Truth is a harsh master,
allowing no time for rest.”

~ April 1945

3: “What was being celebrated yesterday in the city’s streets?”
4: “As the end of hostilities draws

neater we.
5: “‘I am a teacher, and I’m hungry.”

5: Mendes France resigns from government over disagreement on financial
policy.

6: “Those who look upon the resignation of M. Mendes France . . .’

>

9: Nationalization of factories of
Gnome et Rhéne, manufacturers of air-

craft engines who have been supplying
the Germans.
10: “The victories on the western
fron tees
Continued

320

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

12: Roosevelt dies; Truman succeeds

him as president.
14: “His face was the very image of

happiness.”
15-16: “Mr. Truman has made no
secret...”

17: >With every step closer to
victory...”
19 April-13 May: Municipal elections,
victory of the left
25: American and Soviet forces
converge.

26: Pétain returns to France and places
himself in custody.
25 April—-25 May: San Francisco conference establishes UN Charter; France

refuses to act as inviting power.
30: Hitler commits suicide.
May 1945
1: Dénitz succeeds Hitler.

8: Germany surrenders.
9: “Who would think himself
capable of describing this
delirious day...”

8-12: Riots in Sétif and Guelma,
insurrection in Kabylia, followed by
very harsh repression. Foreshadowing of
Algerian War.
10-30: Prisoners of war and deportees
return home.

12: “We are waiting for a

government shakeup . . .”
13-14: “Crisis in Algeria”

15: “Famine in Algeria”
16: “Algeria Asks for Ships and
Justice”
17: “Our food consists of one liter
»»
of soup...

18: “Natives of North Africa
Estranged from a Democracy . . .”

16: France obtains a seat as permanent
member of the Security Council.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

321

EVENTS

19: “The day before yesterday we
protested the fate reserved for
deportees . . .”
20-21: “Arabs Demand a Constitution and a Parliament for Algeria”

23: “It Is Justice That Will Save

Algeria from Hatred”
25: “Yesterday, General de Gaulle
delivered a speech . . .”
26: “While awaiting the ministerial

shakeup . . .”
27: “The foreign affairs committee

of the Consultative Assembly . . .”
28: Blum-Byrnes accord on the liquidation of war debts.
30: In Syria, France bombs Damascus
to quell independence movements.
The intervention of British forces
obliges French troops to return to their
barracks, and a cease-fire is signed on
May 30.

31; “The Syrian affair...”
June 1945

1: “Mr. Churchill’s ultimatum .. .”
4-15: Exchange of banknotes.

5: “Henri Frenay is one of our
comrades-in-arms.”

5: France is awarded a zone of

occupation in Germany.

7-25: The NLM breaks up and the
Democratic and Social Union of the
Resistance is formed out of nonCommunist resistance elements.

12: End of press censorship
L’Humanité publishes an article by
Jacques Duclos on organic unity.
15: “After being briefly traumatized,
the French public . . .”
Continued

322

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

26: Signing of U.N. Charter Nationalization of airlines by purchase of stock
(which would be united in 1948 under
the aegis of Air France).

27: “M. Herriot has just made an
unfortunate statement.”
28: Rent control law.

30 June—1 July: “Images of
Occupied Germany”

30: Price control and anti-blackmarket law.
July 1945
1-22: Bretton Woods conference;

adoption of gold standard and dollar as
international unit of currency.
10-14: Estates General of the
French Renaissance (tied to the
Communists).

18 July—2 August: Potsdam Conference
(Stalin and Molotov, Truman and
Byrnes, Churchill and Eden, then

Atlee and Bevin). Agreement on a peace
treaty for Europe, German reparations,
de-Nazification, Polish frontier on
the Nesse River. France does not
participate.

23: Beginning of Pétain’s trial.
August 1945

2: “Since the Court of Justice has

acknowledged . . .”
3: Last session of the Consultative

Assembly.

4: “Many things have a claim on
the attention of the people of
metropolitan France . . .”
6: Atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
7: “General Franco has officially
announced .. .”
8: “The world is what it is, which
isn't much.”

8: Soviet Union declares war on

Japan.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

323

9: Nagasaki bombed.
12-15: Congress of S.F.1.0., where
organic unity of socialists and
communists is rejected.

12: Japan asks to surrender.
14: “We previously indicated our
slight anxiety . . .”

15: “Yesterday the Washington
Times Herald...”

15: The High Court sentences
Pétain to death while expressing the
hope that he will be pardoned, and
General de Gaulle does pardon him.
16: In Indochina, Ho Chi Minh calls
for a nationwide insurrection.

17: “Now that the war is over...

»

17: Law on the October elections.
20: Proclamation of the Republic of
Vietnam.

22: “The first National Assembly of
the Press...”

23: “The Radical Party congress . . .”

24: “At the Radical eepe
M. Herriot complained
..
25: Abdication of Bao Dai. Formation
of government by Ho Chi Minh

26-27: “We have proved to be
excellent prophets.”
28: “Many readers have asked us
to take a position .. .”
30: “We beg the reader's
indulgence...”
September 1945

1: “The postwar has begun.”
2: Japan surrenders.
5: Benoit Frachon is elected secretary of
the C.G.T.
18: Opening of Niiremberg trials.
Continued

324

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

23: French reestablish themselves in

Saigon.
23-30: Cantonal elections.
October 1945

4: Beginning of Pierre Laval’s trial.
4-19: Law on social security.

11: Law on housing crisis.
15: Execution of Pierre Laval.
19: Landing in Indochina of French

Expeditionary Force commanded by
Leclerc.

21: Referendum and elections to the
first Constituent Assembly. Yes to two
questions: rejection of institutions of

the Third Republic. Elections bring
success to Communists, M.R.P,, and

Socialists; failure for the right and the
Radicals.
November 1945

8: Félix Gouin elected president of the
National Assembly.

13: De Gaulle unanimously elected
head of government.
15: “France is in a state of siege.”
December 1945

2: Nationalization of banks and
credit.

13: Crisis in Syria and Lebanon;
evacuation of French and English
troops.

22: Creation of Republican Party of
Freedom.

26: Ratification of Bretton Woods
accords; currency to be defined in terms
of gold and dollars; creation of the
International Monetary Fund and the

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

325

International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development.
28: Reinstitution of the bread ration
card.

1946
Second Constituent Assembly (National Assembly) (president: Vincent Auriol)

Resignation of General de Gaulle (January 20)
Gouin Government (January 29)
Bidault Government (June 23)
Blum Government (December 16)
January 1946

10: General Assembly of the UN.
20: General de Gaulle resigns in disagreement over shape of government

and rule by parties.

24: Accord between M.R.P., Socialists,
and Communists lays foundations of
tripartite rule.
29: Election of Félix Gouin as head of
government.

31: Vincent Auriol elected president of
the Constituent Assembly.
February 1946

1: Newspaper strike in Paris.
March 1946

6: Sainteny—Ho Chi Minh accord
on recognition of Vietnam as a free
state.

April 1946

3: Resignation of FE de Menthon as
general secretary for the constitution;
replaced by Pierre Cot.
8: Nationalization of gas and electricity.
16: Law on personnel delegates.
Continued

326

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

19: Socialist-Communist majority
votes in favor of the constitution.
29: C.G.T. leads strike at Renault.

Bread ration set at 250 grams.
May 1946

5: Victory of “no” in referendum; the
proposed constitution is rejected by 52
percent of voters.
16: Law on works councils.
17: Law on coal mines.

28: Blum-Byrnes financial accords;
$650 million in debt is deferred
C.G.T. demands higher wages.
June 1946

2: Elections to the Second Constituent
Assembly; success of M.R.P.; Communist gains; Socialist losses. In Algeria,

success of Union of Friends of the

Manifesto, led by Ferhat Abbas.
12: Creation of the C.N.PE
16: In Bayeux, General de Gaulle proposes a constitution similar to the one
that would be adopted in 1958.
18: Proclamation of the Italian Republic.
19: Bidault becomes head of
government.

23: Bidault government based on
tripartite rule (Socialists, Communists,
M.R.P.).
July 1946

4: Employers and unions meet at
Palais-Royal to discuss price stability
and wage increases.
6: Opening of Franco-Vietnamese conference at Fontainebleau, with Ho Chi

Minh attending.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

327

29: Opening of Peace Conference in
Paris.
30 July—3 August: Postal strike.
August 1946

3: Civil service salaries increased by
25 percent.

6: Law on family contributions.
29: 38th Congress of S.EI.O.
September 1946

4: Guy Mollet elected secretary general
of the S.FI.O.

12: Law on old-age insurance.
14: End of Fontainebleau conference.
Provisional accord between Moutet and
Ho Chi Minh avoids breakdown of talks.

30: New draft constitution is adopted
by the Assembly.
October 1946

13: Constitutional referendum: the proposed constitution is adopted.
15: End of Paris conference.
19: Law on civil service status.
Late October: Scandal in wine and
textile industries.
November

1946

10: Legislative elections: Communists

advance, Socialists lose ground.
18: Thierry d’Argenlieu meets with
Ho Chi Minh.
Neither Victims nor Executioners

19: “The Century of Fear”
20: “Saving Bodies”
21: “Socialism Mystified”
Continued

CHRONOLOGY

328

23: “The Revolution Travestied”

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

23: Shelling of Haiphong by French
navy kills several thousand people.
24 November—8 December: Elections

to the Council of the Republic.
26: “International Democracy

and Dictatorship”
27: “The World Moves Quickly”

29: “A New Social Contract”

30: “Toward Dialogue”
December 1946

3: Vincent Auriol elected president of
the National Assembly.

12: The UN decides on a diplomatic
boycott but not an economic boycott
of Spain.
16: After failed attempts by Thorez
and Bidault, Blum becomes head of
government.

19: Insurrection in Hanoi. Economic

annexation of the Saar by France.

23: Law on collective bargaining
agreements.
1947

Vincent Auriol, President of the Republic
Ramadier Government (January 28)
Schuman Government (November 22)
January 1947

1: Social security plan goes into
effect.

2: Prices decreased by 5 percent.
8—15: Newspaper strike in Paris.
8—9: Moutet and General Leclerc leave
Indochina.

16: Vincent Auriol is elected president
of the Republic.
Blum government resigns.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

329

17: [Response to a questionnaire
on American literature]

21: Edouard Herriot is elected president of the National Assembly.
24: French plan on status of Germany.
28: Ramadier becomes head of
government.
February 1947
10: Peace treaty with Finland, Bulgaria,

Hungary, Romania, and Italy signed at
Trianon.

11 February—17 March: Newspaper
strike in Paris.
March 1947

4: Treaty seals Franco-British alliance.
5: Bollaert named high commissioner
in Indochina.

10: Moscow conference on Germany.
12: Truman speech on American aid.

17: “The Deaf and Dumb Republic”
18: Monnerville elected president of
the Council of the Republic (Senate).
21: “Radio 47”

22: “No Excuse for This”

22: Vote to allocate funds for the mili-

tary in Indochina. The Communist
Party rejects Ramadier’s policy.

30: De Gaulle speaks in Bruneval
Malagasy insurrection begins.

31: De Gaulle and Ramadier meet
Creation of minimum wage (S.M.I.G.).
April 1947

2-12: Repression in Madagascar.

7: In Strasbourg, de Gaulle announces
the creation of the Rassemblement du
Continued

330

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

Peuple Frangais (R.P.F.), which is off-

cially born on April 14.
9: Sultan of Morocco denounces the
protectorate.
21: Franco-American agreement on the

Ruhr.
22: “The Choice”

24: Moscow conference on the German
problem fails.
French policy shifts toward that of England and the United States.

29: The C.G.T. assumes leadership of
the Renault strike.
30: “Democracy and Modesty”

May 1947
1: Bread ration reduced to 200
grams per day. Demonstration in
Paris.

4: Dismissal of Communist ministers
who protested the arrest of Malagasy
deputies and voted no confidence in
the government.
7: “Anniversary”
10: “Contagion”

10-21: Incidents in Lyons and
Dijon.
16: Work resumes at Renault.

18: General Juin named resident
general in Morocco.

25: Requisition of personnel in the
electrical and gas utilities.
June 1947

3: “To Our Readers”

1: Numerous strikes.

5: Marshall Plan proposed. France and
England ultimately accept American
aid, while Soviet Union and
Czechoslovakia refuse.

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

331

July-December 1947

27 August: Algeria status approved.
September—November: New wave of
strikes.
5 October: Constitution of Kominform
(news bureau representing communist

and workers’ parties). This was a response
to the Marshall Plan and covered the
Communist countries (Soviet Union,

Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Romania,
and Czechoslovakia) as well as the Com-

munist Parties of France and Italy.
19 November: Ramadier resigns.
20 November: Following the failure of
Léon Blum to form a government,
Robert Schuman is chosen
Accidental death of General Leclerc.
10 December: Inaugural session of the

assembly of the French Union.
14—28 December: The S.EI.O. and
M.R.P. declare themselves in favor of a

“Third Force.”

15 December: Failure of the Big Four
meeting in London on the German
problem.
1948
January—October 1948

25-30 January: Devaluation of the
franc, return to free market in gold,
blockage of 5,000-franc notes.
30 January: Assassination of Gandhi.
11 February: Naegelen named governorgeneral of Algeria.

24 February: Communists seize power in
Prague.
Continued

332

CHRONOLOGY

OF

PRINCIPAL

EVENTS

28 February: Creation of Rassemblement Démocratique Révolutionnaire
(Altman, Sartre, Rousset).
13 March: American Senate approves
the Marshall Plan.

4-11 April: Elections in Algeria.
14 May: Proclamation of state of Israel.

5 June: France recognizes independence
of Vietnam.
22 June: Soviets begin Berlin blockade.
19 July: Robert Schuman resigns.
24 July: André Marie forms new
gover nment.

25-28 August: Birth of Movement for
Peace in Wroclaw.
27 August: Marie government resigns,

replaced by Robert Schuman, who
presided over a minority coalition.
11 September: Queuille government.

4 October: Two death sentences against
Malagasy rebels, including Raseta.
November 1948
November—December: Garry Davis stirs

controversy and attracts support after proclaiming himself a citizen of the world.
2: Truman reelected.

25: “Why Spain?”

29: End of numerous strikes that had led
to police being called into factories and
reservists being recalled to active duty.
December 1948

9: “What Is the UN Accomplishing?”

10: Universal Declaration of the Rights
of Man adopted at UN
25-26: “Responses to an Unbeliever”

PARTIAL

BIBLIOGRAPHY

|. WORKS BY ALBERT CAMUS

Bartfeld, Fernande. Albert Camus voyageur et conférencier, le voyage en Amérique du Sud.
Archives des Lettres Modernes, Archives Albert Camus no. 7, Lettres Modernes, 1995.
Grenier, Roger. Albert Camus, Soleil et Ombre. Paris: Gallimard, 1987.
Guérin, Jeanyves. Camus et la politique. Actes du Colloque de Nanterre, 5—7 June 1985. Paris:
LHarmattan, 1986.
Guérin, Jeanyves. Portrait de ‘artiste en citoyen. Paris: Bourrin, 1993.
Lebesque, Morvan. Camus par lui-méme, “Ecrivains de toujours.” Paris: Editions du Seuil,
1963.
Parker, Emmett. The Artist in the Arena. Madison and Milwaukee: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1965.
Todd, Olivier. Albert Camus: Une vie. Paris: Gallimard, 1996.
Weyembergh, Maurice. Albert Camus ou la mémoire des origines. Brussels: De Boeck University,
1998.
Collective Works
A Albert Camus, ses amis du Livre. Paris: Gallimard, 1962.
Camus, “Génies et réalités.” Paris: Hachette, 1964.

ll: WORKS ABOUT COMBAT

Ajchenbaum, Yves-Marc. A /a vie, a la mort: Histoire du journal “Combat,” 1941-1974. Paris:
Le Monde Editions, 1994.

Guérin, Jeanyves, ed. Camus et le premier “Combat.” Actes du Collque de Paris X-Nanterre.
Editions européennes Erasme, 1990.

Ill. WORKS ON THE HISTORICAL PERIOD

Ageron, Robert. Histoire de l’Algérie contemporaine. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,

1970.
Aron, Raymond. Mémoires: 50 ans de vie politique. Paris: Julliard, 1983.
Aron, Robert. Histoire de la Libération de la France. Paris: Fayard, 1959.

Aron, Robert. Histoire de l’épuration. Paris: Fayard, 1967.
Aron, Robert. Les Origines de la guerre d’Algérie. Texts and contemporary documents. Paris:
Fayard, 1962.
Azéma, Jean-Pierre, and Francois Bédarida, eds. La France des années noires. Vol. 1, De la
défaite a Vichy. Vol. 2, De Voccupation a la Libération. Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1993.

Azéma, Jean-Pierre, and Francois Bédarida, eds. Les Années de tourmente. De Munich a Prague.
Critical Dictionary. Paris: Flammarion, 1995.

Conan, Eric, and Henry Rousso. Vichy un passé qui ne passe pas. Paris: Fayard, 1994. Paris:
Gallimard, 1996.

Dahan, Yves-Maxime. La vie politique a Alger de 1940 a 1944. Librairie de droit et de jurisprudence, Pichon et Durand-Auzias, 1963.

Dansette, Adrien. Histoire de la Libération de Paris. “Les grandes études contemporaies.” Paris:
Librairie Arthéme Fayard, 1946.

4

£ het gap

|
/f i

ie

AJ el q 7

—

jo Aylssaniun

Sa2\\1o¢ ae

LITERATURE

Collected in their entirety here for the first time in English, Camus at Combat presents all of Camus’ World War II resistance and early postwar writings published in Combat, the resistance newspaper where he served as editor-in-chief and editorial writer between 1944 and 1947. These 165 articles

and editorials show how Camus’ thinking evolved from support of a revolutionary transformation of postwar society, to a wariness of the radical Left
alongside his longstanding strident opposition to the reactionary Right.

More than fifty years after the publication of these writings, they still
speak to us about freedom, justice, truth, and democracy.
“As Camus at Combat ... makes plain, the experience, first, of the Nazi occupation of France, and then of the struggle of Algerian independence against
France led him to conclude that the ‘primitive’ impulse to kill and torture
shared a taproot with the habit of abstraction, of thinking of other people as
a class of entities.”

“It is astonishing to see how many of the issues on which Camus comments,
and which were broached by the situation in which he was writing, anticipate
and prefigure problems that continue to afflict us today. In his commentaries, Camus never stays on the surface of the events that provide his starting
point; he is always searching for the deeper causes . . . that motivate human
behavior. For this reason, many of these occasional writings still live.”

“[T]his important book offers both a moving portrayal of life under the Occu-

pation and a fascinating glimpse at the evolution of the author's thinking.”

JACQUELINE L&vI-VALENSI (1932-2004) was emeritus professor and dean of literature at University de Picardie, in Amiens, and France’s leading scholar on Camus.
Davip CARROLL is professor of French at the University of California, Irvine. His books
include French Literary Fascism. ARTHUR GOLDHAMMER has translated more than ninety
books from the French. In 1996 he was named Chevalier dans I'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres
by the French Minister of Culture.

Cover photo: Albert Camus © Henri Cartier-Bresson/Magnum Photos, 1944,

P| rainceron
press.princeton.edu

TeilMl

ISBN-13:

9°"780691

li

