©  



American   Journals  



American   Journals  
Albert   Camus  
Translation   by   Hugh   Levick  
PARAGON   HOUSE   PUBLISHERS  
New   York  

First   English   translation,   1987.  
Published   by  
PARAGON   HOUSE   PUBLISHERS  
90   Fifth   Avenue  
New   York,   New   York   10011  
Copyright   1987   by   Paragon   House   Publishers  
Copyright   1978   by   Editions   Gallimard  
All   rights   reserved.   No   part   of   this   book  
may   be   reproduced,   in   any   form,   without   written  
permission   from   the   publisher,   unless   by   a  
reviewer   who   wishes   to   quote   brief   passages.  
Cover   and   text   design   by   Edward   A.   Butler  
Library   of   Congress   Cataloging-in-Publication   Data  
Camus,   Albert,   1913-1960.  
American   journals.  
Translation   of:   Journaux   de   voyage.  
1.   C amus,   Albert,   1913-1960—Journeys—America.  
2.   Authors,   French—20th   century—Biography.  
3.   America—Description   and   travel.   I.   Title.  
PQ2605.A3734Z46613   1987   848 / .91403   {B]   87-2376  
ISBN   0-913729-68-X  

Contents  
Preface   to   the   English   Language   Edition . 7  
Introduction   to   the   French   Edition   . 1 1  
The   United   States   (March-May   1946) . 1 9  
South   America   (June-August   1949) . 5 7  
Notes   . 1 4 3  
Chronology   . 1 4 9  
A   Note   on   the   Author   . 1 5 5  
A   Note   on   the   Type   157  

Digitized   by   the   Internet   Archive  
in   2019   with   funding   from  
Kahle/Austin   Foundation  
https://archive.org/details/americanjournalsOOOOcamu  

Preface   to   the   English  
Language   Edition  
American   Journals   is   a   translation   of   Journaux   de  
voyage,   which   was   published   by   Gallimard   in   1978.  
The   complete   text   has   been   translated,   with   the  
exception   of   several   explanatory   notes   unneces¬  
sary   for   English-language   readers.   Some   notes  
have   also   been   added,   to   identify   names   and   terms  
perhaps   more   familiar   to   French   readers   than   to  
those   reading   in   English.  
The   volume   incorporates   two   of   Camus’s  
notebooks:   one   kept   during   his   1946   visit   to   the  
7  

8   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
United   States,   and   the   second,   during   his   1949  
trip   to   South   America.   The   United   States   journal,  
which   is   the   shorter   of   the   two,   is   loosely   struc¬  
tured:   Camus   seems   to   be   writing   when   the   mood  
strikes   him.   Entries   are   generally   labelled   by   days  
of   the   week   or   descriptive   headings.   In   contrast,  
every   entry   in   the   South   American   journal   begins  
with   a   date,   and   there   is   an   entry   for   every   date,  
except   July   29,   and   August   28-30   (during   the   lat¬  
ter   period,   Camus   was   ill   and   anxious   to   return   to  
Paris,   his   departure   having   been   postponed   sev¬  
eral   times).  
These   journals   reflect   the   stress   of   travel   and  
a   hectic   schedule   of   public   appearances,   and   thus  
they   afford   us   glimpses   of   Camus   at   his   most   sar¬  
donic   and   his   most   vulnerable.   Witness   his   first   re¬  
action   to   New   York:   “.   .   .   Everyone   looks   like  
they’ve   stepped   out   of   a   B-film”;   and   his   thoughts  
during   the   sea   voyage   to   South   America:   “Twice,  
the   idea   of   suicide   ...   I   think   I   understand   now  
how   one   kills   oneself.”   Camus’s   attitude   toward   the  
sea   best   expresses   his   ambivalence:   “That’s   the  
way   the   sea   is,   and   that’s   why   I   love   it!   A   call   to   life  
and   an   invitation   to   death!”   The   journals   are   filled  
with   humorous   observations,   somber   musings   on  
philosophy   and   the   meaning   of   life,   and   notes  
which   would   later   become   parts   of   larger   works,  
including   “The   Growing   Stone,”   “The   Sea   Close  
By”   Neither   Victims   nor   Executioners   and   The   Plague.  

PREFACE   •   9  
The   introduction   which   follows   was   written  
by   Roger   Quilliot,   a   long-time   editor   of   Camus,  
who   compiled   the   Pleiade   edition   of   Camus’s  
works.  



Introduction   to   the  
French   Edition  
Several   years   ago,   when   we   published   the   second  
volume   of   Albert   Camus’s   Notebooks,   two   difficul¬  
ties   presented   themselves:   one   a   problem   of   princi¬  
ple,   the   other   technical   in   nature.  
The   notebook   devoted   to   South   America   was  
not   filed   with   the   others;   the   manuscript   was   also  
separate. 1   It   was   entitled   Voyage   to   South   America.   It  
was   clear   that   the   author   had   questioned   himself  
about   its   fate.   Furthermore,   when   in   1954   he   sent  
me   the   typed   manuscript   of   these   collected  
11  

12   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Notebooks,   the   trip   to   South   America   appeared   in   a  
special   folder.   Had   Camus   envisaged   fleshing   it  
out,   making   of   it   a   larger   work?   We   have   no   proof.  
But   everything   indicates   that   the   trip   and   its   nar¬  
ration   occupied   a   special   place   in   his   mind.  
This   being   the   case,   in   what   form   could   we  
publish   it,   since   the   notebook   itself   was   too   short  
to   come   out   as   an   individual   volume?   Very   logi¬  
cally,   we   imagined   associating   it   with   a   trip   to  
North   America   which   was   included   in   the   chrono¬  
logical   sequence   of   the   other   notebooks. 2   An   in¬  
clusion   which   is   easy   to   understand   if   one   consid¬  
ers   that   aside   from   some   traveller’s   notes  
concerning   the   crossing   of   the   Atlantic   and   the  
discovery   of   New   York,   Camus   speaks   rather   little  
about   the   meetings   and   adventures   that   consti¬  
tuted   this   voyage,   and   even   less   about   the   lectures  
he   gave   in   New   York   and   at   Harvard   and   how   peo¬  
ple   reacted   to   them.   On   the   other   hand,   the  
preoccupations   that   are   strewn   throughout   the  
1945   and   1946   notebooks   are   present   in   these  
pages,   in   particular   The   Plague.  
Despite   these   differences   in   texture   we   de¬  
cided   to   issue   the   two   notebooks   together.   The  
text   was   established   by   Madame   Camus   and   myself  
by   examining   different   typescripts   and   manu¬  
scripts,   one   of   which—the   notebook   of   the   Voy-  

INTRODUCTION   •   13  
age   to   the   U.S.A.—belonged,   like   all   the   note¬  
books   of   its   type,   to   Madame   Camus,   the   other   to  
Madame   Maria   Casares,   who   generously   entrusted  
it   to   us   for   examination.  
To   avoid   all   useless   speculation,   let   me   say  
once   again   that   these   texts   are   published,   like  
those   which   preceded   them,   without   any   cuts.   Ini¬  
tials,   when   they   exist,   were   chosen   by   the   author.  
One   exception,   however:   twice   we   have   replaced  
the   name   of   the   same   person   with   an   X.  
•  
The   two   notebooks   have   one   point   of   interest  
in   common:   they   show   us   how   Camus   passed   from  
rough   notes   to   a   finished   work.   Several   passages  
from   the   Voyage   to   the   U.S.A.   can   be   found   in  
“The   Rains   of   New   York”;   important   fragments  
from   the   Voyage   to   South   America   have   been   in¬  
tegrated   either   into   “The   Sea   Close   By”   (L’Ete),  
or   even   more   voluminously   into   “The   Growing  
Stone.”   Two   dance   scenes,   actually   witnessed,   are  
condensed   into   one   of   the   only   exotic   texts   which  
Camus   ever   wrote;   the   trip   to   Iguape   and   the   epi¬  
sode   of   the   growing   stone,   recorded   as   simple   folk¬  
lore,   take   on,   in   the   short   story,   symbolic   value.  
There   are   few   examples   which   so   clearly   exhibit  
the   transformations   of   the   raw   fact   into   the   cre¬  
ated   myth—and   it   is   a   myth   willed   optimistic   by  
the   author,   for   whom   the   actual   voyage   was   ex¬  
hausting   and   depressing.  

14   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
The   different   circumstances   of   the   two   voy¬  
ages   influenced   Camus’s   reactions:   the   trip   to   the  
U.S.A.,   begun   March   10,   1946,   is   the   voyage   of   a  
well-known   journalist   who   has   not   yet   attained   full  
recognition   as   an   author.   From   which   fact   springs  
the   wary   welcome   of   the   American   immigration  
police   who   see   in   Camus   the   moving   spirit   behind  
a   newspaper   which   proudly   flaunts   the   motto,  
From   Resistance   to   Revolution.   The   amazing   thing   is  
that   Camus   tells   us   nothing   about   his   visits   to   the  
American   universities,   which   should   have   been   as¬  
tonishing   for   a   French   traveller,   nor   about   the  
most   prestigious   of   them,   Harvard,   which   none¬  
theless   recorded   his   passage   in   its   monthly   bulle¬  
tin.   His   notes   suggest   a   kind   of   bewilderment,  
both   admiring   and   reproachful,   face   to   face   with  
this   New   World,   limitless   both   in   its   skyscrapers  
and   its   expanses;   and   a   vague   anxiety   about   the  
unconscious   expansionism   implied   by   such   colossal  
power.   In   the   near   future,   between   the   two   hostile  
camps   forming   in   the   East   and   the   West—of  
which   the   U.S.A.   is   one   of   the   pillars—Camus   will  
obstinately   refuse   to   choose.   Nonetheless,   at   this  
time   he   confides   to   his   former   teacher,   M.   Ger¬  
main:   “My   trip   to   America   taught   me   a   lot   of  
things,   the   details   of   which   would   take   more   space  
than   I   have   here.   It’s   a   great   country,   strong   and  
disciplined   in   liberty,   but   unaware   of   many   things,  
foremost   of   which   is   Europe.”  

INTRODUCTION   •   15  
The   Voyage   to   South   America   is   of   a   differ¬  
ent   nature:   Camus   is   in   a   precarious   state   of   health  
at   the   outset,   but   it   is   only   progressively   that   he  
begins   to   suspect   a   new   attack   of   tuberculosis.   In  
this   sense   his   itinerary   is   also   that   of   the   re-emerg-  
ing   illness,   which   is   one   of   the   subjects   of   “The  
Sea   Close   By.”   He   cannot   be   far   from   those   who  
are   dear   to   him   without   great   pain,   to   which   his  
nervousness   about   mail   delays   testifies.   Finally,   it   is  
his   first   official   voyage   as   a   celebrity:   they   will   not  
get   him   to   do   it   again   (although   later   on   he,   in  
reality,   gives   lectures   in   Italy   and   Greece).   If   he  
does   manage   to   amuse   himself   from   time   to   time,  
more   often   than   not   he   is   annoyed   by   the   many  
constraints   inherent   in   this   kind   of   project:   a   vari¬  
ety   of   meetings,   often   disappointing,   the   uneven  
quality   of   his   hosts   and   how   he   is   received—  
everything   is   set   up   to   irritate   a   man   who   detests  
fashionable   gatherings,   but   who   knows   that   having  
undertaken   this   trip,   he   must   also   accept   these  
annoyances.   Thus   we   see   him   submitting   himself,  
with   vexation,   to   an   excessively   busy   schedule   of  
events   of   varying   degrees   of   interest.  
On   the   whole   these   pages   bear   the   mark   of   a  
state   of   crisis   which   is   confirmed   from   the   very  
beginning   as   he   reads   Vigny   on   the   boat.   It   is   a  
physical   crisis   which   will   take   Camus   many   months  
to   overcome;   an   existential   crisis   which   translates  

16   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
into   his   obsession   with   suicide   and   his   acute   feeling  
of   exile—another   aspect   of   this   voyage   which  
places   it   at   the   source   of   “The   Growing   Stone.”  
He   also   appears   to   be   particularly   sensitive   to  
the   intense   contrasts   within   these   American   lands,  
as   seen   from   a   European   vantage   point:   wealth  
and   extreme   poverty;   refined   and   primitive   cul¬  
tures,   sometimes   within   the   same   community.   Not  
to   mention   the   enormous   problem   that   the   over¬  
population   of   these   lands—particularly   in   the  
large   cities—poses   for   any   lucid   observer!   Not  
without   discomfort   does   Camus   discover   what   was  
beginning   to   be   called   the   Third   World.   And  
without   a   doubt   he   suffers   from   seeing   it   in   a   whirl  
of   airplane   flights   and   fashionable   gatherings.  
•  
Two   trips   separated   from   one   another   by   a  
span   of   three   years.   During   the   twelve   years   which  
follow,   Camus   rarely   consents   to   lectures   in   for¬  
eign   countries:   he   will   refuse   a   huge   sum   from   Ja¬  
pan.   Only   from   a   sense   of   obligation   will   he   resign  
himself   to   the   Nobel   Prize   celebrations   in   Stock¬  
holm,   and   even   then   only   at   the   insistence   of  
Roger   Martin   du   Gard   and   his   publishers.  
Paradoxically,   even   though   the   young   man  
without   great   resources   had   travelled   freely  
throughout   Europe,   the   writer   at   the   height   of   his  

INTRODUCTION   •   17  
fame,   after   1948,   gave   up   the   voyages   which   gen¬  
erally   enriched   the   lives   of   his   contemporaries.  
R.   Quilliot  
1.   It   is   announced   in   the   manuscript   of   notebook   VI   by   the   indica¬  
tion,   “see   S.   Am.   journal   June   to   August   1949.”  
2.   In   manuscript   these   pages   are   found   in   notebook   V,   a   student  
notebook   like   the   preceding   ones,   and   the   text   is   connected   to   the  
page   which   was   begun   before   his   departure.   In   the   two   typescripts,  
the   numbering   of   the   pages   does   not   indicate   any   discontinuity.   In¬  
contestably,   the   notes   were   made   spontaneously,   and   were   not   re¬  
written.  



The   United   States  
•AMERICA.   DEPARTURE.  
The   light   anxiety   of   departure   has   passed.   In   the  
train,   I   meet   R.,   a   psychiatrist   who   is   going   over  
there   to   make   contacts.   I   know   that   he’ll   be   in   my  
cabin   on   the   boat,   and   that’s   all   right   because   I  
find   him   both   discreet   and   friendly.   In   my   train  
compartment,   three   kids   rather   wild   at   the   start,  
but   who   eventually   calm   down,   their   little   maid,  
their   mother,   a   tall,   elegant   woman   with   bright  
eyes,   and   a   tiny   little   blond   woman   who   sits   oppo-  
19  

20   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
site   me   crying.   An   uneventful   trip   except   for   one  
incident.   I   do   several   favors   for   the   young   blond  
woman.   Before   Rouen,   a   sort   of   tall   woman   with  
thick   features,   dressed   in   a   long   fur   coat,   asks   me  
if   all   the   people   in   this   part   of   the   train   are   going  
to   America.   If   I’m   going.   “Yes.”   She   excuses   her¬  
self   and   then   asks   me   if   she   can   ask   me   what   I’m  
going   to   do   there.  
“Some   lectures.”  
“Literary   or   scientific?”  
“Literary.”  
A   truly   theatrical   exclamation,   complete   with  
raising   her   hand   quickly   to   cover   her   mouth—es¬  
capes   her.   “Ah!”   she   says,   “isn’t   that   marvelous!”  
And   two   seconds   later,   her   eyes   lowered:   “I  
am   also   in   literature.”  
“Oh,   really!”  
“Yes.   I   am   going   to   publish   a   book   of   poems.”  
“That’s   very   good,”   I   say.  
“Yes,   and   I’ve   gotten   Rosemonde   Gerard   to  
contribute   a   preface.   She’s   written   a   very   beautiful  
sonnet   for   me.”  
“That’s   wonderful!”  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   21  
“Of   course,   it’s   only   my   first   book.   But   to  
make   a   literary   debut   with   a   preface   by   Rose-  
monde   Gerard.   .   .   .”  
“Who’s   the   publisher?”  
She   gives   me   a   name   that   I   don’t   know.   She  
explains   that   it’s   traditional   verse   “because   my  
leaning   is   towards   the   classical   forms.   I   don’t   know  
what   you   think   about   modern   literature   ...   but   I  
don’t   like   what   I   can’t   understand,”   etc.,   etc.   She  
gets   off   the   train   at   Rouen   and   offers   to   mail   a  
telegram   for   me   that   I   want   to   send   to   Paris   be¬  
cause   I’ve   left   behind   R’s   New   York   address.   She  
never   sent   it   because   I   haven’t   received   an   answer.  
In   the   dining   car   I   see   R.   and   we   eat   lunch   sit¬  
ting   opposite   the   tiny   blond   who   can’t   manage   to  
crack   her   walnuts.   In   Le   Havre   the   tiny   little  
woman,   who   seems   completely   lost,   asks   me   to  
help   her.   Waiting   for   the   bus   we   talk   a   little.   She’s  
going   to   Philadelphia.   The   bus   is   an   old   police  
van,   dirty   and   dusty.   Le   Havre,   with   its   immense  
ruins.   The   air   is   hot   and   humid.   When   we   arrive   at  
the   Oregon,   I   see   that   it’s   a   freighter,   a   large  
freighter,   but   a   freighter   nonetheless.   Customs,  
foreign   exchange,   police   station   with   the   small  
box   of   cards   that   a   cop   checks   while   you   tell   him  
your   name—and   that   I   know   well   because   of   some  
close   calls   that   I   had   with   boxes   like   this   one   dur¬  
ing   the   occupation.   And   then   boarding   the   ship.  

22   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
The   cabin   for   four   with   showers   and   a   toilet  
has   become   a   cabin   for   five   where   it’s   impossible  
to   sneeze   without   knocking   something   over.   We  
are   asked   to   go   to   the   dining   room   to   see   the  
maitre   d’hotel.   In   reality   we’ve   been   convened   to  
watch   a   comic   performance.   The   maitre   d’hotel  
looks   like   the   Frenchmen   that   one   sees   in   Ameri¬  
can   films,   and   on   top   of   it,   he’s   afflicted   with   a   tic  
that   has   him   passing   out   irritating   winks   right   and  
left.   In   order   to   compose   harmonious   dining   ta¬  
bles   he   has,   like   a   good   hostess,   a   layout   of   the   din¬  
ing   room   and   a   list   of   the   professions   of   those   pas¬  
sengers   who’ve   come   specially   recommended.  
Naturally,   he   wants   to   put   me   with   a   journalist. 1  
But   I   refuse   energetically   and   finally   manage   to  
get   a   table   with   R.   and   the   little   blond   whose   name  
is—wonderfully—Jeanne   Lorette.   She’s   a   little  
Parisian   who’s   in   the   perfume   business,   who   was  
crying   this   morning   because   she   had   left   her   twin  
sister   who’s   everything   to   her,   but   she’s   going   to  
Philadelphia   to   meet   an   American   whom   she’s  
supposed   to   marry.   R.   is   delighted   by   the   natural¬  
ness,   discretion,   and   kindness   of   Lorette.   Me   too.  
We’re   a   little   less   delighted   by   the   cabin.   The   fold-  
out   bed,   in   the   middle   of   the   room,   is   occupied   by  
an   old   man   of   70.   The   bunk   above   mine   belongs  
to   a   middle-aged   guy   whom   I   take   to   be   a   business¬  
man.   Above   R.   is   a   vice   consul   who’s   on   his   way   to  
Shanghai   and   who   has   an   open,   fun-loving   appear-  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   23  
ance.   We   get   settled   and   then   I   decide   to   do   some  
work.  
I   dine   with   R.,   Lorette,   the   tall   lady   from   the  
train   compartment   (she’s   not   really   so   tall—but  
thin   and   elegant),   and   a   Mexican   couple   “who   are  
in   business.’’   The   two   women   seem   to   look   at   our  
Lorette   a   little   distrustfully.   But   since   she   just   con¬  
tinues   being   natural,   she’s   the   one   who   appears   to  
have   the   most   class.   She   tells   us   that   her   mother-  
in-law   who   doesn’t   even   know   her   sends   her   the  
nicest   letters,   and   that   it   seems   that   American  
mothers-in-law   are   absolutely   top   quality.   Her   fi¬  
ance   is   religious,   and   he   neither   drinks   nor  
smokes.   He   asked   her   to   go   to   confession   before  
leaving   France.   The   morning   she   was   leaving   (dur¬  
ing   the   preceding   days,   she   had   been   getting   the  
necessary   papers,   etc.)   she   got   up   at   6   a   m.   to   go   to  
church,   but   it   was   closed   and   the   train   was   leaving  
early.   So   she’ll   confess   over   there   and,   she   says   in  
her   light   Parisian   accent   (most   of   the   time   she   ar¬  
ticulates   very   badly   and   you   have   to   strain   to   catch  
what   she’s   saying),   “I   prefer   that   because   the   one  
over   there   won’t   understand   very   well   what   I’m  
saying,   and   he’ll   give   me   absolution.”   We   explain  
to   her   that   in   cases   like   this   they   always   give   abso¬  
lution.   “Even   for   mortal   ones.”   But   of   course,   R.  
says,   convinced.   And   we   point   out   to   her   the   fact  
that   there’s   undoubtedly   a   chaplain   on   the   boat.  

24   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
After   dinner   R.   and   I   agree   on   the   fact   that  
the   charming   Lorette   tries   to   calm   her   own   appre¬  
hension   by   presenting   to   others   and   consequently  
to   herself   a   comforting   image   of   her   situation—  
which   is   perhaps   comforting,   but   this   is   not   the  
question.   In   any   case   we   also   agree   on   wishing   for  
this   curious   little   creature   all   the   happiness   that  
she   deserves.   Going   to   sleep   is   a   more   difficult  
project.   The   cabin   is   packed.   There   are   two   snor-  
ers,   the   old   man   and   the   businessman.   On   top   of  
that   R.   and   I   had   opened   the   porthole,   but   the   old  
man   closes   it   in   the   middle   of   the   night.   I   have   the  
impression   that   I’m   breathing   the   breath   of   the  
others   and   I   want   to   go   sleep   on   the   deck.   Only  
the   idea   of   the   cold   holds   me   back.   Wake   up   at  
7:30   a   m.   because   after   8:30   we   can   no   longer   have  
breakfast.   Work   in   the   morning.   At   12:15   lunch.  
The   Mexican   tells   me   that   he   represents   French  
perfumes   in   Mexico   and   goes   on   and   on   about  
French   quality.   The   beautiful   bright   eyes   opposite  
me   lose   a   little   of   their   haughtiness,   and   one   per¬  
ceives   that   there   was   a   lot   of   timidity   in   their   brilli¬  
ance.   Lorette   assures   us   that   she   will   never   permit  
her   family   to   speak   badly   of   France.   She   portrays  
the   people   of   Antwerp   as   having   outstanding  
judgement.   (If   they   buy   jewels   for   their   wives,  
they’re   always   uncut   diamonds,   never   set   rings.  
That   way,   they   have   capital.   And   fur   coats.   Safe  
investments   in   short.)  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   25  
In   the   afternoon   we   speak   with   the   vice-  
consul.   I’m   not   surprised   to   learn   that   he   is   from  
Oran.   And   naturally   we   pat   each   other   enthusiasti¬  
cally   on   the   shoulder.   He’s   been   to   the   most   unbe¬  
lievable   countries,   among   them   Bolivia,   which  
he   describes   very   well.   La   Paz   is   at   an   altitude   of  
13,000   feet.   Automobiles   there   lose   40%   of   their  
power,   tennis   balls   hardly   make   it   over   the   net,  
and   horses   can   only   jump   low   obstacles.   He   man¬  
aged   there   by   eating   garlic.   His   wife,   a   cultivated  
Polish   woman,   tells   R.   stories   about   magic.   3   p.m.  
The   ship   leaves.   The   sea   is   smooth.   The   wife   of  
one   of   the   sailors,   in   full   mourning,   runs   clumsily  
down   the   pier   waving   goodbye   to   the   ship.   My   last  
image   of   France   is   of   destroyed   buildings   at   the  
very   edge   of   a   wounded   earth.  
•TO   WORK.  
At   dinner   the   Mexican   tells   stories   about   passing  
through   customs.   Only   one   is   interesting:   the   one  
about   an   American   in   Mexico   who,   after   an   acci¬  
dent,   wanted   to   bring   his   defunct   leg   back   with  
him   in   a   crystal   box.   Three   days   of   discussions   to  
know   whether   or   not   this   object   fell   into   a   cate¬  
gory   which   had   been   established   to   restrict   the  
importation   of   materials   that   could   lead   to   epi¬  
demics.   But   the   American   having   declared   that   he  
would   remain   in   Mexico   rather   than   be   separated  

26   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
from   his   leg,   the   United   States   took   action   so   as  
not   to   lose   an   honorable   citizen.   Lorette   coughs   a  
lot   and   is   afraid   of   getting   seasick.   R.   wants   to   cure  
her   through   autosuggestion.   Which   he   does   very  
skillfully.   After   dinner   I   have   a   drink   with   Ma¬  
dame   D.,   the   tall,   bright-eyed   woman.   Husband   at  
the   Washington   Embassy.  
•   1   0   a.   m   T   U   E   S   D   A   Y.  
The   night   was   short   but   good.   This   morning   it’s  
raining   and   the   sea   is   swelling.   The   bar   is   practi¬  
cally   empty.   I   work   in   peace.   The   Atlantic   is   the  
color   of   a   pigeon’s   wing.   Before   lunch   I   lie   down,  
my   stomach   a   little   upset,   and   after   sleeping   for  
half   an   hour,   I   wake   up   fresh   as   a   daisy.   At   lunch  
some   abstentions.   Our   Lorette   stays   in   her   bunk  
all   day.   The   Mexicans   leave   the   table   before   the  
end   of   the   meal.   Mme.   D.,   R.   and   I   enjoy   a  
friendly   chat.   But   R.   is   a   little   uncomfortable   and  
goes   to   lie   down.   And   even   though   I   feel   fine,   I   do  
the   same.   I   feel   too   sluggish   to   work.   But   I   do   read  
War   and   Peace.   How   I   would   have   been   in   love  
with   Natasha!  
The   day   drags   on,   heavy   and   monotonous.  
After   dinner   Mr.   X   of   the   furs   talks   to   me   about  
Oriental   wisdom.   It’s   the   kind   of   conversation   that  
I’ve   never   been   able   to   stand   for   more   than   five  
minutes.   I   leave   to   join   Natasha   Rostov   in   bed.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   27  
WEDNESDAY.  
Awake   with   a   fever   and   a   vague   discomfort   in   my  
throat.   Despite   a   rough   sea   the   sun   is   beautiful.   I  
spend   the   morning   stretched   out   beneath   it.   In   the  
afternoon   English   with   R.   on   the   bridge   and   cock¬  
tails   with   Mme.   D.   at   the   Captain’s.   After   dinner  
R.   tells   me   about   his   memories   as   a   doctor.   Da¬  
chau.   Diarrhea   flowing   from   the   bodies   of   the  
dying   piled   one   on   top   of   the   other.  
THURSDAY.  
Lousy   day   with   shivers   from   a   flu.   In   the   evening   a  
little   champagne   with   R.   and   Mme.   D.   revives   me.  
But   my   head   is   empty.   Nevertheless,   English   in   the  
afternoon.  
FRIDAY.  
The   flu   subsides.   But   life   continues   to   be   monoto¬  
nous.   I   work   a   little   in   the   morning.   The   sea   still  
rough.   In   the   afternoon   together   with   the   consul  
(Dahoui)   we   receive   Mme.   D.   and   L.   in   our   cabin.  
An   enjoyable   conversation.   The   consul   tells   (with  
Algerian   eloquence)   the   story   of   a   little   vice-consul  
from   Andripole   who   was   unable   to   pay   his   first  
visit   to   the   consul   because   of   four   orangutans  
which   were   tied   up   in   the   consul’s   waiting   room.  

28   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
He   finally   decides   to   make   the   call,   but   continues  
to   spend   fearful   days   in   the   consulate.   Finally,   af¬  
ter   the   consul   tells   him   that   one   of   the   animals   had  
died   from   eating   a   box   of   matches,   the   vice-consul  
brings   a   box   each   day   and   gives   it   affectionately   to  
one   of   the   animals   until   its   death   is   achieved.  
When   all   four   of   them   are   buried,   he   breathes   eas¬  
ily   again.  
Also   a   classic   story   of   consuls   who’ve   spent   30  
years   in   Djeddah 2   and   elsewhere,   who   drink   and  
die   in   solitude   (for   me).  
In   the   evening   after   dinner,   since   we   are  
going   to   sail   near   the   Azores,   I   go   onto   the   deck  
and,   in   a   corner   sheltered   from   the   strong   wind  
which   has   been   blowing   since   our   departure,   I   re¬  
vel   in   a   pure   night,   with   rare   but   enormous   stars  
which   pass   quickly   in   a   straight   line   above   the   ship.  
A   slender   moon   gives   the   sky   a   light   without   brilli¬  
ance   which   lights   up   the   turbulent   water   with   its  
reflection.   Once   again   I   look,   as   I   have   for   years,  
at   the   designs   that   the   foam   and   the   wake   make   on  
the   surface   of   the   water,   this   lace   which   is   inces¬  
santly   made   and   unmade,   this   liquid   marble   .   .   .  
and   once   more   I   look   for   the   exact   comparison  
that   will   hold   for   me   this   marvelous   flowering   of  
sea,   water,   and   light   that   has   escaped   me   for   so  
long   now.   Still   in   vain.   For   me,   it’s   a   recurring  
symbol.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   29  
•FRIDAY.   SATURDAY.   SUNDAY.  
Same   program.   The   sea   still   too   rough,   we   head  
towards   the   South   and   pass   the   Azores.   This   soci¬  
ety   in   miniature   is   both   fascinating   and   dull.  
Everyone   prides   himself   on   being   elegant   and  
knowing   how   to   live.   The   performing   dog   aspect.  
But   some   of   them   are   opening   up.   The   furrier   X   is  
on   the   boat.   Thus   we   learn   that   he   has   a   magnifi¬  
cent   porcelain   service,   superb   silver,   etc.,   but   that  
he   uses   copies   that   he’s   had   made   and   keeps   the  
originals   locked   up.   Which   made   me   think   that   he  
also   has   a   copy   of   a   wife   with   whom   he’s   never  
been   able   to   enjoy   anything   more   than   a   copy   of  
love.  
Three   or   four   passengers   are   obviously   going  
to   the   U.S.A.   to   export   capital.   I   even   have   the  
crafty   strategy   explained   to   me.   “Notice,”   says  
one   of   them,   “that   I’m   not   doing   anything   against  
my   country.   Its   intentions   are   good,   but   France  
doesn’t   know   anything   about   business.”   These  
people,   on   the   contrary,   know   about   business.  
I   share   with   R.,   who   continues   to   be   a   charm¬  
ing   companion,   the   opinion   that   the   only   contem¬  
porary   problem   is   money.   Ugly-looking   custom¬  
ers   .   .   .   greed   and   impotence.   Fortunately,   there   is  
the   company   of   women.   It’s   the   basic   truth.  
Mme.   D.   more   and   more   charming.   L.   also.  

30   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
MONDAY.  
Beautiful   day.   The   wind   has   subsided.   For   the   first  
time,   the   sea   is   calm.   The   passengers   come   up  
onto   the   deck   like   mushrooms   after   a   rainfall.   We  
breathe   easily.   Evening   a   magnificent   sunset.   Af¬  
ter   dinner,   moonlight   on   the   sea.   Mme.   D.   and   I  
agree   that   most   people   don’t   lead   the   lives   that  
they   would   like   to   lead   and   that   it’s   a   question   of  
cowardice.  
SUNDAY.  
They   announce   that   we   will   arrive   in   the   evening.  
The   week   has   gone   by   in   a   whirl.   The   evening   of  
Tuesday   the   21st,   our   table   decided   to   celebrate  
the   arrival   of   spring.   Drinking   until   4   a   m.   The  
next   day   as   well.   Forty-eight   euphoric   hours   dur¬  
ing   which   all   relationships   rushed   forward   to   new  
levels.   Mme.   D.   is   in   revolt   against   her   milieu.   L.  
confesses   to   me   that   she’s   going   to   make   a   mar¬  
riage   of   reason.   On   Saturday   we’ve   left   the   Gulf  
Stream   and   it   gets   terribly   chilly.   The   time   passes  
very   quickly,   however,   and   actually   I’m   not   in   such  
a   hurry   to   arrive.   I’ve   finished   my   lecture.   And  
the   rest   of   the   time   I   look   at   the   sea,   and   I   talk,  
mostly   with   R.—truly   intelligent—and   of   course  
Mme.   D.   and   L.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   31  
Today   at   noon,   we   see   land.   Since   this   morn¬  
ing   seagulls   have   been   flying   over   the   boat,   seem¬  
ingly   suspended,   immobile,   above   the   decks.   The  
first   thing   we   see   is   Coney   Island,   which   looks   like  
the   Porte   d’Orleans.   “It’s   St.   Denis   or   Gennevil-  
liers,”   L.   says.   It’s   absolutely   true.   In   the   cold,  
with   the   grey   wind   and   the   flat   sky,   it’s   all   rather  
depressing.   We’ll   drop   anchor   in   the   bay   of   the  
Hudson   and   we   won’t   disembark   until   tomorrow  
morning.   In   the   distance,   the   skyscrapers   of   Man¬  
hattan   against   a   backdrop   of   mist.   Deep   down,   I  
feel   calm   and   indifferent,   as   I   generally   do   in   front  
of   spectacles   that   don’t   move   me.  
•   MONDAY.  
Go   to   bed   very   late.   Get   up   very   early.   We   enter  
New   York   harbor.   A   terrific   sight   despite   or   be¬  
cause   of   the   mist.   The   order,   the   strength,   the  
economic   power   are   there.   The   heart   trembles   in  
front   of   so   much   admirable   inhumanity.  
I   don’t   disembark   until   11   a   m.,   after   long   for¬  
malities   during   which   I   am   the   only   one   of   all   the  
passengers   to   be   treated   as   suspect.   The   immigra¬  
tion   officer   ends   by   excusing   himself   for   having  
detained   me   for   so   long. 3   “I   was   obliged   to,   but   I  
can’t   tell   you   why.”   A   mystery,   but   after   five   years  
of   occupation!  

32   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Met   by   C.,   E.,   and   an   envoy   from   the   consu¬  
late.   C.   unchanged.   E.   also.   But   in   all   this   bustle,  
the   goodbyes   with   L,   Mme.   D.,   and   R.   are   rapid  
and   perfunctory.  
Tired.   My   flu   comes   back.   And   it’s   on   shaky  
legs   that   I   get   the   first   impact   of   New   York.   At  
first   glance,   a   hideous,   inhuman   city.   But   I   know  
that   one   changes   one’s   mind.   A   few   details   strike  
me:   that   the   garbage   men   wear   gloves,   that   the  
traffic   moves   in   an   orderly   fashion   without   police¬  
men   at   the   intersections,   etc.,   that   no   one   ever   has  
change   in   this   country,   and   that   everyone   looks  
like   they’ve   stepped   out   of   a   B-film.   In   the   eve¬  
ning,   crossing   Broadway   in   a   taxi,   tired   and   fever¬  
ish,   I   am   literally   stupefied   by   the   circus   of   lights.   I  
am   just   coming   out   of   five   years   of   night,   and   this  
orgy   of   violent   lights   gives   me   for   the   first   time  
the   impression   of   a   new   continent.   An   enormous,  
50-foot-high   Camel   billboard:   a   G.I.   with   his  
mouth   wide   open   blows   enormous   puffs   of   real  
smoke.   Everything   is   yellow   and   red.   I   go   to   bed  
sick   in   both   body   and   soul,   but   knowing   perfectly  
well   that   I   will   have   changed   my   mind   in   two   days.  
•TUESDAY.  
Wake   up   with   fever.   Incapable   of   going   out   before  
noon.   A   little   better   when   E.   arrives.   I   have   lunch  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   33  
with   him   and   D.,   a   Hungarian   journalist,   in   a  
French   restaurant.   I   realize   that   I   haven’t   noticed  
the   skyscrapers;   they’ve   seemed   so   natural   to   me.  
It’s   a   question   of   general   proportions.   And   then  
also   you   can’t   live   all   the   time   looking   up.   There¬  
fore   you   only   have   in   your   field   of   vision   a   reason¬  
able   proportion   of   stories.   Magnificent   food  
stores.   Enough   to   make   all   of   Europe   drool.   I   ad¬  
mire   the   women   in   the   street,   the   color   of   their  
dresses,   and   the   colors—reds,   yellows,   greens—of  
all   the   taxis   which   look   like   insects   in   their   Sunday  
best.   As   for   the   stores   selling   ties,   you   have   to   see  
it   to   believe   it.   So   much   bad   taste   hardly   seems  
imaginable.   D.   affirms   that   Americans   don’t   like  
ideas.   That’s   what   they   say.   I’m   not   so   sure.  
At   3   o’clock   I   go   to   see   Regine   Junier.   Admi¬  
rable   old   maid   who   sends   me   all   her   wealth   be¬  
cause   her   father   died   of   consumption   at   27   and  
so   .   .   .   She   lives   in   two   rooms   in   the   middle   of   an  
army   of   hats   which   she   makes,   and   which   are   ex¬  
ceptionally   ugly.   But   nothing   tarnishes   the   gener¬  
ous   and   attentive   heart   that   shows   in   each   word  
that   she   speaks.   I   leave   her,   devoured   by   fever   and  
unable   to   do   anything   but   go   to   bed.   So   much   for  
the   other   meetings.—Odor   of   New   York—a   per¬  
fume   of   iron   and   cement—the   iron   dominates.  

34   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
In   the   evening   dinner   with   L.M.   at   “Rubens.”  
He   tells   me   the   story   of   his   secretary,   very   “Amer¬  
ican   Tragedy.”   Married   to   a   man   with   whom   she  
has   two   children,   she   and   her   mother   discover   that  
the   husband   is   a   homosexual.   Separation.   The  
mother,   a   puritanical   Protestant,   works   on   the  
daughter   for   months,   breeding   in   her   the   idea   that  
her   children   are   degenerates.   The   idiot   finally   suf¬  
focates   one   and   strangles   the   other.   Declared   in¬  
competent,   she   is   freed.   L.M.   gives   me   his   per¬  
sonal   theory   about   Americans.   It’s   the   fifteenth  
that   I’ve   heard.  
At   the   corner   of   East   1st   Street,   little   bar  
where   a   loud   juke   box   smothers   all   the   conversa¬  
tions.   To   have   five   minutes   of   silence,   you   have   to  
put   in   five   cents.  
•WEDNESDAY.  
A   little   better   this   morning.   Visit   from   Liebling,   of  
the   New   Yorker.   Charming   man.   Chiaromonte 4  
then   Rube.   The   latter   two   and   I   have   lunch   in   a  
French   restaurant.   In   my   opinion,   Ch.   talks   about  
America   like   nobody   else.   I   point   out   to   him   the  
“funeral   homes.”   He   tells   me   how   they   function.  
One   way   to   know   a   country   is   to   know   how   people  
die   there.   Here,   everything   is   anticipated.   “You  
die   and   we   do   the   rest,”   say   the   advertisements.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   35  
The   cemeteries   are   private   property:   “Hurry   up  
and   reserve   your   place.”   Everything   happens  
in   the   store,   transportation,   ceremonies,   etc.   A  
dead   man   is   a   finished   man.—At   Gilson’s,   radio.  
Then   at   my   hotel   with   Vercors,   Thimerais,   and  
O’Brien. 5   Tomorrow’s   lecture.   At   6,   a   drink   with  
Gral   at   the   St.   Regis.   Returning,   I   walk   down  
Broadway,   lost   in   the   crowd   and   the   enormous,   il¬  
luminated   billboards.   Yes,   there   is   an   American  
tragic.   It’s   what   has   been   oppressing   me   since   I   ar¬  
rived   here,   but   I   still   don’t   know   what   it’s   made  
from.  
Bowery   Street,   side   by   side   for   a   quarter   of   a  
mile   shops   selling   wedding   gowns.   I   eat   alone   in  
the   restaurant   where   I   had   lunch.   And   I   go   back  
to   write.  
Negro   question.   We   sent   a   diplomat   from  
Martinique   to   the   consulate   here.   He   was   lodged  
in   Harlem.   With   regard   to   his   French   colleagues,  
he   perceived   for   the   first   time   that   he   was   not   of  
the   same   race.  
Contradictory   observation:   in   the   bus   a   mid¬  
dle-class   American   sitting   opposite   me   gets   up   to  
give   his   seat   to   an   old   Negro   lady.  

36   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Impression   of   overflowing   wealth.   Inflation   is  
here,   an   American   says   to   me.  
•   THURSDAY.  
The   day   spent   dictating   my   lecture.   In   the   evening  
a   little   stage   fright,   but   I   throw   myself   into   it   right  
away   and   the   public   is   “hooked.”   But   while   I’m  
speaking   someone   lifts   the   box   office   receipts  
which   were   supposed   to   be   given   to   French   chil¬  
dren.   At   the   end   O’Brien   announces   the   theft,   and  
a   spectator   proposes   that   everyone   give   the   same  
sum   at   the   exit   that   he   originally   gave   when   enter¬  
ing.   Everyone   gives   much   more   and   the   receipts  
are   considerable.   Typical   of   American   generosity.  
Their   hospitality,   their   cordiality   are   like   that   too,  
spontaneous   and   without   affectation.   It’s   what’s  
best   in   them.  
Their   love   of   animals.   Pet   stores   with   several  
floors:   on   the   first   floor   the   canaries   and   on   the  
top   floor   the   big   monkeys.   Several   years   ago   on  
5th   Avenue   a   man   was   arrested   for   driving   a   truck  
with   a   giraffe   in   it.   He   explained   that   his   giraffe  
lacked   fresh   air   in   the   suburbs   where   he   kept   it,  
and   that   this   was   his   solution.   In   Central   Park,   a  
lady   grazes   a   gazelle.   In   court   the   lady   explains  
that   the   gazelle   is   a   person.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   37  
“However,   it   doesn’t   speak,”   says   the   judge.  
“Yes,   the   language   of   goodness.”  
Five   dollar   fine.   After   that,   a   tunnel   3   kilome¬  
ters   long   under   the   Hudson   and   the   terrific   New  
Jersey   bridge.  
After   the   lecture,   a   drink   with   Schiffrin, 6  
Dolores   Vanetti,   who   speaks   the   purest   slang   that  
I’ve   ever   heard,   and   others.   Mrs.   Schiffrin   asks   me  
if   I’ve   ever   been   an   actor.  
•FRIDAY.  
Knopf. 7   11   a   m.   The   big   time.   12.   Broadcasting.  
Gilson   is   nice.   We’ll   go   see   the   Bowery   together.   I  
have   lunch   with   Rube   and   J.   de   Lannux   who   takes  
us   for   a   drive   through   New   York.   Beautiful   blue  
sky   which   forces   me   to   remember   that   we’re   on  
the   same   latitude   as   Lisbon,   something   which   is  
hard   to   believe.   In   rhythm   with   the   traffic,   the  
gilded   skyscrapers   turn   and   turn   in   the   blue   above  
our   heads.   It’s   a   good   moment.  
We   go   to   Tryon   Park   above   Harlem   and   look  
down   at   the   Bronx   on   one   side,   the   Hudson   on   the  
other.   Brilliant   magnolias   all   over   the   place.   I   sam¬  
ple   a   new   specimen   of   these   “ice   creams”   which  
are   such   a   joy   to   me.   Another   good   moment.  

38   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
At   4   o’clock   Bromley   is   waiting   for   me   at   the  
hotel.   We   take   off   for   New   Jersey.   Gigantic   land¬  
scape   of   factories,   bridges,   and   railroads.   And  
then,   suddenly   East   Orange   and   a   countryside   as  
postcard   as   can   be,   with   thousands   of   neat   and   tidy  
cottages   like   toys   in   the   midst   of   tall   poplars   and  
magnolias.   I’m   shown   the   little   public   library,  
bright   and   gay,   which   the   neighborhood   uses   a   lot  
—with   a   huge   room   for   children.   (Finally   a   coun¬  
try   where   the   children   are   really   taken   care   of.)   I  
look   in   the   card   catalogue   under   philosophy:   W.  
James   and   that’s   it.  
At   Bromley’s   house,   American   hospitality   (in  
fact,   his   father   is   from   Germany).   We   work   on   the  
translation   of   Caligula,   which   he   has   finished.   He  
explains   to   me   that   I   don’t   know   how   to   take   care  
of   my   publicity,   that   I   have   a   standing   here   of  
which   I   should   take   advantage,   and   that   the   suc¬  
cess   of   Caligula   here   would   put   me   and   my   chil¬  
dren   on   Easy   Street.   By   his   calculations   I   should  
make   1,500,000   dollars.   I   laugh   and   he   shakes   his  
head.   “Aach!   You   don’t   have   any   sense."   By   the  
time   we   return   to   the   city,   we’ve   become   quite  
friendly.   He’s   a   great   guy   and   he   wants   us   to   go   to  
Mexico   together.   (. N.B .:   he’s   an   American   who  
doesn’t   drink!)  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   39  
SATURDAY.  
Regine.   I   bring   her   my   presents   and   she   cries   tears  
of   gratitude!  
A   drink   at   Dolores’.   Then   Regine   takes   me   on  
a   tour   of   the   big   American   department   stores.   I  
think   of   France.   In   the   evening   dinner   with   L.M.  
From   the   top   of   the   Plaza,   I   admire   the   island   cov¬  
ered   with   its   stone   monsters.   In   the   night   with   its  
millions   of   lit   windows,   and   its   large   black   walls  
which   carry   the   flickering   lights   halfway   into   the  
sky,   I   have   the   impression   that   a   gigantic   fire   is  
under   way   which   would   raise   to   the   horizon   thou¬  
sands   of   immense   black   carcasses   stuffed   with   tiny  
points   of   combustion.   The   charming   countess.  
SUNDAY.  
A   trip   to   Staten   Island   with   Chiaromonte   and  
Abel. 8   On   the   way   back,   in   lower   Manhattan,   an  
immense   geological   dig   between   skyscrapers  
which   stand   very   close   to   one   another;   we   ad¬  
vance,   overwhelmed   by   a   feeling   of   something  
prehistoric.   We   eat   in   Chinatown.   And   I   breathe  
for   the   first   time   in   a   place   where   I   feel   the   expan¬  
sive   but   orderly   life   that   I   truly   love.  

40   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
•MONDAY   MORNING.  
Walk   with   Georgette   Pope   who   came   to   my   hotel,  
God   knows   why.   She’s   from   New   Caledonia.  
“What   is   your   husband’s   job?—Magician!”   From  
the   top   of   the   Empire   State   Building,   in   a   freezing  
wind,   we   admire   New   York,   its   ancient   rivers   and  
its   overflowing   of   stone.  
At   lunch   Saint-Ex.’s   wife—a   maniac—tells   us  
that   in   San   Salvador   her   father   had,   along   with   17  
legitimate   children,   forty   bastards,   each   of   whom  
received   an   acre   of   land.  
Evening,   an   interview   at   L’Ecole   Libre   des  
Hautes   Etudes.   Tired,   I   go   to   Broadway   with   J.S.  
Roller   skating.   W.   52nd   Street.   An   immense  
rink   covered   with   dust   and   red   velvet.   In   a   rectan¬  
gular   box   stuck   in   the   back   under   the   ceiling,   an  
old   lady   plays   a   great   variety   of   tunes   on   a   large  
organ.   Hundreds   of   sailors,   and   girls   dressed   for  
the   occasion   in   jumpsuits   revolve   arm   in   arm   in   an  
infernal   din   of   little   metal   wheels   and   organ   stops.  
The   description   is   worth   working   on.  
Then   Eddy   and   Leon,   a   nightclub   without   any  
charm.   To   make   up   for   the   dreariness   of   the  
place,   J.S.   and   I   have   ourselves   photographed   as  
Adam   and   Eve   by   means   of   two   completely   naked  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   41  
cardboard   mannequins   (like   the   ones   at   a   fair)   with  
holes   at   head   level   where   you   insert   your   face.  
J.,   who   has   interesting   things   to   say   about  
American   love,   wants   to   introduce   me   to   the   taxi  
girls.   A   small,   dusty,   softly   lit   hall.   Each   dime   buys  
you   a   dance.   But   if   you   want   to   talk   to   one   of   the  
girls,   you   have   to   go   to   the   back   of   the   hall   where,  
each   on   one   side   of   a   small   barrier,   it’s   impossible  
to   come   any   closer.   Impression   of   repression   and  
terrible   sexual   exasperation.   J.   tells   me   about   V-E  
Day   and   the   orgiastic   scenes   at   Times   Square.  
•TUESDAY.  
With   Harold   (charming),   who   also   talks   to   me  
about   the   American   woman.   In   the   evening  
French   Institute   boring.   But   we   go   to   a   Negro  
night   club   with   Dr.   Jerry   Winter.   Rocco,   the   best  
Negro   pianist   I’ve   heard   in   years.   A   piano   on   roll¬  
ers   which   he   pushes   in   front   of   him   as   he   plays.  
The   rhythm,   force,   and   precision   of   his   playing  
and   him,   jumping,   dancing,   throwing   his   head   and  
hair   right   and   left.  
Impression   that   only   the   Negroes   give   life,  
passion,   and   nostalgia   to   this   country   which,   in  
their   own   way,   they   colonized.  

42   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Night   on   the   Bowery.   Poverty—and   a   Euro¬  
pean   wants   to   say:   “Finally,   reality.”   The   utterly  
derelict.   And   twenty   cent   hotels.   Decorated   like   a  
“saloon,”   Bowery   Follies,   where   some   very   old  
female   singers   perform   for   an   impoverished   audi¬  
ence.   And,   several   steps   away,   the   most   splendid  
bridal   shops   that   one   can   imagine—everything   in  
one   place—mirrors,   brilliant,   etc.   Yes,   an   aston¬  
ishing   night.  
W.   Frank. 9   One   of   the   few   superior   men   that  
I’ve   met   here.   He   despairs   a   little   for   the   America  
of   today   and   compares   it   with   the   America   of   the  
19th   century.   “The   great   minds   (Melville)   have  
always   been   solitary   here.”  
Vassar   College.   An   army   of   young   starlets  
who   recline   on   the   lawns   with   their   long   legs  
crossed.   What   they   do   for   young   people   here   is  
worth   remembering.  
•SUNDAY.  
Long   conversation   with   Ch.   Can   we   create   a   secu¬  
lar   church?  
The   afternoon   with   students.   They   don’t   feel  
the   real   problem;   however,   their   nostalgia   is   evi¬  
dent.   In   this   country   where   everything   is   done   to  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   43  
prove   that   life   isn’t   tragic,   they   feel   something   is  
missing.   This   great   effort   is   pathetic,   but   one   must  
reject   the   tragic   after   having   looked   at   it,   not  
before.  
•MONDAY.  
Ryder 1 0   and   Figari. 1 1   Two   very   great   painters.  
Ryder’s   paintings,   mystical   in   inspiration   and  
almost   workmanlike   in   technique   (they’re   almost  
enamels)   force   you   to   think   of   Melville,   with  
whom   he   was   more   or   less   contemporary  
(younger).   Yes,   the   great   America   is   there.   And  
now?   Figari   has   everything:   nostalgia,   strength,  
humor.  
Then   Alfred   Stieglitz,   a   kind   of   old   American  
Socrates.   “As   I   get   older,   life   seems   more   and  
more   beautiful,   but   living   is   more   and   more  
difficult.   Don’t   hope   for   anything   from   America.  
Are   we   an   end   or   a   beginning?   I   think   we’re   an  
end.   It’s   a   country   that   doesn’t   know   love.”  
In   the   evening.   Circus.   Four-ring.   Everyone  
performs   at   the   same   time.   And   I   don’t   see  
anything.  
Tucci:   Human   relationships   are   very   easy  
here   because   there   are   no   human   relationships.  

44   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Everything   stays   on   the   surface.   Out   of   respect  
and   from   laziness.  
•   19   APRIL.  
Another   night   on   the   Bowery.   And   the   “elevated”  
—we’re   in   the   front—which   speeds   along   five  
stories   above   the   ground,   and   the   skyscrapers   spin  
slowly,   and   the   machine   swallows   the   little   red   and  
blue   lights,   is   momentarily   digested   by   the   little  
stations   and   then   takes   off   again   towards   more   and  
more   miserable   neighborhoods   where   there   are  
fewer   and   fewer   cars   in   the   streets.  
Once   again   the   Bowery   Follies   and   the   old  
singers   who   end   their   careers   performing   here.  
Enormous,   with   sweating,   bloated   faces—and  
suddenly   they   start   prancing   around   and   the  
bundles   of   unshapely   flesh   with   which   they   are  
covered   start   bouncing   up   and   down.   “I   am   a   bird  
in   a   gilded   cage.”   “I   ain’t   got   no   ambition.”   “I’m  
nobody’s   baby,”   etc.   The   less   ugly   ones   are   not  
popular.   Either   you   have   to   be   very   beautiful   or   very  
ugly.   Even   in   ugliness   there’s   such   a   thing   as  
mediocrity.   And   then   the   night.   And,   in   an  
atmosphere   of   squalor,   these   Rumanians   who   sing  
and   dance   until   they   gasp   for   breath.   Carried   to  
the   limits   of   an   exalted   world—and   that  
unforgettable   face.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   45  
When   you   look   from   upper   Riverside   down  
the   highway   that   runs   along   the   Hudson,   the  
uninterrupted   line   of   smooth-running,   well-oiled  
cars   creates   a   deep   and   distant   song   which   is  
exactly   the   sound   of   the   waves.  
In   Philadelphia,   enormous   gas   tanks   tower  
over   little   cemeteries   full   of   flowers.  
Placid   evenings   on   the   vast   lawns   of  
Washington,   when   the   sky   turns   red   and   the   grass  
begins   to   darken—a   host   of   Negro   children,  
shrieking   with   joy,   playing   stickball,   while  
Americans   in   unbuttoned   shirts,   slouched   on  
benches,   having   come   straight   from   an   old   movie  
house,   with   their   last   bit   of   energy   suck   at   ice  
creams   molded   into   little   paper   cups,   while  
squirrels   come   to   unearth   tidbits   at   your   feet,   the  
delicacy   of   which   they   alone   appreciate.   In   the   one  
hundred   thousand   trees   of   the   city,   a   million   birds  
greet   the   appearance   of   the   first   star   in   the   still  
clear   sky   above   the   Washington   monument,   while  
long-legged   creatures   mend   their   way   through  
the   paths   in   the   grass,   in   view   of   the   grand  
monuments,   offering   to   the   sky   a   momentary  
relaxation   of   their   imposing   face   and   loveless   gaze.  
Plague :   it’s   a   world   without   women   and   thus  
without   air.  

46   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
The   one   who   is   right   is   the   one   who   has   never  
killed.   So   it   can’t   be   God.  
I   have   suddenly   ceased   to   be   curious   about  
this   country.   Like   certain   people   in   whom,   without  
explanation,   I   suddenly   lose   interest   (F.  
reproaches   me   for   this).   And   I   see   clearly   the  
thousand   reasons   one   can   have   for   being  
interested   in   this   place,   I   would   be   capable   of  
presenting   its   defense   and   its   apology,   I   can  
reconstruct   its   beauty   or   its   future,   but   my   heart  
has   simply   ceased   speaking   and   .   .   .  
Chinese   theater   in   Chinatown.   A   large,  
round,   dusty   hall.   The   show   lasts   from   6   to   11   p.m.  
and   is   watched   by   1500   Chinese   who   eat   peanuts,  
jabber,   enter,   exit,   and   follow   the   show   with   a  
kind   of   steady   distraction.   Children   run   around   in  
the   middle   of   the   hall.   On   stage   the   costumed  
actors   work   alongside   musicians   in   street   clothes  
and   suspenders   who   stop   playing   from   time   to  
time   to   eat   a   sandwich   or   straighten   a   child’s  
trousers.   Likewise,   during   the   action,   stagehands  
in   vests   and   shirtsleeves   enter   to   pick   up   the   sword  
that’s   fallen   from   the   hands   of   someone   who’s  
died,   place   a   chair   or   take   one   away,   all   of   which   is  
not   really   necessary.   From   time   to   time   through  
the   doors   that   give   onto   the   wings   one   sees   the  
actors   chatting   or   following   the   action   as   they  
await   their   cues.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   47  
As   for   the   play,   the   program   being   in  
Chinese,   I   tried   to   invent   the   subject.   But   I   suspect  
that   I   misinterpreted   everything.   Because   just   as   a  
brave   man   is   dying   on   stage   in   a   very   realistic  
fashion   amidst   the   lamentations   of   his   widow   and  
his   friends,   and   I   feel   completely   serious,   the  
public   laughs.   And   when   a   kind   of   magistrate   with  
a   grating   voice   makes   a   clownish   entrance,   I   am  
the   only   one   who   laughs,   the   rest   of   the   audience  
manifesting   a   kind   of   respectful   attention.   A   kind  
of   butcher   covered   with   blood   kills   a   man.   He  
forces   a   young   Chinese   man   to   carry   the   body.  
The   young   man   is   so   frightened   that   his   knees  
bang   against   each   other   .   .   .  
FROM   NEW   YORK   TO   CANADA.  
Large,   clean,   spacious   countryside   with   small   and  
large   white-columned   houses   and   tall,   strong   trees  
and   lawns   which   are   never   separated   by   fences   so  
that   it’s   one   lawn   that   belongs   to   everyone   where  
beautiful   children   and   supple   adolescents   laugh   in  
a   life   filled   with   good   things   and   rich   creams.  
Nature   here   contributes   to   the   beautiful   American  
fairy   tales.  
An   account   of   an   American   childhood   and   he  
looks   in   vain   for   what   his   heart   is   seeking.   He  
resigns   himself.  

48   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
The   owl   who   was   playing   the   drums   at   the  
Bowery   Follies.  
Two   beings   love   each   other.   But   they   don   t  
speak   the   same   language.   One   of   them   speaks   both  
languages,   but   the   second   language   very  
imperfectly.   It   suffices   for   them   to   love   each  
other.   But   the   one   who   knows   both   languages  
dies.   And   his   last   words   are   in   his   native   tongue  
which   the   other   is   unable   to   grasp.   He   searches,   he  
searches   .   .   .  
Small   inn   in   the   heart   of   the   Adirondacks   a  
thousand   miles   from   everything.   Entering   my  
room,   this   strange   feeling:   during   a   business   trip   a  
man   arrives,   without   any   preconceived   idea,   at   a  
remote   inn   in   the   wilderness.   And   there,   the  
silence   of   nature,   the   simplicity   of   the   room,   the  
remoteness   of   everything,   make   him   decide   to   stay  
there   permanently,   to   cut   all   ties   with   what   had  
been   his   life   and   to   send   no   news   of   himself   to  
anyone.  
New   England   and   Maine.   The   region   of   lakes  
and   red   houses.   Montreal   and   the   two   hills.   A  
Sunday.   Boredom.   Boredom.   The   only   amusing  
thing:   the   street   cars   which   resemble,   in   their  
form   and   the   fact   that   they   are   gilded,   carnival  
chariots.   This   big   country,   calm   and   slow.   One  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   49  
feels   that   it   has   been   completely   unaware   of   the  
war.   In   the   course   of   a   few   years   Europe,   which  
was   several   centuries   ahead   in   knowledge,   moved  
several   centuries   ahead   in   moral   consciousness.  
Remake   and   recreate   Greek   thought   as   a  
revolt   against   the   sacred.   But   not   the   revolt  
against   the   sacred   of   the   romantic—which   is   in  
itself   a   form   of   the   sacred—but   revolt   as   putting  
the   sacred   in   its   place. 1 2  
The   idea   of   messianism   at   the   base   of   all  
fanaticism.   Messianism   against   man.   Greek  
thought   is   not   historical.   The   values   are   pre-  
existant.   Against   modern   existentialism. 1 3  
Plague :   Tarrou   makes   regular   visits   to   the  
Spanish   dancers.   Passion   is   his   only   love.   Naturally  
a   man   should   fight.   “But   if   he   loves   only   that,  
what’s   the   use   of   fighting.”  
In   the   American   newspapers:   A   weapon   more  
frightening   than   the   atomic   bomb.   “In   certain  
places   in   the   Middle   Ages   the   black   plague   killed  
60%   of   the   population.   We   don’t   know   if  
American   scientists   have   found   a   way   to   spread   it,  
but   in   China   the   Japanese   failed.   They   had   sown  
the   black   plague   in   the   rice   crop.”  

50   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
The   stupendous   Quebec   countryside.   At   the  
point   of   the   Diamond   Cape   before   the   immense  
breach   of   the   Saint   Lawrence,   air,   light,   and   water  
interpenetrate   in   infinite   proportions.   For   the   first  
time   on   this   continent   a   real   impression   of   beauty  
and   true   magnitude.   It   seems   that   I   would   have  
something   to   say   about   Quebec   and   its   history   of  
men   who   came   to   struggle   in   the   wilderness,  
driven   by   a   force   that   was   greater   than   they   were.  
But   to   what   end?   Now   there   are   a   lot   of   things   that  
artistically   speaking   I   know   I   could   make   work.   But  
this   no   longer   means   anything   to   me.   The   only  
thing   that   I   want   to   say   I   have   been   incapable   of  
saying   up   until   now   and   I   will   without   a   doubt  
never   say   it.  
Do   a   play   about   bureaucracy   (as   stupid   in  
America   as   elsewhere). 1 4  
Even   the   Salvation   Army   advertises   here.   And  
in   their   advertisements   the   Salvation   women   have  
red   cheeks   and   brilliant   smiles   .   .   .  
Zaharo’s 1 5   father.   Polish.   Slaps   an   officer   at  
fifteen.   Flees.   Gets   to   Paris   during   Carnival.   With  
the   little   money   he   has,   he   buys   confetti   and   sells  
it.   Thirty   years   later   he   has   an   enormous   fortune  
and   a   family.   Completely   illiterate;   his   son   reads  
whatever   is   at   hand   to   him.   He   reads   him   Socrates’  

THE   UNITED   STATES   51  
Apology.   “You’ll   no   longer   read   me   any   other  
books,”   says   the   father.   “This   one   says  
everything.”   And   ever   since   he   always   has   this  
book   read   to   him.   He   detests   judges   and   the  
police.  
Manhattan.   Sometimes   from   beyond   the  
skyscrapers,   across   the   hundreds   of   thousands   of  
high   walls,   the   cry   of   a   tugboat   finds   you   in   your  
insomnia   in   the   middle   of   the   night,   and   you  
remember   that   this   desert   of   iron   and   cement   is   an  
island. 1 6  
The   guy   from   the   Holland   Tunnel   in   New  
York   or   the   Sumner   Tunnel   in   Boston.   All   day  
long   on   a   raised   footbridge   he   counts   the   cars  
which   pass   endlessly   in   a   deafening   din   the   whole  
length   of   the   violently   lit   tunnel   which   is   too   long  
for   him   to   be   able   to   see   either   one   of   the   exits.  
This   is   the   hero   of   a   modern   novel.  
B.   as   an   elevated   kind   of   American.   His  
psychology:   ocean   people   love   the   mountains   and  
mountain   people   love   the   sea.  
Rain   on   New   York. 1 7   It   flows   untiringly  
between   the   high   cement   cubes.   The   taxi’s   rapid  
and   monotone   windshield   wipers   sweep   a   water  
which   is   incessantly   reborn—bizarre   feeling   of  

52   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
remoteness.   Impression   of   being   trapped   in   this  
city,   that   I   could   escape   from   the   monoliths   that  
surround   me   and   run   for   hours   without   finding  
anything   but   new   cement   prisons,   without   the  
hope   of   a   hill,   a   real   tree,   or   a   bewildered   face.  
B.’s   father.   Supreme   Court   judge   in  
Hamburg.   His   bedside   reader   is   the   German   Chaix  
Indicateur   which   gives   the   schedules   of   all   the  
trains   in   the   entire   world. 1 8   He   knows   it   almost   by  
heart,   and   B.   cites   this   anomaly   with   an   admiration  
absolutely   devoid   of   irony.  
New   York   rains.   Incessant,   sweeping  
everything.   And   the   skyscrapers   in   the   grey   haze  
rise   up   whitened   like   the   immense   sepulchers   of  
this   city   inhabited   by   the   dead.   Through   the   rain  
one   sees   the   sepulchers   sway   on   their   foundations.  
Terrible   feeling   of   being   abandoned.   Even   if   I  
hugged   all   the   beings   of   the   world   to   my   breast,   I  
would   remain   unprotected.  
Plague:   To   Tarrou:—Do   you   believe   that   you  
know   life   totally?  
Tarrou:—Yes.  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   53  
Revolt.   Thorough   analysis   of   the   Terror   and  
its   relationship   to   bureaucracy.—Note   that   our  
age   marks   the   end   of   ideologies.   The   atom   bomb  
prohibits   ideologies. 1 9  
Julian   Green   wonders   (Journal)   if   it   is   possible  
to   imagine   a   saint   who   writes   a   novel.   Naturally  
not   because   there   is   no   novel   without   revolt.   Or  
one   must   imagine   a   novel   which   is   an   accusation   of  
earthly   things   and   man—a   novel   absolutely  
without   love.   Impossible.  
AT   SEA.  
Slowness   of   this   return   voyage.   The   evenings   at  
sea   and   this   passage   from   the   setting   sun   to   the  
moon   are   the   only   moments   when   I   feel   my   heart  
a   little   relaxed.   I   will   have   always   loved   the   sea.   It  
will   have   always   made   everything   peaceful   inside  
me.  
Terrible   mediocrity   of   these   people.   Up   until  
now   I   haven’t   suffered   once   from   the   mediocrity  
that   may   have   surrounded   me.   Up   until   now.   But  
here,   this   intimacy   is   unbearable.   And   at   the   same  
time,   in   everything   this   something   that   could   go  
very   far,   if   only   .   .   .  

54   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Two   young,   beautiful   creatures   have   started   a  
romance   on   this   boat   and   immediately   a   kind   of  
nasty   circle   has   closed   around   them.   These  
beginnings   of   love!   I   love   and   approve   of   them  
from   the   bottom   of   my   heart—with   even   a   feeling  
of   gratitude   for   those   who   preserve   on   this   deck,  
in   the   middle   of   the   sun-glittering   Atlantic,  
halfway   between   two   insane   continents,   these  
truths   which   are   youth   and   love.  
But   why   not   also   give   this   name   to   the   longing  
that   I   feel   in   my   heart   and   to   the   tumultuous  
desire   to   find   again   the   impatient   heart   that   I   had  
at   20.   But   I   know   the   remedy:   I’ll   gaze   for   a   long  
time   at   the   sea.  
Sad   to   still   feel   so   vulnerable.   In   25   years   I’ll  
be   57.   25   years   then   to   create   a   body   of   work   and  
to   find   what   I’m   looking   for.   After   that,   old   age  
and   death.   I   know   what   is   the   most   important   for  
me.   And   I   still   find   a   way   to   give   in   to   little   temp¬  
tations,   wasting   time   on   frivolous   conversations   or  
fruitless   idling   about.   I’ve   mastered   two   or   three  
things   in   myself.   But   how   far   I   am   from   the   kind  
of   superiority   that   I   so   badly   need.  
Marvelous   night   on   the   Atlantic.   This   hour  
when   the   sun   has   disappeared   and   the   moon   has  
just   barely   been   born,   when   the   west   is   still  

THE   UNITED   STATES   •   55  
luminous   and   the   east   is   already   dark.   Yes,   I’ve  
loved   the   sea   very   much—this   calm   immensity—  
these   wakes   folded   under   wakes—these   liquid  
routes.   For   the   First   time   a   horizon   that   measures  
up   to   the   breath   of   a   man,   a   space   as   large   as   his  
audacity.   I’ve   always   been   torn   between   my  
appetite   for   people,   the   vanity   and   the   agitation,  
and   the   desire   to   make   myself   the   equal   of   these  
seas   of   forgetfulness,   these   unlimited   silences   that  
are   like   the   enchantment   of   death.   I   have   a   taste  
for   worldly   vanities,   my   fellows,   for   faces   but,   out  
of   step   with   this   century,   I   have   an   example   in  
myself   which   is   the   sea   and   anything   in   this   world  
which   resembles   it.   O   sweetness   of   nights   where   all  
the   stars   sway   and   slide   above   the   masts,   and   this  
silence   in   myself,   this   silence   which   Finally   frees  
me   from   everything.  



South   America  
•   3   0   J   U   N   E  
At   sea.   Exhausting   day.   R.   and   I   drive   full   speed   to  
reach   Marseille   on   time.   Desdemona 1   comes  
through.   In   Marseille,   torrid   heat   and,   at   the   same  
time,   a   wind   that’ll   blow   your   head   off.   Even   na¬  
ture   is   an   enemy.   Cabin   to   myself.   I   wait   for   the  
departure,   walking   the   decks   and   corridors.   Feel¬  
ing   of   shame,   seeing   the   4th   class   passengers  
lodged   in   the   hold   on   bunks   stacked   one   on   top   of  
the   other,   concentration   camp   style.   Dirty   diapers  
57  

58   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
hanging.   Some   children   are   going   to   live   for   20  
days   in   this   hell.   And   me   .   .   .   The   ship   lifts   anchor  
2   hours   late.   Dinner.   At   my   table   G.,   Professor   of  
History   and   Philosophy   at   the   Sorbonne—a   small  
young   man   who’s   going   to   meet   his   family   in   Ar¬  
gentina,   and   Mme.   C.   who’s   going   to   meet   her  
husband.   She’s   from   Marseille,   a   tall   brunette.   She  
says   anything   that   comes   into   her   head—and  
sometimes   it’s   amusing.   Other   times   ...   At   any  
rate,   she’s   alive.   The   others   are   dead—and   me  
too,   after   all.   After   dinner,   G.,   who   has   made   allu¬  
sions   to   the   condition   of   the   plague-stricken,   intro¬  
duces   me   to   a   Brazilian   professor   and   his   wife   as  
“the   author   of   The   Plague.”   I   look   healthy!   In   the  
“music   hall”   (where   they   could   have   easily   accom¬  
modated   half   of   the   4th   class   emigrants),   G.   enter¬  
tains   us   with   doodles   on   the   shipboard   piano  
which   seems   to   have   shot   all   its   rods.   Then   a   con¬  
versation.   Eulogy   of   Salazar   by   the   Brazilian   pro¬  
fessor.   Mme.   C.   makes   two   enormous   blunders  
trying   to   persuade   the   Brazilians   that   there’s   a   rev¬  
olution   every   day   in   South   America.   I   overhear  
“She   was   from   the   working-class,   about   as   low   as  
you   can   get,”   and   other   gems.   I   say   goodbye   and  
leave.   In   the   stern,   where   I   take   refuge,   the   emi¬  
grants   are   drinking   wine   from   a   goatskin   and   sing¬  
ing.   I   stay   with   them,   unknown   and   happy   (for   ten  
seconds).   Then   I   go   look   at   the   sea.   A   sliver   of  
moon   rises   above   the   masts.   As   far   as   one   can   see,  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   59  
in   the   not   yet   opaque   night,   the   sea—and   a   feeling  
of   calm,   a   powerful   melancholy   rises   in   this   mo¬  
ment   from   the   waters.   I’ve   always   been   calm   at  
sea,   and   for   a   moment   this   infinite   solitude   is   good  
for   me,   although   today   I   have   the   impression   that  
this   sea   is   made   of   all   the   tears   in   the   world.   I   re¬  
turn   to   my   cabin   to   write   this—as   I   would   like   to  
do   every   evening,   saying   nothing   intimate,   but   for¬  
getting   nothing   of   the   day’s   events.   Turned   to¬  
wards   what   I   have   left,   my   heart   anxious,   I   would  
nonetheless   like   to   sleep.  
•JULY   1ST  
Waking   up   with   a   fever,   I   stay   in   bed,   dreaming  
and   dozing   for   part   of   the   morning.   At   11   I   feel  
better   and   go   out.   G.   on   the   deck.   We   talk   about  
philosophy.   He   wants   to   do   the   philosophy   of   the  
history   of   philosophy.   He’s   dead   right.   But   accord¬  
ing   to   him,   he’s   remained   young   and   loves   to   live.  
He’s   right   again.   Lunch   with   my   three   muske¬  
teers.   Mme.   C.   blunders   again,   asking   G.   if   he’s   a  
high   school   teacher,   when   in   fact   he’s   a   professor  
at   the   Sorbonne.   But   she   doesn’t   realize   it.   I   notice  
the   attitude   that   men   have   towards   her.   They  
think   she’s   superficial   because   she’s   merry.   Natu¬  
rally,   this   is   an   error.   In   the   afternoon   I   read   an  
account   of   the   Brazilian   revolutions—Europe   is  
nothing.   At   five   o’clock   I   go   work   in   the   sun.   The  

60   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
sun   crushes   the   sea,   which   hardly   breathes,   and  
from   bow   to   stern   the   boat   is   full   of   silent   people.  
In   revenge   the   boat’s   loudspeaker   blasts   banalities  
to   the   four   corners   of   the   earth.   I   am   introduced  
to   a   young   Rumanian   woman   who’s   left   England  
to   go   live   in   Argentina.   A   passionate   one—neither  
beautiful   nor   ugly,   and   a   light   mustache.   I   go   read  
in   my   cabin,   then   get   dressed   for   dinner.   Sad.   I  
drink   wine.   After   dinner,   conversation,   but   I   look  
at   the   sea   and   try   once   again   to   fix   the   image   that  
I’ve   been   seeking   for   twenty   years   for   these   pat¬  
terns   and   drawings   made   on   the   sea   by   the   water  
thrown   up   by   the   stem. 2   When   I   find   it,   it’ll   be   fin¬  
ished.  
Twice,   the   idea   of   suicide.   The   second   time,  
still   looking   at   the   sea,   I   feel   a   dreadful   burning   in  
my   temples.   I   think   I   understand   now   how   one   kills  
oneself.   Conversation   again—a   lot   of   words,   not  
much   said.   In   the   darkness   I   climb   to   the   upper  
deck,   and,   after   having   made   some   decisions   about  
work,   finish   the   day   facing   the   sea,   the   moon,   and  
the   stars.   The   surface   of   the   waters   are   slightly   il¬  
luminated,   but   you   feel   their   profound   darkness.  
That’s   the   way   the   sea   is,   and   that’s   why   I   love   it!   A  
call   to   life   and   an   invitation   to   death.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   61  
•JULY   2  
Monotony   settles   in.   A   little   work   this   morning.  
Sun   on   the   upper   deck.   Before   lunch   I   end   up  
being   introduced   to   all   the   passengers.   We’re   not  
spoiled   by   a   surplus   of   pretty   women,   but   I   say   it  
without   bitterness.   The   sea   suddenly   calm,   we  
spend   all   afternoon   in   front   of   Gibraltar,   this  
enormous   rock   with   cement   inclines   and   an   ab¬  
stract,   hostile   gullet.   Then   Tangiers   with   its   soft  
white   houses.   At   six   o’clock,   as   the   day   ends,   the  
sea   rises   a   little   and   while   the   loudspeakers   blast  
the   Eroica,   we   leave   the   haughty   limits   of   Spain  
and   leave   Europe   for   good.   I   can’t   stop   looking   at  
the   land,   my   heart   oppressed.  
After   dinner,   a   film.   A   high-powered   Ameri¬  
can   dud.   I   can   only   stomach   the   first   few   images.   I  
return   to   the   sea.  
•JULY   3  
These   days   are   relentless.   This   morning   a   swim   in  
the   pool   (the   water   comes   up   to   my   stomach)   and  
ping-pong   where   I   finally   manage   to   stretch   my  
muscles.   This   afternoon   horse   racing   (with   dice)  
and   my   usual   bad   luck.   We’re   on   the   Atlantic,   the  
sea   is   high   and   the   boat   rolls   a   lot.   Tried   to   work  
but   without   much   success.   Finally,   I   read   Vigny’s  

62   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
diaries   where   many   things   enchant   me,   but   not   the  
side   of   him   that’s   like   a   constipated   swan.   And  
above   all   I   prefer   this   neat   little   cabin,   this   hard  
bunk,   and   this   destitution.   Either   this   stripped-  
down   solitude   or   the   storm   of   love—nothing   else  
in   the   world   interests   me.   Have   I   forgotten   any¬  
thing?   I   don’t   think   so.   As   usual   I   finish   the   day  
before   the   sea,   sumptuous   this   evening   beneath  
the   moon,   which   writes   Arab   symbols   with   phos¬  
phorescent   streaks   on   the   slow   swells.   There   is   no  
end   to   the   sky   and   the   waters.   How   well   they   ac¬  
company   sadness!  
•   JULY   4  
Same   day.   Made   worse   by   drowsiness—as   if   this  
long   series   of   insomniac   nights   were   suddenly  
catching   up   with   me.   Several   times   during   the   day  
I   lie   down   and   fall   asleep   even   though   last   night  
was   a   good   one.   Meanwhile,   work,   pool,   sun   (at   2  
a   m.   because   the   rest   of   the   time   it’s   a   frog   pond)  
and   Vigny.   I   find   lots   of   things   in   it   which   coincide  
with   my   state   of   mind.   And   this   again:   “If   suicide  
is   permitted,   it’s   in   one   of   those   situations   where,  
in   the   midst   of   a   family,   a   man   is   unwanted,   and  
his   death   will   bring   peace   to   those   for   whom   his  
life   is   nothing   but   a   problem.”   I   must   say,   how¬  
ever,   that   tanned,   rested,   well-fed,   and   dressed   in  
white,   I   possess   all   the   signs   of   life.   It   seems   to   me  
that   I   could   be   attractive.   But   to   whom?  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   63  
In   front   of   the   sea,   before   going   to   bed.   This  
time   the   moon   lights   up   a   corridor   of   sea   which,  
with   the   movement   of   the   ship,   seems,   in   the   dark  
ocean,   to   be   an   abundant   and   milky   river   descend¬  
ing   relentlessly   towards   us. 3   During   the   day   I   have  
already   tried   to   jot   down   some   aspects   of   the   sea:  
Morning   sea:   Immense   fish   pond—heavy   and  
wriggling—scaly—sticky—covered   with   cool   drib¬  
ble. 4  
Noon   sea:   pale—large   iron   plate   turning   white  
—greying   also—it’s   going   to   turn   over   abruptly   to  
offer   the   sun   its   humid   side,   now   in   the   obscure  
shadows   .   .   .   etc. 5  
Good   night.  
JULY   5  
Morning   some   swimming,   some   sun,   and   then  
some   work.   At   noon   we   pass   the   Tropic   of   Cancer  
beneath   a   vertical   sun   that   kills   every   shadow.  
However,   it’s   not   excessively   hot.   But   the   sky   is  
full   of   a   nasty   haze   and   the   sun   looks   like   a   sick¬  
ness.   The   sea   looks   like   an   enormous   swelling   with  
the   metallic   brilliance   of   decay.   In   the   afternoon,   a  
great   event:   we   pass   a   ship   that’s   following   the  
same   route   we   are.   The   greeting   that   the   two   ships  

64   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
give   each   other   with   three   grand   prehistoric   ani¬  
mal   roars,   the   waving   of   the   passengers   lost   at   sea  
and   alert   to   the   presence   of   other   human   beings,  
the   irrevocable   separation   on   the   green,   malevo¬  
lent   waters—all   that   weighs   on   the   heart   a   little.  
Afterwards   I   remain   staring   at   the   sea   for   a   long  
time,   full   of   a   strange   and   good   exaltation.   After  
dinner   I   go   to   the   bow.   The   emigrants   play   the   ac¬  
cordion   and   dance   in   the   night,   where   the   heat  
seems   to   mount   as   if   it   were   day.  
•JULY   6  
The   day   rises   on   a   steely   sea,   stormy,   and   full   of  
blinding   flakes   of   light.   The   sky   is   white   with   haze  
and   heat,   a   dead   but   unbearable   brilliance,   as   if  
the   sun   had   been   liquified   and   spread   out   in   the  
thickness   of   the   clouds   over   the   whole   expanse   of  
the   celestial   skullcap.   As   the   day   advances,   the  
heat   builds   in   the   livid   air.   All   day   long   the   stem  
flushes   out   swarms   of   flying   fish   from   their   wave  
bushes.   At   7   in   the   evening   the   coast   appears,  
gloomy   and   leprous.   We   disembark   into   the   night  
at   Dakar.   Two   or   three   cafes   violently   lit   with  
neon,   the   tall,   admirably   dignified   and   elegant  
Negroes   in   their   long   white   robes,   the   Negresses  
in   brightly   colored,   traditional   dresses,   the   smell  
of   peanuts   and   dung,   dust   and   heat.   Only   a   few  
hours,   but   I   find   once   again   the   odor   of   my   Africa,  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   65  
an   odor   of   misery   and   abandon,   a   virgin   but   also  
strong   odor   whose   seductiveness   I   know.   When   I  
get   back   on   board   the   boat,   a   letter.   For   the   first  
time   I   go   to   bed   slightly   pacified.  
•JULY   7  
Night   of   insomnia.   Heat.   Swimming   pool   and   then  
I   come   back   and   stretch   out   in   my   cabin.   Vigny,  
which   I   finish.   After   breakfast   I   try   in   vain   to  
sleep.   I   work   until   6   with   good   results.   And   then   I  
follow—on   the   deck—this   strange   character   that   I  
have   observed   since   the   beginning   of   the   voyage.  
Even   in   the   Tropics   always   dressed   in   a   dark   grey  
suit,   stiff   collar,   peaked   cap,   black   shoes,   60   years  
old.   Small,   thin,   looks   like   a   self-willed   rat.   Alone  
in   the   dining   room,   his   lounge   chair   always   in   the  
same   place   on   the   deck,   he   reads   nothing   but   Les  
Nouvelles   litteraires   of   which   he   seems   to   have   an  
inexhaustible   supply   and   which   he   reads   from   be¬  
ginning   to   end.   He   smokes   cigar   after   cigar   and  
speaks   to   no   one.   The   only   conversation   that   I’ve  
heard   him   have   was   with   a   sailor   whom   he   asked  
whether   porpoises   were   fat   or   lean.   Sometimes   it  
also   happens   that   he’ll   drink   (pastis)   with   a   young  
German-speaking   Swiss   who   doesn’t   speak   French.  
And   he   doesn’t   speak   German.   This   makes   for   a  
conversation   of   deaf-mutes.   This   evening,   while   I  
walked   around   the   deck   four   times,   I   noticed   that  

66   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
not   once   did   he   look   at   the   sea.   No   one   on   board  
knows   what   kind   of   work   he   does.  
Before   dinner,   I   watch   the   sun   go   down.   But  
it   is   absorbed   by   the   haze   well   before   reaching   the  
horizon.   At   this   moment   the   sea   is   pink   on   the  
port   side   and   blue   starboard.   We   proceed   through  
a   limitless   expanse.   There   won’t   be   any   land   be¬  
fore   Rio.   Suddenly   the   evening   hour   is   marvelous.  
The   thick   water   looks   slightly   tarnished.   The   sky  
expands.   And   then   during   the   hour   when   the  
tranquillity   is   greatest,   hundreds   of   porpoises  
spring   out   of   the   water,   prance   about   for   a   mo¬  
ment,   and   flee   towards   a   horizon   without   men.  
Once   they’ve   gone,   it’s   silence   and   the   anguish   of  
the   primitive   seas.   After   dinner,   I   come   back   to  
face   the   sea   at   the   bow   of   the   boat.   It’s   sumptuous,  
heavy   and   embroidered.   The   wind   whips   my   face  
brutally,   coming   at   me   head   on,   after   traversing  
spaces   the   extent   of   which   I   can’t   even   imagine.   I  
feel   alone   and   a   little   lost,   finally   delighted   and  
feeling   little   by   little   the   rebirth   of   my   strength   in  
the   face   of   this   unknown   future   and   this   immens¬  
ity   which   I   love.  
•   JULY   8  
Night   of   insomnia.   All   day   long   I   have   a   hollow  
head   and   an   empty   heart.   The   sea   is   rough.   The  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   67  
sky   is   covered.   The   decks   are   deserted.   Since  
Dakar,   there   are   only   twenty   passengers   left.   Too  
tired   to   describe   the   sea   today.  
•JULY   9  
Better   night.   In   the   morning   I   stroll   on   the   big  
empty   decks.   The   trade   winds   that   we   run   into  
now   have   made   it   cooler.   A   short   and   sturdy   wind  
brushes   the   sea   which   twists   upwards   in   small,  
foamless   waves.  
A   little   work,   a   lot   of   idling   about.   I   notice  
that   I’m   not   writing   down   conversations   with   the  
passengers.   Even   though   some   of   them—with  
Delamain,   the   publisher,   and   his   wife—are   inter¬  
esting.   Read   a   charming   novel   about   fidelity   by  
him.   I’ll   get   back   to   it.   But   it’s   also   that   my   interest  
at   this   moment   is   not   really   directed   towards   peo¬  
ple   but   towards   the   sea   and   this   profound   sadness  
in   myself   to   which   I   am   not   accustomed.  
At   6   p.m.,   at   sunset,   this   evening   as   always,   rec¬  
ords   of   great   music.   Suddenly   the   Toccata,   just   at  
the   moment   when   the   sun   disappears   behind   the  
clouds   accumulated   on   the   line   of   the   horizon.   In  
the   operatic   sky,   immense   red   trails,   black   plush,  
fragile   architectures,   which   seem   to   be   made   of  
wire   and   feathers,   are   set   in   a   vast   arrangement   of  

68   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
reds,   greens,   and   blacks—covering   the   whole   sky,  
evolving   in   an   always   changing   light,   following  
the   most   majestic   choreography.   The   Toccata,   on  
this   sleeping   sea,   beneath   the   festivals   of   this   royal  
sky   .   .   .   the   moment   is   unforgettable.   To   such   an  
extent   that   the   entire   ship   grows   quiet,   the   passen¬  
gers   crowded   against   the   western   railing   of   the  
deck,   recalled   to   silence   and   to   that   which   is   most  
real   in   them,   removed   for   a   moment   from   the   pov¬  
erty   of   days   and   the   pain   of   being.  
•   JULY   10  
We   pass   the   equator   in   the   morning,   in   Parisian  
weather—cool,   a   little   harsh,   a   fleecy   sky,   the   sea  
slightly   ruffled.   The   equator   ceremony   having  
been   cancelled   for   lack   of   passengers,   we   replace  
the   ritual   with   several   water   games   in   the   swim¬  
ming   pool.   And   then   a   moment   with   the   emi¬  
grants   who   are   playing   the   accordion   and   singing  
in   the   bow   of   the   ship,   turned   towards   the   desolate  
sea.   Once   more   I   notice   amongst   them   a   woman  
whose   hair   is   turning   grey,   a   woman   of   superb  
class,   a   soft,   proud,   and   beautiful   face,   hands   and  
wrists   like   stems,   and   an   unequaled   sense   of   style.  
Always   followed   by   her   husband,   a   tall,   blond,   taci¬  
turn   man.   Information   gathered—she’s   fleeing  
Poland   and   the   Russians   and   is   seeking   exile   in  
South   America.   She   is   poor.   But   looking   at   her,   I  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   69  
think   of   the   well-dressed   but   vulgar   matrons   who  
occupy   several   of   the   first-class   cabins.   I   still  
haven’t   dared   to   speak   to   her.  
Calm   day.   Except   for   a   big   champagne   dinner  
in   honor   of   passing   the   equator.   If   there   are   more  
than   four   people,   social   gatherings   are   hard   for  
me   to   stomach.   A   story   of   Mme.   C.’s:   Her   grand¬  
mother:   “As   for   me,   in   my   life,   you   see,   I’ve   only  
skimmed   over   the   surface   of   things.”   Her   grand¬  
father:   “Come   now,   my   dear,   you’ve   nonetheless  
borne   me   two   sons!”  
After   dinner   we   passengers   are   treated   to   a  
Laurel   and   Hardy.   But   I   flee   to   the   bow   to   con¬  
template   the   moon   and   the   Southern   Cross   to¬  
wards   which   we   ceaselessly   advance.   Surprised  
to   see   how   few   stars,   and   those   almost   anemic-  
looking,   in   this   southern   sky.   I   think   of   our  
Algerian   nights,   swarming   with   stars.  
Stayed   a   long   time   looking   at   the   sea.   Despite  
all   my   efforts   and   reasonings,   impossible   to   shake  
this   sadness   which   I   do   not   understand   at   all.  
•JULY   11  
Day   breaks   in   the   middle   of   the   Pot   au   Noir 6   be¬  
neath   a   driving   rain.   The   rain   pours   in   buckets  

70   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
over   the   decks,   but   the   temperature   remains   sti¬  
fling,   deadly.   In   the   middle   of   the   day   the   sky  
clears,   but   the   sea   is   rough   and   the   ship   pitches  
and   rolls.   Some   people   don’t   make   it   to   the   dining  
room.   Worked.   Badly.   Little   by   little   towards   eve¬  
ning   the   sky   clouds   up   again,   thickens   from   min¬  
ute   to   minute.   Night   descends,   very   quickly,   onto  
an   ink-black   sea.  
•JULY   12  
Rain,   wind,   furious   sea.   Some   people   are   sick.   The  
ship   advances   surrounded   by   the   smoky   sea-spray.  
Slept   and   worked.   Towards   the   end   of   the   after¬  
noon   the   sun   appears.   We’re   already   at   the   lati¬  
tude   of   Pernambouc   and   heading   towards   the  
coast.   In   the   evening   the   sky   is   overcast   again.  
Tragic   skies   come   to   greet   us   from   the   continent  
—messengers   from   a   dreadful   shore.   It’s   an   idea  
that   comes   to   me   suddenly,   reawakening   the   ab¬  
surd   apprehension   that   I   had   before   setting   out   on  
this   trip.   But   a   little   sun   will   clear   up   everything.  
•JULY   13  
A   radiant   sun   floods   the   spaces   of   the   sea.   And   the  
entire   boat   is   bathed   in   a   dazzling   light.   Swimming  
pool,   sun.   And   I   work   all   afternoon.   The   evening  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   71  
is   cool   and   sweet.   We   arrive   in   two   days.   All   of   a  
sudden   the   idea   of   leaving   this   ship—this   narrow  
cabin   where   during   long   days   I   was   able   to   shelter  
a   heart   cut   off   from   everything,   this   sea   which   has  
been   such   a   help   to   me—frightens   me   a   little.   To  
begin   living   again,   speaking.   People,   faces,   a   role  
to   play.   I’ll   need   more   courage   than   I   feel   capable  
of.   Fortunately,   I’m   in   good   shape   physically.  
There   are   moments,   however,   when   I   would   like  
to   avoid   other   human   beings.  
Late   at   night,   on   the   sleeping   boat,   I   watch  
the   night.   The   curious   austral   moon,   with   its   flat¬  
tened   summit,   lights   up   the   waters   towards   the  
south.   One   imagines   the   thousands   of   kilometers,  
these   solitudes   where   the   thick   and   brilliant   waters  
are   like   oily   fields.   This   at   least   would   be   peace.  
•JULY   14  
Endless   good   weather.   I   finish   up   my   work,   at   least  
the   work   that   I   was   able   to   manage   on   shipboard,  
the   rest   being   impossible   under   these   conditions.  
In   the   afternoon,   several   hundred   meters   away,   an  
enormous   black   beast   rises   to   the   surface,   rides  
several   waves   and   spouts   two   jets   of   water   spray.  
The   waiter   who   is   near   me   confirms   that   it’s  
a   whale.   And   without   a   doubt   the   size,   the   awe¬  
some   power   of   its   swimming,   its   aura   of   solitary  

72   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
beast   .   .   .   but   I   remain   skeptical.   In   the   afternoon,  
mail   and   suitcases.   In   the   evening   the   Captain’s  
reception   and   dinner   for   the   14th   of   July.   For   the  
first   time   a   sunset   without   haze.   Right   and   left   the  
sun   is   bracketed   by   the   first   cliffs   of   Brazil,   black  
facades.   We   dance,   sign   menus,   exchange   cards,  
and   promise   that   we’ll   all   meet   again,   cross   our  
hearts.   Tomorrow   everyone   will   have   forgotten  
everyone   else.   I   go   to   bed   late,   tired   and   reasoning  
with   myself   to   relax   a   little   for   my   encounter   with  
this   country.  
•JULY   15  
At   4   a   m.   a   racket   on   the   upper   deck   awakens   me.   I  
get   up.   It’s   still   dark.   But   the   coast   is   very   near:  
black,   even   hills   with   very   clear   outlines,   but   the  
outlines   are   soft,   round—old   profiles   of   one   of   the  
oldest   continents   on   the   planet.   In   the   distance,  
lights.   While   the   darkness   lifts,   we   follow   the  
coast,   the   water   quivers   only   slightly,   we   tack  
about   and   now   the   lights   are   opposite   us   but   very  
distant.   I   return   to   my   cabin.   When   I   go   back   up,  
we   are   already   in   the   bay,   immense   and   smoking   a  
little   in   the   newborn   day   with   the   sudden   conden¬  
sations   of   light   which   are   the   islands.   The   mist   dis¬  
appears   rapidly.   And   we   see   the   lights   of   Rio   run¬  
ning   all   along   the   coast,   the   “Sugar   Loaf’   with  
four   lights   on   its   summit   and,   on   the   peak   of   the  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   73  
highest   of   the   mountains,   which   seem   to   crush   the  
city,   an   enormous   and   unfortunate   illuminated  
Christ.   As   the   light   gradually   increases,   we   get   a  
better   view   of   the   city,   squeezed   between   the   sea  
and   the   mountains,   spread   out   lengthwise,  
stretched   out   endlessly.   In   the   center   enormous  
buildings.   Every   minute   a   roar   above   our   heads:  
an   airplane   takes   off   in   the   dawning   day,   at   first  
inextricably   blended   with   the   hues   of   the   land,  
then   rising   in   our   direction   and   passing   above   us  
with   its   great   insect   buzzing.   We’re   in   the   middle  
of   the   basin   and   the   mountains   make   an   almost  
perfect   circle   around   us.   Finally,   a   blood-red   light  
announces   the   arrival   of   the   sun,   which   rises   up  
behind   the   eastern   mountains   opposite   the   city  
and   begins   to   ascend   into   a   pale,   cool   sky.   The  
richness   and   sumptuousness   of   the   colors   that   play  
on   the   bay,   the   mountains,   and   the   sky   once   again  
induce   everyone   to   silence.   One   minute   later   the  
colors   seem   to   be   the   same,   but   it’s   a   postcard.   Na¬  
ture   abhors   miracles   that   last   too   long.  
Formalities.   Then   disembarking.   Right   away  
it’s   the   whirlwind   that   I   was   afraid   of.   Some   jour¬  
nalists   have   already   come   on   board.   Questions,  
photos.   Neither   worse   nor   better   than   anywhere  
else.   But   once   in   Rio,   with   Mme.   M.   and   a   famous  
Brazilian   journalist—already   met   him   in   Paris,  
very   nice—the   calvary   begins.   In   the   confusion   of  
a   first   day,   I   notice   by   chance:  

74   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
1.   They   ask   me   to   choose   between   a   room   at  
the   embassy,   which   is   deserted,   and   one   of   the  
many   luxury   hotels.   I   flee   the   nasty-looking   hotel,  
and   congratulate   myself   on   finding   a   simple   and  
most   charming   room   in   the   completely   empty   em¬  
bassy.  
2.   Brazilian   drivers   are   either   joyous   madmen  
or   icy   sadists.   The   confusion   and   anarchy   of   this  
traffic   are   regulated   by   only   one   law:   get   there  
first,   no   matter   what   the   cost.  
S.   There   is   a   striking   contrast   between   the  
luxurious   display   of   palaces   and   modern   buildings  
and   the   shanty   towns,   which   are   sometimes   sepa¬  
rated   from   each   other   by   no   more   than   a   hundred  
yards;   the   shanty   towns,   stuck   to   the   sides   of   the  
hills,   with   neither   water   nor   light,   are   home   to   an  
impoverished   population   of   both   blacks   and  
whites.   The   women   go   for   water   at   the   foot   of   the  
hills,   where   they   wait   in   line,   and   they   bring   it  
back   in   pails   which   they   carry   on   their   heads   like  
the   women   of   Kabylia. 7   While   they   wait,   an   unin¬  
terrupted   stream   of   chromed   and   silent   beasts  
from   the   American   automobile   industry   passes   in  
front   of   them.   Never   have   I   seen   wealth   and   pov¬  
erty   so   insolently   intertwined.   It   is   true   that,   ac¬  
cording   to   one   of   my   companions,   “at   least   they  
have   a   good   time.”   Regret   and   cynicism—only   B.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   75  
generous.   He’ll   take   me   to   the   shanty   towns   that  
he   knows   well:   “I’ve   been   a   criminal   reporter   and  
a   communist,”   he   says.   “Two   good   reasons   to  
know   the   neighborhoods   of   misery.”  
4.   People.   Lunch   with   Mme.   M.,   B.,   and   a  
kind   of   notary,   thin,   cultivated   and   spiritual—I  
can   only   remember   his   unusual   first   name,   Anni-  
bal—at   a   country   club   which   perfectly   resembles  
its   name:   tennis,   lawns,   young   people.   Annibal   has  
six   daughters,   all   of   whom   are   pretty.   He   says   that  
in   Brazil   the   mixture   of   religion   and   love   is   very  
interesting.   To   a   Brazilian   professor   who   had  
translated   Baudelaire,   Annibal   sent   the   following  
telegram:   “Kindly   retranslate   me   back   into   French  
immediately.   Signed:   Baudelaire.”   He   resembles  
many   of   these   very   refined   Spaniards   that   one  
meets   in   the   Spanish   provinces.  
5.   One   of   the   three   or   four   Brazilian   battle¬  
ships   that   I   was   shown,   and   that   seem   to   me   to   be   a  
little   out   of   date,   is   called   Terror   do   Mondo.   It   has  
seen   service   in   several   revolutions.  
6.   People.   After   lunch   a   reception   at   Mme.  
M’s.   Beautiful   apartment   on   the   bay.   The   after¬  
noon   is   soft   on   the   waters.   A   lot   of   people,   but   I  
forget   the   names.   A   translator   of   Moliere   who   a  
colleague   tells   me   added   an   act   to   The   Imaginary  

76   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Invalid,   which   was   not   long   enough   to   make   a   play  
out   of.   A   Polish   philosopher   from   whom   heaven,  
if   it   is   merciful,   will   protect   me.   A   young   French  
biologist   on   mission   here,   furiously   appealing   and  
nice.   Above   all   some   young   people   from   a   black  
theater   troupe   who   want   to   put   on   Caligula;   I  
promise   to   work   with   them.   With   my   frightful  
Spanish   I   manage   to   reach   an   agreement   with   one  
of   them   who   speaks   Spanish:   on   Sunday   I   will  
go   with   them   to   a   Negro   ball.   He’s   delighted   with  
the   trick   we’re   playing   on   my   official   hosts   with  
such   a   rendezvous   and   he   keeps   repeating   to   me:  
“Segreto.   Segreto.”  
7.   Just   when   I   think   everything   is   finished,  
Mme.   M.   announces   that   I’m   dining   with   a   Bra¬  
zilian   poet.   I   say   nothing,   promising   myself   that  
starting   tomorrow   I’ll   cut   everything   that   isn’t   in¬  
dispensable.   And   I   consent   with   resignation.   But  
in   no   way   did   I   expect   the   ordeal   that   was   to   fol¬  
low.   Enormous,   indolent,   folds   of   flesh   around   his  
eyes,   his   mouth   hanging   open,   the   poet   arrives.  
Anxieties,   a   sudden   movement,   then   he   spills   him¬  
self   into   an   easy   chair   and   stays   there   a   little   while,  
panting.   He   gets   up,   does   a   pirouette   and   falls  
back   down   into   the   easy   chair.   He   talks   about   Ber-  
nanos, 8   Mauriac,   Brisson,   Halevy. 9   Apparently   he  
knows   everybody.   He’s   been   treated   badly.   He’s  
not   involved   in   Franco-Brazilian   politics,   but   with  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   77  
some   Frenchmen   he   created   a   fertilizer   factory.  
Besides   he’s   never   been   decorated.   In   this   country  
they’ve   decorated   all   the   enemies   of   France.   But  
not   him,   etc.,   etc.  
He   dreams   for   a   moment,   suffering   visibly  
from   God   knows   what,   and   Finally   surrenders   the  
conversation   to   a   senor   who   seizes   hold   of   it  
greedily.   Because   this   is   a   senor   like   the   ones   who  
walked   their   graceful   dogs   on   the   Calle   Major   in  
Palma,   Mallorca 1 0   before   going   to   watch,   with   the  
pleasure   of   connoisseurs,   the   executions   of   ’36.   He  
rattles   on   about   everything:   I   should   see   this,   do  
that,   Brazil   is   a   country   where   one   does   nothing  
but   work,   no   vices,   no   time   for   them,   we   work,   we  
work,   and   Bernanos   told   him,   and   Bernanos   cre¬  
ated   in   this   country   a   way   of   living,   ah:   we   love  
France   so   much   .   .   .  
Appalled   by   the   prospect   of   this   outing,   I   per¬  
suade   the   young   biologist   to   come   to   dinner   with  
us.   In   the   car   I   ask   that   we   not   go   to   a   deluxe   res¬  
taurant.   And   the   poet   emerges   from   his   300  
pounds   and   tells   me,   with   raised   Finger:   “There   is  
no   deluxe   in   Brazil.   We   are   poor,   miserable,”   as  
he   affectionately   taps   the   shoulder   of   the   chauf¬  
feur   in   livery   who’s   driving   his   enormous   Chrys¬  
ler.   And   having   said   this,   the   poet   sighs   painfully  
and   returns   to   his   nest   of   flesh   where   he   begins  

78   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
distractedly   gnawing   at   one   of   his   complexes.   The  
senor   shows   us   Rio   which   is   on   the   same   latitude   as  
Madagascar   and   oh   so   much   more   beautiful   than  
Tananarive.   “Everyone’s   a   worker,”   he   repeats,  
slouched   against   his   cushion.   But   the   poet   stops  
the   car   in   front   of   a   pharmacy,   with   great   effort  
drags   himself   from   his   seat,   and   asks   us   to   kindly  
wait   a   couple   of   minutes   for   him—he’s   going   to  
get   an   injection.  
We   wait,   and   the   senor   comments:   “Poor   fel¬  
low,   he’s   diabetic.”  
“Is   it   getting   worse?”   Letarget   asks   politely.  
Ah   yes!  
“It’s   getting   worse.”  
The   poet   returns,   whimpering,   and   collapses  
on   his   poor   cushion   in   his   miserable   car.   We   land  
in   a   restaurant   near   the   market—where   they   serve  
only   fish—in   a   quadrangular,   high-ceilinged   room  
which   is   so   brutally   lit   with   neon   that   we   all   look  
like   pale   fish   floating   through   unreal   waters.   The  
senor   wants   to   order   for   me.   But   I’m   exhausted  
and,   wanting   to   eat   lightly,   I   refuse   everything   he  
suggests.   The   poet   is   served   first,   and   without  
waiting   for   us,   he   begins   eating,   sometimes   using  
his   short,   fat   fingers   instead   of   his   fork.   He   talks  
about   Michaux,"   Supervielle, 1 2   Beguin, 1 3   etc.,  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   79  
stopping   from   time   to   time   to   spit—sitting   straight  
up—bones   and   morsels   of   fish   into   his   plate.   It’s  
the   first   time   I’ve   ever   seen   this   operation   done  
without   the   person   bending   over   his   plate.   Marvel¬  
ously   skillful   for   the   most   part,   he   only   misses   his  
plate   once.   But   then   we’re   served,   and   I   see   that  
the   senor   has   ordered   fried   shrimp   for   me,   which  
I   refuse,   explaining,   in   what   I   believe   to   be   a  
friendly   manner,   that   I   know   this   dish   because   it’s  
quite   common   in   Algeria.   The   senor   gets   angry  
over   this.   They’re   only   trying   to   please   me,   that’s  
all.   Very   humbly,   in   fact,   very   humbly.   I   mustn’t  
look   in   Brazil   for   what   I   have   in   France,   etc.,   etc.  
Rising   up   out   of   my   fatigue   a   stupid   anger   over¬  
comes   me,   and   I   push   back   from   the   table   to   get  
up   and   leave.   Letarget’s   kind   intervention   and   also  
the   sympathy   that   I   feel   despite   everything   for   this  
curious   poet   hold   me   back,   and   I   make   an   effort   to  
calm   myself.   “Ah,”   says   the   poet,   sucking   his   fin¬  
gers,   “in   Brazil   one   needs   a   lot   of   patience,   a   lot   of  
patience.”   I   simply   reply,   in   order   to   get   it   off   my  
chest,   that   it   doesn’t   seem   to   me   that   up   until   now  
I’ve   been   lacking   in   patience.   As   quickly   and   as   ir¬  
rationally   as   he   got   excited,   the   senor   now   calms  
down,   and   to   smooth   things   over   he   overpowers  
me   with   compliments   that   leave   me   speechless.   All  
of   Brazil   awaits   me   feverishly.   My   visit   is   the   most  
important   thing   that’s   happened   in   this   country  
for   many   years.   I’m   as   famous   as   Proust   .   .   .  

80   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
There’s   no   stopping   him   now.   But   finally   he   fin¬  
ishes   with:   “It’s   for   this   reason   that   you   should   be  
patient   with   Brazil.   Brazil   needs   your   patience.   Pa¬  
tience   .   .   .   that’s   what’s   necessary   in   Brazil   .   .   .’’   and  
so   on.   Despite   everything   the   rest   of   the   meal   is  
calm,   even   though   the   poet   and   the   senor   toss   off  
constant   asides   in   Portuguese,   and   I   sense   that  
they’re   complaining   about   me.   As   for   the   rest,  
these   bad   manners   are   displayed   so   naturally   that  
the   whole   thing   becomes   rather   friendly.   Leaving  
the   restaurant   the   poet   declares   himself   in   need   of  
a   cup   of   coffee.   He   drives   us   to   his   club—an   imita¬  
tion   of   an   English   club—where   I   consent   to   drink  
a   “real”   cognac   for   which   I   have   absolutely   no   de¬  
sire.   The   senor   launches   into   an   explanation   of  
the   administrative   difficulties   of   the   Figaro,   which  
I   already   know   very   well,   but   no   matter;   he   contin¬  
ues   with   a   peremptory   description   which   is   com¬  
pletely   false.   In   fact   Chamfort   is   right:   if   you   want  
to   succeed   in   society   you   have   to   let   people   who  
don’t   know   anything   teach   you   a   lot   of   things   you  
already   know.   I   say   that   I   want   to   leave.  
The   senor   points   triumphantly   at   the   poet,  
who’s   spread   out   in   his   easy   chair   behind   a   mon¬  
strous   cigar:   “S.   is   the   greatest   Brazilian   poet.”  
To   which   the   poet,   weakly   waving   his   cigar,  
replies   in   a   pained   voice:   “There   is   no   greatest  
Brazilian   poet.”  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   81  
In   the   vestibule,   just   when   I   think   it’s   finished,  
the   poet   suddenly   becomes   animated   and   grabs   my  
arm.   Don   t   move,’   he   says   to   me.   “Observe   with  
all   your   faculties.   I   m   going   to   show   you   a   charac¬  
ter   from   one   of   your   novels.”  
We   see   on   the   sidewalk   a   small,   thin   man,   fe¬  
dora   askew,   sharp   features.   The   poet   hurries   to¬  
wards   him,   gobbles   him   up   in   a   long,   Brazilian   hug  
and   says   to   me:   This   is   a   man.   He   is   Deputy   of   the  
Interior.   But   he   is   a   man.”  
The   other   replies   that   Federico   is   excessively  
kind.  
The   senor   jumps   into   the   game.   More   hugs,  
this   time   between   equals,   since   the   senor   is   a   feath¬  
erweight.   And   the   senor   pulls   back   the   deputy’s  
vest:   “Look.”  
The   deputy   is   carrying   a   revolver   in   a   hand¬  
some   holster.   We   continue   on   our   way.  
“He’s   killed   at   least   40   men,”   the   poet   says,  
full   of   admiration.   “And   why?—Enemies.”  
Ah!  
“Yes,   he   killed   one,   took   cover   behind   the  
cadaver,   and   killed   the   others.”  

82   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
“He’s   authorized   to   carry   arms,”   Letarget  
says   without   flinching,   “because   he’s   a   deputy.”  
Looking   at   me,   the   poet   says:   “Isn’t   he   a   char¬  
acter   for   you?”  
“Yes,”   I   say.  
But   he’s   mistaken—he’s   the   one   who’s   the  
character.  
•JULY   16  
Get   up   early.   Work.   I   put   my   notes   in   order.   Con¬  
versation   with   the   waiter   who’s   serving   me.   He’s  
from   Nice.   He   wants   to   go   to   North   America   be¬  
cause   he   thinks   the   G.I.’s   are   nice.   Unable   to   ob¬  
tain   an   immigration   visa,   he   came   to   Brazil,   think¬  
ing   that   once   here   it   would   be   easier   to   get   his  
visa.   It’s   not   easier.   I   ask   him   what   he   wants   to   do  
in   the   United   States.   He’s   torn   between   boxing  
and   singing.   For   the   time   being   he’s   training   to   be  
a   boxer.   I’ll   go   with   him   Monday   to   his   gym.  
Lunch   with   Barleto   in   the   home   of   a   Brazilian  
woman,   a   novelist   and   translator.   Charming   house  
on   the   side   of   a   hill.   Naturally   there   are   a   lot   of  
people,   and   among   them   a   novelist   who   is   said   to  
have   written   the   Brazilian   Buddenbrooks,   but   who  
manifests   a   curious   cultural   ignorance.   If   I   am   to  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   83  
believe   B.,   the   novelist   was   heard   to   say   “English  
authors   like   Shakespeare,   Byron,   or   David   Cop-  
perfield.   At   the   same   time   he’s   obviously   well-  
read.   Since   it   doesn’t   matter   to   me   if   he   mistakes  
David   for   Charles,   I   find   him   very   intelligent.   At  
lunch   the   Brazilian   couscous   turns   out   to   be   fish  
cakes.   When   I   ask   to   see   a   soccer   game,   the   guests  
get   very   excited,   and   when   I   mention   that   I   had   a  
long   career   as   a   soccer   player,   I   provoke   a   general  
delirium.   Unwittingly,   I’ve   stumbled   upon   their  
principal   passion.   But   the   mistress   of   the   house  
translates   Proust,   and   everyone   present   is   pro¬  
foundly   knowledgeable   about   French   culture.   Af¬  
terwards   I   suggest   to   B.   that   we   take   a   walk   in   the  
city.  
Gaily   lit   up   by   multicolored   signs,   the   little  
pedestrian   streets   are   harbors   of   peace   near   the  
large   arteries   with   their   growling   traffic.   As   if,   be¬  
tween   Concorde,   the   Madeleine,   and   the   Avenue  
de   l’Opera,   no   cars   were   allowed   on   the   rue   St.  
Honore.   The   flower   market.   Little   bar   where   you  
drink   “little   coffees”   seated   on   miniscule   chairs.  
Moorish   houses   next   to   skyscrapers.   Next   Barleto  
makes   me   take   a   little   tramway   that   climbs   a   steep  
path   up   the   city’s   hills.   We   reach   a   neighborhood  
—at   once   poor   and   luxurious—that   looks   out  
over   the   city.   At   dusk   the   city   extends   to   the   hori¬  
zon.   Above   her   a   multitude   of   colored   signs   stand  

84   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
smoking   in   the   moist   evening   air.   In   the   soft   sky  
one   can   see   the   profiles   of   hills   which   end   in   jut¬  
ting   high   palms.   There   is   a   tenderness   in   this   sky,  
and   a   nostalgia   which   is   almost   sweet.   Descending  
on   foot,   down   steps   and   along   small,   slanting  
streets,   we   return   to   the   city   proper.   In   the   first  
real   street   that   we   come   upon,   a   positivist   temple.  
There’s   a   cult   here   to   Clotilde   de   Vaux 1 4   and   it’s  
in   Brazil   that   Auguste   Comte   is   immortalized   by  
his   most   disconcerting   legacy.   A   little   further   on  
there’s   a   Gothic   church   built   of   reinforced   con¬  
crete.   The   temple,   on   the   other   hand,   is   Greek.  
But   they   must   have   been   short   of   money   because  
there   are   no   cornices   on   the   columns.   Small   bar  
where   we   chat   with   B.N.   Charming   man,   some¬  
times   profound   (“by   sitting   in   the   sun   and   letting  
our   skin   turn   dark,   a   certain   innocence   is   lost”)  
who,   it   seems   to   me,   lives   the   drama   of   our   era  
with   dignity.   I   leave   him   to   meet   Abdias,   the   black  
actor,   at   Mme.   Mineur’s   and   to   go   on   from   there  
to   a   macumba.  
•A   MACUMBA,   IN   BRAZIL 1 5  
At   Mme.   M.’s,   anxiety   reigns.   The   “father   of   the  
saints”   (priest   and   principal   dancer),   who   was   sup¬  
posed   to   organize   the   macumba,   consulted   the   saint  
of   the   day,   but   was   refused   his   authorization.  
Abdias,   the   black   actor,   thinks   he   probably   didn’t  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   85  
promise   enough   money   to   win   the   good   will   of   the  
saint.   In   his   opinion   we   should   risk   an   expedition  
to   Caxias,   a   suburban   village   25   miles   from   Rio,  
where   by   chance   we   might   be   able   to   find   a   mac-  
umba.   During   dinner   the   macumbas   are   explained  
to   me.   The   purpose   of   these   ceremonies   is   always  
the   same:   through   dances   and   songs,   to   attain   the  
descent   of   the   god   into   oneself.   The   goal   is   the  
trance.   What   distinguishes   macumbas   from   other  
ceremonies   is   the   mixture   of   Catholicism   and   Afri¬  
can   rituals.   There   is   Echou,   an   African   god   and  
spirit   of   evil,   but   also   Ogoun   who   is   our   Saint  
George.   There   are   also   Saint   Cosme   and   Saint  
Damien,   etc.,   etc.   The   cult   of   saints   is   integrated  
here   into   rites   of   possession.   Each   day   has   its   saint,  
who   cannot   be   feted   on   any   other   day   unless   spe¬  
cial   authorization   is   obtained   from   the   principal  
“father   of   the   saints.”   The   “father   of   the   saints”  
has   his   daughters   (and   his   sons,   I   suppose),   and   he  
is   required   to   verify   their   trances.  
After   receiving   this   elementary   information,  
we   depart.   25   miles   in   a   kind   of   fog.   It’s   10   p.m.  
Caxias,   which   makes   me   think   of   a   village   fair   full  
of   stands.   We   stop   at   the   village   square   where  
there   are   already   about   twenty   cars   and   many  
more   people   than   we   had   imagined.   No   sooner  
have   we   stopped   than   a   young   mulatto   comes   up  
to   me,   offers   me   a   bottle   of   aguardiente,   and   asks  

86   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
me   if   I’ve   brought   Tarrou   with   me.   He   breaks   out  
laughing,   jokes   with   me,   and   introduces   me   to   his  
friends.   He’s   a   poet.   I   learn   that   it   was   known   in  
Rio   that   I   was   to   be   taken   to   a   macumba   (I   was  
told   to   keep   it   secret   which   I   innocently   did),   and   a  
lot   of   people   have   shown   up.   Abdias   tries   to   get   in¬  
formation   and   directions.   We   remain   there   in   the  
middle   of   the   square,   chatting   with   the   people  
from   the   village.   Abdias   is   immobile.   Apparently,  
no   one   is   taking   care   of   anything;   everyone   is   just  
standing   around,   staring   up   at   the   stars.   Suddenly:  
general   excitement.   Abdias   tells   me   that   we   have  
to   go   up   the   mountain.   We   take   off,   drive   several  
miles   on   a   beat-up   road   and   then,   for   no   apparent  
reason,   suddenly   stop.   Waiting—no   one   seems   to  
be   doing   anything.   Then   off   we   go   again.   Sud¬  
denly   the   car   turns   a   45   degree   angle   and   sets   off  
up   the   mountain   road.   It   struggles   painfully   for   a  
few   minutes   and   then   stops:   it’s   too   steep.   We  
leave   the   car   behind   and   set   off   on   foot.   The   hill   is  
barren,   very   little   vegetation,   but   we’re   in   the  
open   sky,   amidst   the   stars,   it   seems.   The   air   smells  
of   smoke.   It’s   so   thick   you   seem   to   be   cutting  
through   it   as   you   walk.   At   the   summit   of   the   hill  
we   hear   the   drums   and   songs   in   the   distance,   but  
then   they   stop.   We   walk   in   their   direction.   No  
trees,   no   houses;   it’s   a   desert.   But   in   a   hollow   we  
see   a   kind   of   vast   hangar   without   walls.   Paper   gar¬  
lands   are   strung   across   the   ceiling.   Suddenly   I   see  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   87  
a   procession   of   black   girls   coming   towards   us.  
They’re   dressed   in   long-waisted   white   dresses  
made   of   coarse   silk.   A   man   is   following   them.   He’s  
dressed   in   a   kind   of   red   jumper   and   is   wearing  
necklaces   of   multicolored   teeth.   Abdias   stops   him  
and   introduces   me.   His   greeting   is   serious,   but  
friendly.   But   there   is   a   complication.   They’re  
going   to   join   another   macumba   twenty   minutes  
away,   and   we   have   to   follow   them.   We   set   out.   At   a  
crossroads   I   see   a   kind   of   niche   where   the   statues  
of   saints   or   devils   (extremely   crude,   in   the   style   of  
Saint   Sulpice)   are   set   in   front   of   a   candle   and   a  
bowlful   of   water. 1 6   They   show   me   Echou,   red   and  
ferocious,   with   a   knife   in   his   hand.   The   path  
snakes   through   the   hills   under   a   star-filled   sky.  
The   dancers   go   on   ahead   of   us,   laughing   and   jok¬  
ing.   We   go   down   one   hill,   cross   the   road   by   which  
we   arrived,   and   start   up   another   hill.   Cabins   made  
of   branches   and   clay,   full   of   whispering   shadows.  
Then   the   procession   stops   in   front   of   a   raised   ter¬  
race   surrounded   by   a   wall   of   reed   stalks.   We   hear  
drums   and   songs   coming   from   inside.   When   we’re  
all   together,   the   first   women   climb   up   the   terrace  
and   enter   backwards   through   the   reed   door.   Then  
the   men.   We   enter   a   courtyard   full   of   rubbish.  
The   sound   of   singing   is   coming   from   a   little  
thatched   house   opposite   us.   We   go   in.   It’s   a   very  
crude   kind   of   cabin;   however,   the   walls   are   stuc¬  
coed.   The   roof   is   held   up   by   a   central   mast,   the  

88   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
floor   is   earthen.   A   small   lean-to   shelters   an   altar  
above   which   is   a   colored   image   of   St.   George. 1 7  
Similar   images   are   hung   around   the   walls.   In   a  
corner,   on   a   little   platform   decorated   with   palm  
leaves,   three   musicians   are   playing   short   and   long  
drums.   Before   we   arrived   there   were   already   some  
forty   dancers.   We   double   that   number   so   it’s   very  
crowded   and   hard   to   breathe.   I   back   up   against   a  
wall   and   watch.   The   dancers   set   themselves   in   two  
concentric   circles,   the   men   inside   and   the   women  
outside.   The   two   “fathers   of   the   saints”   (the   one  
who   welcomed   us   is   dressed,   like   the   dancers,   in  
what   looks   like   white   pajamas)   are   face   to   face   in  
the   center   of   the   circles.   One   after   the   other   they  
sing   the   first   notes   of   a   song   that’s   taken   up   in   cho¬  
rus   by   the   dancers.   The   circles   move   clockwise.  
The   dance   is   simple:   a   foot   stamp   onto   which   is  
grafted   the   double   undulation   of   the   rhumba.   The  
“fathers”   mark   the   rhythm   very   lightly.   My   trans¬  
lator   informs   me   that   the   songs   are   entreating   the  
saint   to   authorize   our   presence   in   this   place.   The  
breaks   between   the   songs   are   rather   long.   Near  
the   altar   one   woman   singer   shakes   a   small   bell   in¬  
cessantly.   The   dancing   is   hardly   frenetic.   The  
style   is   mediocre   and   it’s   heavy.   As   it   gets   hotter,  
the   breaks   are   almost   unbearable.   I   notice:  
1.   that   the   dancers   don’t   even   work   up   a   light  
sweat;  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   89  
2.   a   white   man   and   woman   who   dance   worse  
than   the   others.  
One   of   the   dancers   approaches   and   speaks   to  
me.   My   translator   tells   me   that   I   am   being   asked   to  
uncross   my   arms   because   this   position   impedes   the  
descent   of   the   spirit.   I   submit   and   keep   my   arms   at  
my   sides.   Little   by   little   the   breaks   between   the  
songs   get   shorter   and   the   dance   more   lively.   A   lit  
candle   is   brought   to   the   center   and   stuck   in   the  
earth   near   a   glass   of   water.   The   songs   invoke   St.  
George.  
He   arrives   in   moonlight  
He   leaves   in   sunlight  
and   continues:  
I   am   the   battlefield   of   god.  
In   fact,   one   or   two   of   the   dancers   already  
seem   to   be   in   a   trance,   but,   if   I   may   say   so,   the  
trance   is   rather   calm:   hands   on   the   small   of   the  
back,   legs   stiff,   eyes   unmoving   and   vacant. 1 8   The  
“father”   in   red   pours   water   in   two   concentric   cir¬  
cles   around   the   candle,   and   almost   without   inter¬  
ruption   the   dances   resume,   one   after   the   other.  
From   time   to   time   a   man   or   woman   leaves   the   cir¬  
cles   to   dance   in   the   middle,   near,   but   never   cross-  

90   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
ing,   the   circles   of   water.   Their   rhythm   is   faster,  
and   they’re   seized   by   spasms   and   inarticulate   cries.  
The   dust   rises   from   the   floor   and   thickens   the   air  
which   is   already   stifling.   More   and   more   dancers  
leave   the   circles   to   dance   around   the   two   fathers  
who   have   also   quickened   the   tempo   of   their   move¬  
ments   (the   father   in   white   dances   very   well).   Now  
the   drums   are   raging,   and   all   of   a   sudden   the   fa¬  
ther   in   red   breaks   loose. 1 9   Eyes   inflamed,   arms   and  
legs   whirling   around   his   body,   he   leaps   from   leg   to  
leg   with   bent   knee,   accelerating   his   rhythm   until  
the   dance   ends   and   he   stands   staring   at   everyone  
with   a   fixed   and   frightening   gaze.   At   this   moment  
a   dancer   comes   forward   from   a   dark   corner,  
kneels,   and   offers   him   a   sheathed   sword.   The   fa¬  
ther   in   red   pulls   the   sword   and   swings   it   around  
his   body   in   a   threatening   manner.   They   bring   him  
an   enormous   cigar.   Little   by   little   everyone   lights  
cigars   and   smokes   them   while   they   dance.   The  
dance   continues.   One   by   one   the   dancers   prostrate  
themselves   before   the   father,   placing   their   heads  
between   his   feet.   He   hits   them   diagonally   with   the  
flat   of   the   sword,   stands   them   up,   touches   his   right  
shoulder   to   their   left   and   vice   versa.   He   pushes  
them   violently   into   the   circle,   and   two   out   of   three  
times   this   movement   sets   off   a   crisis   which   takes   a  
different   form   depending   on   the   dancer:   a   fat  
black   man,   immobile,   staring   vacantly   at   the   cen¬  
tral   mast,   has   only   a   quivering   at   the   back   of   his  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   91  
neck   which   continues   incessantly.   He   looks   like   a  
boxer   down   for   the   count.   A   thick   white   woman  
with   an   animal   face   barks   relentlessly,   shaking   her  
head   from   right   to   left. 2 0   But   the   young   black  
women   enter   into   the   most   hideous   trance,   their  
feet   glued   to   the   ground   and   their   bodies   racked  
by   starts   and   jerks   which   become   more   violent   as  
they   ascend   toward   the   women’s   shoulders.   Their  
heads   shoot   back   and   forth   and   look   as   if   they   are  
going   to   fly   off   their   necks.   They   scream   and  
howl.   Then   the   women   begin   to   fall.   They   are  
picked   up,   patted   on   the   forehead,   and   they   start  
in   again   until   they   fall   once   more.   The   summit   is  
reached   when   everyone   starts   screaming:   strange,  
hoarse   sounds   that   resemble   barking.   I   am   told  
that   this   will   continue   incessantly   until   dawn.   It’s  
2   a   m.   The   heat,   the   dust,   the   cigar   smoke,   and   the  
smell   of   bodies   make   the   air   unbreathable.   I   go  
out   staggering,   and   breathe   in   the   fresh   air   with  
delight.   I   like   the   night   and   the   sky   better   than   the  
gods   of   men.  
•JULY   17  
Work   in   the   morning.   I   eat   lunch   with   G.   and   two  
Brazilian   professors.   Three   professors   in   fact,   but  
nice.   Then   Lucien   Febvre, 2 1   an   old,   rather   taci¬  
turn   man,   joins   us,   and   we   take   a   drive   through  
the   mountains   that   encircle   Rio.   One   hundred  

92   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
views   of   the   Tijuca   gardens,   the   Meyrink   chapel,  
the   Corcovado,   the   bay   of   Rio—each   view   very  
different   from   all   the   others.   And   the   immense  
beaches   of   the   South,   with   white   sand   and   emerald  
waves,   which   run   deserted   for   thousands   of   miles  
into   Uruguay.   The   tropical   forest   and   its   three  
layers.   Brazil   is   a   land   without   men.   Everything  
created   here   is   created   at   the   price   of   inordinate  
efforts.   Nature   suffocates   man.   “Is   space   sufficient  
to   create   culture?”   the   good   Brazilian   professor  
asks   me.   It’s   a   meaningless   question.   But   these  
spaces   are   the   ones   that   will   gain   from   technical  
progress.   The   faster   the   airplane   flies,   the   less   im¬  
portant   are   France,   Spain,   and   Italy.   They   were  
nations,   now   they   are   provinces,   and   tomorrow  
they   will   be   the   world’s   villages.   The   future   is   not  
ours,   and   there’s   nothing   we   can   do   against   this   ir¬  
resistible   movement.   Germany   lost   the   war   be¬  
cause   it   was   a   nation   and   modern   warfare   requires  
the   means   of   empires.   Tomorrow   the   means   of   en¬  
tire   continents   will   be   necessary.   And   now   the   two  
great   empires   seek   the   conquest   of   their   conti¬  
nents.   What’s   to   be   done?   The   only   hope   is   the  
birth   of   a   new   culture,   and   a   South   America   that  
can   perhaps   mollify   the   mechanical   folly. 2 2   That’s  
what   I   badly   expressed   to   my   professor   as   we   sat  
before   a   hissing   sea,   letting   sand   run   between   our  
fingers.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   93  
After   being   chilled   in   the   car   and   also   under  
the   Corcovado   Christ,   I   return   to   the   hotel   to   wait  
for   the   faithful   Abdias   who’s   supposed   to   take   me  
to   dance   the   samba   after   dinner.   Disappointing  
evening.   In   an   outlying   neighborhood,   a   kind   of  
working   class   dance   hall   lit,   of   course,   by   neon.  
For   the   most   part   there   are   only   blacks,   but   in   Bra¬  
zil   this   means   a   great   variety   of   skin   colors.   Sur¬  
prised   to   see   how   slowly   these   blacks   dance,   as   if  
underwater.   Perhaps   it’s   the   climate.   The   Harlem  
madmen   would   probably   calm   down   here.   Except  
for   the   color   of   the   skin,   nothing   distinguishes   this  
dance   hall   from   a   thousand   others   throughout   the  
world.   Speaking   of   this,   I   notice   that   I   have   to   con¬  
quer   in   myself   a   reverse   prejudice.   I   like   blacks   a  
priori,   and   I’m   tempted   to   see   in   them   qualities  
that   they   don’t   really   have.   I   want   these   people   to  
be   beautiful,   but   if   I   imagine   them   with   white   skin,  
I   find   a   rather   pretty   collection   of   clerks   and   dys¬  
peptic   employees.   Abdias   agrees.   The   race   is   ugly.  
However,   of   the   mulatto   women   who   immediately  
come   to   drink   at   our   table,   not   because   it’s   ours  
but   because   we’re   drinking   there,   one   or   two   are  
pretty.   I’m   even   attracted   to   one   who’s   lost   her  
voice,   dances   a   lax   samba   with   another   woman,  
taps   me   on   the   side   to   awaken   my   appetite,   and  
then   suddenly   informs   me   that   I’m   bored.   Taxi.   I  
return   to   the   hotel.  

94   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
•JULY   18  
It’s   pouring   buckets   onto   the   smoking   bay   and  
onto   the   city.   Calm   morning   of   work.   I   go   to   lunch  
with   Lage   in   a   nice   restaurant   that   gives   onto   the  
port.   I   have   a   date   with   Barleto   at   3   to   visit   the  
working   class   suburbs.   We   take   a   suburban   train.  
Meier.   Todos   os   santos , 2 3   Madeidura.   I’m   struck   by  
how   Arab   it   seems.   Stores   without   shop-fronts.  
Everything   is   in   the   street.   Saw   a   hearse:   a   ceno¬  
taph   in   Empire   style   with   enormous   gilded   bronze  
columns   on   a   delivery   truck   painted   black.   Let   the  
rich   have   horses.   Violently   colored   fabrics   on   dis¬  
play.   We   cross   interminable   suburbs   in   a   bumpy  
streetcar.   Sad   and   most   of   the   time   empty   (the  
tribes   of   workers   camped   at   the   entrances   of   hous¬  
ing   developments 24   remind   me   of   B. 2 5 )   but   coagu¬  
lating   at   long   intervals   around   a   center,   a   square  
brilliant   with   neon,   with   red   and   green   lights   (in  
the   middle   of   the   day),   crammed   with   this   multico¬  
lored   crowd   at   whom,   from   time   to   time,   a   loud¬  
speaker   screams   the   latest   football   scores.   One  
thinks   of   these   crowds   of   people,   incessantly   grow¬  
ing   over   the   surface   of   the   world,   who   will   eventu¬  
ally   cover   everything   and   end   up   suffocating  
themselves.   I   understand   Rio   better   like   this,   at  
any   rate   better   than   at   the   Copacabana—that   as¬  
pect   of   it   that’s   like   an   oil   stain   extending   infinitely  
in   every   direction.   Returning   in   a   lotacao,   a   kind   of  
group   taxi,   we   see   one   of   the   numerous   accidents  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   95  
that   result   from   this   unbelievable   traffic.   On   an  
avenue   shimmering   with   lights   a   speeding   bus   hits  
a   poor,   old   black   man,   sends   him   flying   like   a   ten¬  
nis   ball,   drives   around   the   body,   and   takes   off.  
The   driver   flees   because   of   the   stupid   law   of   fla¬  
grante   delicto,   which   would   send   him   to   prison.   So  
he   takes   off,   there’s   no   flagrante   delicto,   and   he  
won’t   go   to   prison.   Nobody   comes   to   help   the   old  
black   man.   The   shot   he   took   would   have   killed   a  
bull.   Later   on   I   learn   that   they’ll   put   a   white   sheet  
over   him—which   will   slowly   turn   red   with   his  
blood—set   lit   candles   around   him,   and   the   traffic  
will   continue   to   by-pass   him   until   the   authorities  
arrive.  
In   the   evening,   dinner   at   Robert   Claverie’s.  
Nothing   but   French,   which   is   relaxing.   Huxley  
says   that   when   one   speaks   a   foreign   language  
there’s   someone   inside   of   oneself   who   refuses.  
JULY   19  
Beautiful   weather.   A   charming,   myopic   lady   jour¬  
nalist.   Mail.   Lunch   with   the   Delamains   in   a   restau¬  
rant   at   the   train   station—neon,   of   course.   The  
meal.   Dark   thoughts.   At   the   end   of   the   afternoon  
I   go   to   a   drama   school.   Interview   with   professors  
and   students.   Dinner   at   the   Chapass’   home   with  
the   national   poet   Manuel   Bandera,   a   small,  

96   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
extremely   refined   man.   After   dinner   Kaimi,   a  
black   man   who   writes   and   composes   the   sambas  
that   are   sung   throughout   Brazil,   comes   to   sing   and  
play   his   guitar.   Of   all   songs   these   are   the   saddest  
and   most   moving.   The   sea   and   love,   nostalgia   for  
Bahia.   Little   by   little   everyone   sings.   One   sees   a  
black   man,   a   deputy,   a   university   professor,   and   a  
notary   public   sing   these   sambas   together   with   very  
natural   grace.   Completely   seduced.  
•JULY   20  
Beautiful   morning   in   a   motor   boat   on   the   bay   of  
Rio.   Only   a   light,   cool   wind   brushes   the   surface   of  
the   water.   We   run   alongside   the   islands;   little  
beaches   (two   twins   named   Adam   and   Eve).   Finally,  
a   swim   in   the   pure,   cool   water.   Afternoon,   a   visit  
from   Murillo   Mendes—a   poet   and   in   poor   health.  
A   pure,   unyielding   spirit.   Really   one   of   the   two   or  
three   that   I’ve   noticed   here.   Lecture   in   the   eve¬  
ning.   When   I   arrive,   I   find   a   crowd   blocking   the  
entrance.   Unable   to   find   a   seat,   Claverie   and   the  
ravishing   Mme.   Petitjean   are   about   to   leave.   I  
manage   to   get   seats   for   them,   but   not   without   dif¬  
ficulty.   The   auditorium   holds   800   people,   but   it’s  
overflowing   and   some   of   the   public   are   obliged   to  
stand   or   sit   on   the   floor.   The   society   people,   diplo¬  
mats,   etc.,   naturally   arriving   late,   have   to   choose  
between   standing   or   leaving.   The   Spanish   ambas-  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   97  
sador   sits   behind   the   rostrum   on   a   board   sup¬  
ported   by   two   sawhorses.   In   a   little   while   he’ll   be  
educated.   Ninu,   a   Spanish   refugee   whom   I   knew  
in   Paris,   is   there!   He’s   head   of   the   campeones   in   a  
ranch   60   miles   from   Rio.   He   came   60   miles   to  
hear   his   “ campahero .   ”   He’s   leaving   tomorrow  
morning.   When   you   know   what   it   means   to   go   60  
miles   on   these   roads   ...   I’m   moved   to   tears.   Tak¬  
ing   out   a   pack   of   cigarettes,   he   tells   me   that   these  
are   closest   to   the   “gusto   franees,”   and   offers   me  
one.   I   stick   close   to   him   all   evening,   happy   to   have  
him   in   the   auditorium   and   thinking   to   myself   that  
it’s   for   men   like   him   that   I’m   going   to   speak.   And,  
in   fact,   this   is   how   I   speak, 2 6   and   I   get   through   to  
the   men   like   N.,   and,   it   seems   to   me,   to   the   young  
people   who   are   there.   But   I   doubt   that   I   win   over  
the   society   people.   Afterwards,   the   stampede.   I  
harvest   several   honest   responses.   The   rest   is   play¬  
acting.   Go   to   sleep   at   midnight,   knowing   I   have   to  
get   up   at   4:30   a   m.   for   a   plane   to   Recife.  
JULY   2   1  
Get   up   at   4   a   m.   It’s   pouring.   Just   going   from   the  
embassy   door   to   the   taxi,   I   get   soaked.   During   the  
formalities   at   the   airport   I’m   asleep   on   my   feet.  
It’s   a   long   way   from   the   airport   to   the   aerodrome.  
In   this   climate   one   gets   wet   twice:   once   from   the  
rain,   and   then   from   one’s   own   perspiration.   A  

98   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
long   wait.   We   don’t   end   up   leaving   until   8.30,   and  
once   again   I’m   in   a   rage   against   airplanes.   While  
I’m   waiting   I   look   at   a   chart   that   shows   the   dis¬  
tances   between   Rio   and   the   capitals   of   the   world.  
Paris   is   6000   miles   away.   Two   minutes   later   La   vie  
en   rose   on   the   radio.   Under   a   low   sky,   burdened  
with   rain,   the   airplane   takes   off   heavily.   I   try   to  
sleep   but   can’t.   Four   and   a   half   hours   later,   when  
we   land   at   Recife,   the   airplane   door   opens   onto  
red   earth   consumed   by   heat.   It’s   true   that   we   re  
once   again   at   the   equator.   Insomniac,   vaguely   fe¬  
verish   from   a   cold   I’ve   caught   this   morning,   I   stag¬  
ger   under   the   weight   of   the   heat.   No   one’s   waiting  
for   me.   It’s   not   surprising   since   it   seems   the   plane  
is   early.   So   I   wait   in   an   empty   room   in   air   that’s   on  
Fire,   contemplating   in   the   distance   the   coconut  
forests   that   surround   the   city.   The   delegation   ar¬  
rives.   Everybody   nice.   The   three   Frenchmen   who  
are   there   are   all   over   six   feet   tall.   We’re   well   rep¬  
resented.   We   take   off.   Red   earth   and   coconut  
trees.   And   then   the   sea   and   immense   beaches.   Ho¬  
tel   on   the   pier.   The   masts   are   higher   than   the   par¬  
apet.   I   try   to   sleep.   In   vain.   Four   hours.   They  
come   to   fetch   me.   There’s   the   director   of   the   old¬  
est   newspaper   in   South   America,   Le   journal   de   Per-  
nambouc.   He’s   the   one   who   takes   me   around   the  
city.   Admirable,   very   white   colonial   churches,  
where   the   Jesuitic   style   is   made   clearer   and   lighter  
by   the   stucco.   The   interior   is   baroque,   but   without  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   99  
the   excessive   heaviness   of   European   baroque.   The  
Golden   Chapel   in   particular   is   admirable.   Here  
the   azulejos   are   perfectly   preserved.   Only   the  
“wicked”   Judas,   the   Roman   soldiers,   etc.   have  
been   disfigured   by   the   people;   and   it’s   the   same  
thing   with   the   paintings.   All   their   faces   are   con¬  
sumed   and   bloody.   I   admire   the   old   city—the   red,  
blue,   and   ochre   houses,   the   streets   paved   with  
large   pointed   pebbles.   The   square   of   the   San  
Pedro   church.   Right   next   to   a   coffee   factory   the  
church   is   black   from   the   smoke   of   the   roasters.   It  
literally   has   a   coffee   patina.  
Dinner   alone.   Faintly,   the   sound   of   an   orches¬  
tra.   Exile   has   its   pleasures.   After   dinner,   a   lecture  
for   about   one   hundred   people   who,   as   they   leave,  
seem   very   tired.   I   definitely   do   like   Recife.   Flor¬  
ence   of   the   tropics,   between   its   coconut   forests,   its  
red   mountains,   its   white   beaches.  
•JULY   2   2  
Wake   up   with   the   grippe   and   a   fever.   Wobbly   legs.  
I   get   dressed   and   wait   at   the   hotel   for   three   in¬  
tellectuals   who   are   determined   to   see   me.   Two   are  
pleasant.   We   go   to   see   Olinda,   a   small,   historic   city  
with   old   churches,   on   the   bay   opposite   Recife.  
Very   beautiful   convent   of   Saint-Francis.   When   I  
return   I’m   shivering   with   fever   and   take   aspirin  

100   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
and   gin.   Lunch   at   the   consul’s.   After   lunch   a   walk  
through   a   coconut   forest   that   borders   the   sea.  
Through   the   openings   we   see   the   sails   of   junsahes  
at   sea,   a   kind   of   narrow   raft,   made   of   trunks   of  
a   very   light   wood   held   together   by   rope.   I’m   told  
that   these   fragile   assemblages   can   remain   at   sea  
for   days   and   days.   Here   and   there   straw   huts.   But  
in   the   suffocating,   luminous   air,   the   shadow   of  
the   coconut   trees   trembles   before   my   eyes.   The  
grippe   gets   worse   and,   with   an   interview   at   5  
o’clock,   I   excuse   myself   to   rest.   Can’t   sleep.   A  
round   table   discussion   which,   thanks   to   two   whis¬  
keys,   I   manage   to   get   through.   Afterwards,   depar¬  
ture   for   a   fiesta   organized   for   me.   They   give   me  
an   injection   for   my   grippe.   Uninteresting   songs  
and   dances.   A   chic   macumba.   But   the   bomba-men-  
boi   is   an   extraordinary   spectacle.   It’s   a   kind   of   gro¬  
tesque   ballet   danced   by   masked   dancers   and   totem  
figures   on   a   theme   that   never   varies:   the   putting  
to   death   of   a   steer.   While   they   dance   the   charac¬  
ters   recite,   and   improvise,   a   text   in   verse.   What   I  
see   lasts   one   hour.   But   I’m   told   that   it   can   last   all  
night.   The   masks   are   extraordinary.   Two   red  
clowns,   the   “sailor   horseman’’   inside   a   merry-go-  
round   horse,   a   swan,   a   clown   dressed   as   a   gaucho.  
Two   Indians,   and   of   course   the   steer—the   “dead  
bearing   the   living”—a   kind   of   two-bodied   figure  
worn   by   a   single   actor,   the   cachasa   (or   drunk),   the  
son   of   the   horse,   a   prancing   colt,   a   man   on   stilts,  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   101  
the   crocodile,   and,   dominating   everything,   a   dead  
man   at   least   9   feet   tall   who   contemplates   the   per¬  
formance,   his   head   high   up   in   the   night   sky.   The  
orchestra   consists   of   a   drum   and   a   steel   drum.   The  
religious   origins   are   evident   (there   are   still   prayers  
in   the   text).   But   all   that   is   drowned   in   a   diabolic  
dance,   a   thousand   graceful   or   grotesque   inven¬  
tions   ending   with   the   murder   of   the   steer   which   is  
reborn   soon   afterwards   and   carries   off   a   little   girl  
between   its   horns.   The   end—a   great   shout:   “Long  
live   Senor   Camus   and   the   one   hundred   kings   of   the  
Orient.”   I   return   to   the   hotel,   brutalized   by   the  
grippe.  
•JULY   23  
9   a   m.   Leave   for   Bahia.   My   grippe   is   a   little   better.  
But   I’m   still   feverish   and   aching.   It’s   cold   in   the  
airplane,   God   knows   why.   And   it   bounces   around  
terribly.   After   three   hours   we   see   the   appearance  
of   little   hills   covered   with   snow   on   a   vast   plain.   At  
least   that’s   the   impression   that   this   white   sand,  
which   is   everywhere   here,   gives   me,   immaculate  
waves   which   resemble   a   desert   surrounding   Bahia.  
From   the   aerodrome   to   the   city   four   miles   of   road  
winds   between   banana   trees   and   dense   vegetation.  
The   earth   is   completely   red.   Bahia,   where   one   sees  
only   blacks,   seems   to   me   to   be   an   enormous   collec¬  
tion   of   markets—teeming,   impoverished,   filthy,  

102   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
and   beautiful.   Innumerable   stands   made   of   torn  
sheets   and   old   planks,   old,   low   houses   stuccoed  
with   red,   apple-green,   and   blue   lime,   etc.  
Lunch   at   the   port.   Large   boats   with   blue   and  
ochre   lateen   sails   unload   bunches   of   bananas.   We  
eat   dishes   that   are   spicy   enough   to   make   cripples  
walk   again.   The   bay   that   I   see   from   the   window   of  
my   hotel   extends   round   and   pure,   full   of   a   strange  
silence,   beneath   a   grey   sky,   while   the   immobile  
sails   that   one   sees   seem   imprisoned   in   a   sea   that  
has   suddenly   become   rigid.   I   prefer   this   bay   to   the  
one   at   Rio—too   spectacular   for   my   tastes.   At   least  
this   one   has   moderation   and   poetry.   Since   the  
morning   brutal   and   abundant   downpours.  
They’ve   transformed   the   broken   streets   of   Bahia  
into   rushing   torrents.   And   we   drive   in   the   middle  
of   two   large   blades   of   water   which   pour   down   in¬  
cessantly   over   both   sides   of   the   car.  
Visit   the   churches.   Even   though   they   have  
bigger   reputations,   they’re   the   same   as   the   ones   at  
Recife.   The   Church   of   the   Good   Jesus   with   its   vo¬  
tive   offerings   (plaster   casts,   a   buttocks,   an   X-ray,  
corporal’s   stripes).   Suffocating.   But   this   harmoni¬  
ous   baroque   is   very   repetitive.   In   fact,   it’s   the   only  
thing   to   see   in   this   country   and   it   doesn’t   take   long  
to   see   it.   Real   life   remains.   But   in   this   oversized  
land   which   has   the   sadness   of   large   spaces,   life   is  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   103  
terribly   banal   and   it   would   take   years   to   integrate  
oneself.   Do   I   want   to   spend   years   in   Brazil?   No.   At  
6   p.m.   I   take   a   shower,   sleep,   and   wake   up   feeling   a  
bit   better.   Dinner   alone.   Then   a   lecture   before   a  
patient   public.   The   consul   joins   me   afterwards  
and,   after   the   last   glass   has   been   drunk,   slips   me,  
under   the   table,   an   envelope   containing   approxi¬  
mately   45,000   francs   in   Brazilian   currency.   This   is  
what   I’m   being   paid   by   the   University   of   Bahia.  
The   consul’s   surprise   when   I   refuse.   He   explains  
to   me   that   “there   are   others   who   demand   this  
payment.”   Finally   he   desists.   I   know   that   he   can’t  
help   thinking:   “If   he   needed   it,   he’d   accept.”   In  
fact.   .   .  
Before   finishing   I   jot   down   several   of   the  
house   rules   in   the   French   of   the   Palace(?)   Hotel   of  
Bahia—“In   Brazil   everyone   speaks   French.”   So  
goes   the   propaganda.  
“The   failure   to   pay   bills,   as   stipulated   in   para¬  
graphs   3   and   4,   will   oblige   the   management   to   ef¬  
fect   the   withholding   of   baggage   as   security   against  
the   debt,   and   as   a   consequence   the   client   will   im¬  
mediately   disoccupy   the   occupied   room.”  
“It   is   prohibited   to   possess   birds,   dogs,   or  
other   animals   in   the   rooms.”  

104   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
“In   the   hotel   lobby   one   still   finds   a   well-  
appointed   American   Bar   and   a   spacious   reading  
room.”  
And   this   one   for   the   end:  
“In   the   hotel   lobby   there   is   a   barber   shop   and  
a   manicure   salon.   The   clients   can   employ   their  
functions   in   their   rooms.”  
•JULY   24   (SUNDAY)  
At   10   a   m.   Eduardo   Catalao,   a   charming   Brazilian  
who   is   polite   in   a   way   that   people   no   longer   are,  
takes   me,   by   way   of   a   road   in   extreme   disrepair,   to  
the   Itapoa   beach.   It’s   a   village   of   fishermen   in  
straw   huts.   But   the   beach   is   wild   and   beautiful,   the  
sea   frothy   at   the   foot   of   the   coconut   trees.   This  
grippe,   which   won’t   end   and   has   me   enslaved,  
keeps   me   from   going   swimming.   We   meet   a   group  
of   young   French   film   people   who   are   living   in   a  
straw   hut   and   making   a   film   about   Bahia.   Sur¬  
prised   to   see   me   in   this   out   of   the   way   place.   They  
smell   a   little   of   St.-Germain-des-Pres.  
A   vitriolic   lunch   at   three.   From   5   to   7,   I   work.  
Dinner   at   the   consul’s.   Then   we   go   to   see   a   can-  
domble , 2 7   a   new   ceremony   of   this   curious   Afro-  
Brazilian   religion   which   is   the   Catholicism   of   the  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   105  
blacks   here.   It’s   a   kind   of   dance   executed   in   front  
of   a   food-laden   table,   accompanied   by   three   drums  
of   different   sizes   and   a   flattened   funnel   that   is  
struck   with   a   thin,   iron   stick.   The   dances   are   di¬  
rected   by   a   kind   of   matron   (who   replaces   the   “fa¬  
thers   of   the   saints’’)   and   all   the   dancers   are  
women.   The   costumes   are   much   richer   than   at  
Bahia.   Two   of   the   dancers,   both   enormous,   have  
their   faces   covered   by   straw   veils.   Nonetheless   I  
learn   nothing   new   until   the   entrance   of   a   group   of  
young   black   girls,   semi-hypnotized,   eyes   almost  
closed,   standing   straight   but   swinging   their   feet  
forward   and   back.   One   of   them,   a   tall   thin   girl,   de¬  
lights   me.   She’s   wearing   a   green   dress   and   a   blue  
huntress’   hat   with   musketeer   feathers   and   the  
brim   turned   up.   In   her   hand   she’s   holding   a   green  
and   yellow   bow   loaded   with   an   arrow   at   the   end   of  
which   is   a   brooch   representing   a   multicolored  
bird.   The   handsome,   sleeping   face   reflects   a  
smooth   and   innocent   melancholy.   This   black  
Diana   is   infinitely   graceful.   And   when   she   dances,  
this   extraordinary   gracefulness   remains   undimin¬  
ished.   When   the   music   stops,   she   totters.   The  
rhythm   alone   lends   her   a   kind   of   invisible   guard¬  
ian   around   which   she   spins   her   arabesques,   utter¬  
ing   from   time   to   time   a   strange,   piercing   but  
somehow   melodious   bird   cry.   All   the   rest   isn’t  
worth   much.   Mediocre   dances   expressing   degen¬  
erated   rituals.   We   leave   with   Catalao.   But   in   this  

106   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
faraway   neighborhood,   as   we   stumble   along   the  
streets   full   of   holes,   through   the   heavy,   aromatic  
night,   the   wounded   bird’s   cry   comes   back   to   me  
and   I   recall   my   beautiful   slumbering   one.  
I   would   like   to   go   to   bed,   but   Catalao   wants   to  
drink   whiskey   in   one   of   those   morbidly   depressing  
night   clubs   one   can   find   anywhere.   Without   my  
knowing,   he   requests   some   French   music   and,  
for   the   second   time,   I   hear   La   vie   en   rose   in   the  
Tropics.  
•JULY   25  
Wake   up   at   7   a   m.   I   have   to   wait   for   an   airplane  
that   may   or   may   not   leave.   Then   it’s   confirmed.   It  
will   depart   at   11   a   m.   My   grippe   is   better,   but   my  
legs   are   shaky.   Furious   desire   to   return   home.   I  
lose   two   hours   at   the   aerodrome.   We   leave.   It’s  
1:30   and   we   won’t   arrive   in   Rio   before   7.   I’m   writ¬  
ing   all   this   in   the   airplane,   where   I   feel   very   alone.  
Evening.   Arrived   with   a   furious   relapse   into  
both   grippe   and   fever.   This   time   it   seems   serious.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   107  
•JULY   26  
In   bed.   Fever.   Only   the   mind   works   on,   obsti¬  
nately.   Hideous   thoughts.   Unbearable   feeling   of  
advancing   step   by   step   toward   an   unknown   catas¬  
trophe   which   will   destroy   everything   around   me  
and   in   me.  
Evening.   They   come   to   fetch   me.   I’d   forgot¬  
ten   that   tonight   the   black   theater   group   was   sup¬  
posed   to   show   me   an   act   of   Caligula.   The   theater’s  
been   reserved   and   there’s   nothing   to   be   done.   I  
cover   myself   as   if   I   were   going   to   the   North   Pole  
and   take   a   taxi.  
Strange   to   see   these   black   Romans.   And   then  
what   seemed   to   me   to   be   a   cruel   and   vigorous   text  
has   become   a   slow,   tender,   vaguely   sensual   cooing.  
After   that   they   perform   a   short   Brazilian   play  
which   I   enjoy   very   much.   Here’s   a   synopsis:  
“A   man   who   frequently   participates   in   mac-  
umbas   is   visited   by   the   spirit   of   love.   He   showers  
attentions   on   his   wife,   who   is   transported   and   falls  
in   love   with   the   spirit   inhabiting   her   husband.  
With   the   same   song,   as   often   as   possible,   she   in¬  
vokes   the   presence   of   the   spirit,   which   on   stage  
becomes   a   pretext   for   frequent   and   animated   bac¬  
chanals.   Finally   the   husband   understands   that   she  
is   in   love   not   with   him   but   with   God,   and   he   kills  

108   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
her.   She   dies   happily,   however,   because   she’s   con¬  
vinced   that   she’s   going   to   join   her   beloved   God.”  
The   evening   ends   with   Brazilian   music   which  
seems,   to   me,   mediocre.   Important,   however,   that  
Brazil   is   the   only   country   with   a   black   population  
that   continually   produces   new   tunes.   The   finale   is  
a   frevo,   a   dance   from   Pernambouc,   in   which  
everyone   participates   and   which   is   the   wildest   con¬  
tortion   that   I’ve   seen   so   far.   Charming.   As   soon   as  
my   head   hits   the   pillow,   I’m   out   like   a   light,   and   I  
don’t   wake   up   until   9   a   m.,   infinitely   better.  
•JULY   27  
Set   on   this   immense   continent   teeming   with   natu¬  
ral   and   primitive   forces,   Brazil,   with   its   thin   armor  
of   modernity,   makes   me   think   of   a   building   being  
gnawed   at   by   invisible   termites.   One   day   the   build¬  
ing   will   collapse,   and   a   swarm   of   little   people—  
black,   red,   and   yellow—will   spread   across   the   sur¬  
face   of   the   continent,   masked   and   armed   with  
spears,   for   the   victory   dance.  
Breakfast   with   the   poet   Murillo   Mendes   (a  
sensitive   and   melancholy   spirit),   his   wife,   and   a  
young   poet   whom   Rio’s   intelligent   traffic   system  
cost   17   fractures   and   a   pair   of   crutches.   After  
breakfast   they   take   me   to   the   “Sugar   Loaf.”   But  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   109  
the   morning   is   spent   waiting   in   line,   and   we   never  
get   past   the   first   peak—to   the   great   distress   of  
Mme.   Mendes   who’s   sure   I’m   bored   when   in   fact  
I’m   in   a   good   mood   because   their   company   is   so  
pleasant.   M.   knows   and   quotes   Char 28   and   believes  
that   he’s   our   most   important   poet   since   Rimbaud.  
That   makes   me   happy.  
•JULY   2   8  
The   Montevideo   embassy   complicates   my   stay   by  
wanting   to   change   the   dates   that   had   been   agreed  
upon.   Finally,   it’s   agreed   I’ll   stay   in   Rio   until  
Wednesday   before   going   to   Sao   Paulo.   Lunch   with  
Simon   and   Barleto   whom   I   like   more   and   more  
each   day.   The   afternoon   spent   working.   In   the  
evening   a   charming   reception   at   the   embassy,   but  
I’m   bored   there.   I   take   French   leave,   as   they   say  
here,   and   go   home   to   bed.  
•JULY   29  
The   days   in   Rio   hardly   make   any   sense   and  
pass   quickly   and,   at   the   same   time,   slowly.   Lunch  
with   Mme.   B.   and   her   sister-in-law.   French   women  
have   their   good   sides.   Lively,   spiritual;   the   time  
passes   quickly.   Then   a   walk   along   the   bay   in   mar¬  
velous,   soft   weather.   With   difficulty   I   tear   myself  

110   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
away   from   these   pleasant,   natural   moments   to   run  
off   to   the   embassy   to   meet   Mendes   and   his   wife  
who   are   supposed   to   take   me   to   Correa’s,   an   ex¬  
publisher,   where   I’m   to   meet   a   student   who   .   .   .   ,  
etc.   What   I’ve   obstinately   refused   all   my   life,   I   ac¬  
cept   here—as   if   in   advance   I   had   agreed   to   every¬  
thing   about   this   trip   which   I   never   wanted   to   un¬  
dertake   in   the   first   place.   I   leave   in   time   to   meet  
Claverie,   Mme.   B.,   and   her   sister-in-law,   whom  
I’ve   invited   to   dinner.   After   dinner   Claverie   drives  
us   along   roads   which   bore   through   the   mountain  
and   the   night.   The   warm   air,   the   tiny,   numerous  
stars,   the   bay   below   .   .   .   but   all   this   makes   me   more  
melancholy   than   happy.  
•JULY   30   AND   31  
Weekend   at   Cl.’s   in   Teresopolis.   In   the   mountains  
90   miles   from   Rio.   The   drive   is   beautiful,   espe¬  
cially   between   Petropolis   and   Teresopolis.   From  
time   to   time   you   round   a   corner   and   an   ipecac  
bush   covered   with   yellow   flowers   bursts   upon   you  
against   a   background   of   mountains   which   extend  
to   the   horizon.   One   again   understands   here   what  
had   struck   me   when   I   was   in   an   airplane   flying  
over   this   country.   Immense,   virgin,   and   solitary  
expanses   in   the   face   of   which   the   cities,   set   along  
the   shore,   are   no   more   than   little   specks   of   no   im¬  
portance.   At   any   moment   this   enormous   conti-  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   111  
nent,   entirely   surrendered   to   the   natural   wilder¬  
ness,   could   turn   upon   and   cover   over   the   false  
luxuriousness   of   these   cities.   The   weekend   is   spent  
taking   walks,   swimming,   and   playing   ping-pong.   In  
this   countryside   I   can   finally   breathe.   And   the   air  
at   2600   feet   shows   me   how   exhausting   the   climate  
of   Rio   really   is.   When   we   go   back   down   Sunday  
night,   it’s   without   pleasure   that   I   return   to   the  
city.   Besides,   in   front   of   the   embassy.   I’m   wel¬  
comed   back   by   one   of   those   scenes   too   frequently  
witnessed   in   Rio.   Once   again,   a   bleeding   woman  
stretched   out   in   front   of   a   bus.   And   a   crowd   look¬  
ing   on   in   silence   without   helping   her.   This   barbar¬  
ian   practice   disgusts   me.   Much   later   I   hear   the   si¬  
ren   of   an   arriving   ambulance.   During   all   that   time  
the   poor,   dying   woman   was   left   moaning   in   the  
street.   As   compensation   they   make   a   big   show   of  
adoring   children.  
AUGUST   1  
Difficult   waking.   To   live   is   to   hurt   others,   and  
through   others,   to   hurt   oneself.   Cruel   earth!   How  
can   we   manage   not   to   touch   anything?   To   find  
what   ultimate   exile?  
Lunch   at   the   embassy.   I   learn   that   in   Brazil  
there   is   no   death   penalty.   In   the   afternoon   a   lec¬  
ture   on   Chamfort. 2 9   I   wonder   why   I   always   attract  

112   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
worldly   women.   A   lot   of   fancy   hats!   Dinner   with  
Barleto,   Machado,   etc.   in   a   nice   Italian   restaurant.  
In   the   afternoon   we   go   to   a   suburban   ghetto.   Nu¬  
merous   negotiations   before   entering   this   “city”   of  
wood,   tin,   and   reeds,   stuck   to   the   flank   of   a   hill  
above   the   Ipanema   beach.   Finally,   we’re   told   that  
we   can   have   a   consultation   (it’s   true   that   we   have  
as   a   letter   of   introduction   two   good   bottles   of  
cachado)   with   one   of   the   ladies   of   the   place.   It’s  
night   when   we   enter,   passing   between   compart¬  
ments   where   the   sound   of   radios   and   snoring   can  
be   heard.   The   ground   is   slippery,   covered   with  
garbage,   and   sometimes   absolutely   vertical.   It  
takes   us   a   good   fifteen   minutes   to   arrive,   out   of  
breath,   at   the   pythoness’   hut.   But   on   the   terrace,  
in   front   of   the   hut,   we’re   rewarded:   beneath   a  
half-moon   the   motionless   beach   and   bay   are  
stretched   out   before   us.   The   pythoness   seems   to  
be   sleeping.   But   she   lets   us   in.   I’ve   seen   a   lot   of  
huts   like   this,   with   multicolored   fabrics   hanging  
from   the   ceiling.   In   a   corner   a   bed   with   someone  
sleeping   on   it.   In   the   middle   a   table   with   laundry  
covered   by   a   red   curtain   that   makes   it   look   like   a  
cadaver.   An   alcove   where   there’s   an   altar   and   all  
the   statues   of   saints   that   St.   Sulpice   exports  
throughout   the   world.   Also   a   statue   of   Redskin —  
how   it   got   there   is   anyone’s   guess.   The   pythoness  
gives   the   impression   of   being   a   nice,   honest   home¬  
maker.   She’s   just   finished   her   consultations,   which  

SOUTH   AMERICA   113  
she   gives   only   when   the   saint   is   within   her.   The  
saint   has   left.   We’ll   have   to   come   back   another  
time.   It   s   hot.   But   these   blacks   are   so   nice   and   pre¬  
possessing   that   we   stay   and   chat.   Descending   is   a  
real   race   with   death.   One   imagines   the   women  
going   to   get   water   two   or   three   times   a   day,   and  
climbing   back   up   with   the   bucket   on   their   heads.  
One   imagines   the   days   when   it’s   raining.   As   it   is,  
Barleto   takes   a   spill.   I   arrive   safe   and   sound,   and  
the   evening   ends   at   the   home   of   Machado,   who  
tells   me   about   the   healers   who   help   the   dying   in  
Minas. 3 0   In   certain   cases,   when   the   agony   lasts   too  
long,   these   men,   who   are   licensed,   are   called.  
They   arrive,   dressed   as   masters   of   ceremony,   say  
hello,   take   off   their   gloves   and   go   to   the   dying  
one.   They   have   him   repeat   “Mary-Jesus”   without  
stopping,   place   a   knee   on   his   stomach,   cover   his  
mouth   and   apply   pressure   until   their   agonized  
client   has   crossed   to   the   other   side.   They   retire  
from   the   room,   put   their   gloves   back   on,   receive  
fifty   cruzeiros   and   leave,   accompanied   by   the   grat¬  
itude   and   esteem   of   the   dead   man’s   family.  
AUGUST   2  
Tired   of   writing   down   meaningless   bits   and   pieces.  
(I’m   writing   this   in   the   airplane   that’s   taking   me   to  
Sao   Paulo.   Yesterday   was   full   of   meaningless   bits  
and   pieces.   Even   a   conversation   with   Mendes   on  

114   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
the   relationship   between   culture   and   violence,  
which   helped   me   clarify   my   thoughts,   seemed  
meaningless   to   me.)  
In   reality,   haunted   in   the   glorious   light   of   Rio  
by   the   idea   of   the   harm   we   do   to   others   from   the  
moment   we   look   at   them.   I   have   to   confess   that  
for   a   long   time   making   people   suffer   was   a   matter  
of   indifference   to   me.   It’s   love   that   enlightened  
me   on   this   point.   Now   I   can   no   longer   bear   it.   In   a  
way   it’s   better   to   kill   someone   than   to   make   him  
suffer.  
What   I   realized   clearly   yesterday   is   that   I   want  
to   die.  
•   AUGUST   3  
Sao   Paulo   and   the   sun   setting   fast—bright   signs  
light   up   one   by   one   on   top   of   the   massive   skyscrap¬  
ers.   Royal   palm   trees   rise   up   between   the   buildings  
and   the   uninterrupted   song   of   thousands   of   birds,  
welcoming   the   day’s   end,   is   heard,   muffling   the  
low-pitched   car   horns   which   announce   the   return  
of   the   businessmen.   Dinner   with   Oswald   de   An¬  
drade,   remarkable   character   (develop   this).   His  
point   of   view   is   that   Brazil   is   populated   with   primi¬  
tive   people   and   that   it’s   for   the   best.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   115  
The   city   of   Sao   Paulo,   strange   city,   limitless  
Oran.  
Stupidly   I   forgot   to   note   the   thing   which  
touched   me   the   most.   On   Sao   Paulo   radio   there’s  
a   program   in   which   poor   people   go   on   the   air   to  
speak   of   their   problems   and   ask   for   help.   This   eve¬  
ning   a   large,   poorly   dressed   black   man   with   a   little  
girl   of   5   months   in   his   arms   and   the   baby’s   bottle  
in   his   pocket   explained   frankly   and   simply   that  
since   his   wife   had   abandoned   him,   he   was   looking  
for   someone   who   would   take   care   of   the   child  
without   stealing   her   from   him.   An   ex-fighter   pilot,  
unemployed,   was   looking   for   a   job   as   a   mechanic,  
etc.   Then,   in   the   offices,   we   wait   for   telephone  
calls   from   the   listeners.   Five   minutes   after   the   end  
of   the   program,   the   phone   is   ringing   constantly.  
Everybody   offers   something.   While   the   black   man  
is   on   the   phone,   the   ex-pilot   rocks   the   infant   in   his  
arms.   And   here’s   the   best   one:   a   large,   older   black  
man,   half-dressed,   comes   into   the   offices.   He   was  
sleeping   and   his   wife,   who   was   listening   to   the   pro¬  
gram,   woke   him   up   and   said:   “Go   get   the   child.”  
AUGUST   4  
Press   conference   in   the   morning.   Lunch   standing  
up   at   Andrade’s.   I   don’t   really   know   why,   but   at   3  
o’clock,   I’m   taken   to   the   city   penitentiary,   “the  

116   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
most   beautiful   one   in   Brazil.” 3 1   In   fact,   it   is   beauti¬  
ful,   like   a   penitentiary   in   an   American   film.   Except  
for   the   odor,   the   hideous   odor   of   man   that   lingers  
in   every   prison.   Iron   bars,   doors,   bars,   doors,   etc.  
And   the   signs.   “Be   good”   and   above   all   “Opti¬  
mism.”   I   feel   ashamed   in   front   of   one   or   two   of  
the   prisoners—and   these   are   ones   with   special  
privileges—who   have   service   jobs   in   the   prison.  
Then   the   doctor-psychiatrist   treats   me   to   an   inter¬  
minable   dissertation   on   the   classification   of   per¬  
verse   mentalities.   And   as   I   leave,   someone   repeats  
the   ritualistic,   “Make   yourself   at   home   here”   to  
me.  
I   forgot.   On   our   way   there,   we   went   down   a  
street   full   of   prostitutes.   They   stand   behind   blinds  
through   which   they   can   be   seen,   and   for   the   most  
part   they’re   charming   looking.   You   discuss   the  
price   through   openings   in   the   blinds,   which   are  
painted   all   colors:   greens,   reds,   yellows,   sky   blue.  
They   are   caged   birds.  
Then   climbing   up   a   little   skyscraper.   Sao  
Paulo   in   the   night.   The   fairy   tale   aspect   of   modern  
cities   with   twinkling   avenues   and   rooftops.   Sur¬  
rounded   by   coffee   and   orchids.   But   it’s   difficult   to  
imagine.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   117  
Then   Andrade   tells   me   his   theory:   cannibal¬  
ism   as   a   vision   of   the   world.   Confronted   with   the  
failure   of   Descartes   and   science,   return   to   the  
primitive   fertilization:   matriarchy   and   anthropo-  
phagy.   Since   the   first   bishop   to   arrive   in   Bahia   was  
eaten,   Andrade   dates   his   review   from   the   year  
317,   the   year   of   the   ingestion   of   Bishop   Sardine  
(he   was   named   Sardine).  
Last   hour.   After   my   lecture,   Andrade   informs  
me   that   in   the   model   penitentiary   they   have   seen  
prisoners   commit   suicide   by   beating   their   heads  
against   the   walls   and   by   closing   drawers   against  
their   throats   to   the   point   of   suffocation.  
AUGUST   5,   AUGUST   6,   AUGUST   7  
(The   trip   to   Iguape) 32  
We   leave   for   the   religious   festivals   of   Iguape,   but  
at   10   instead   of   7   as   planned.   In   fact   we   were   sup¬  
posed   to   drive   all   day   inland,   on   the   deplorable  
Brazilian   roads,   and   it   would   have   been   better   to  
arrive   before   nightfall.   But   there   were   delays,   the  
car   wasn’t   ready,   etc.   We   leave   Sao   Paulo   and   be¬  
gin   driving   south.   The   road,   whether   made   of   dirt  
or   stone,   is   covered   with   red   dust,   and   the   vegeta¬  
tion   on   each   side   of   the   road   for   half   a   mile   is   cov¬  
ered   with   a   layer   of   dried   mud.   After   several   miles  

118   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
we   too—that   is,   the   driver   who   looks   like   Auguste  
Comte;   Andrade   and   his   son,   whose   head   is   full   of  
philosophers;   Sylvestre,   the   French   cultural   at¬  
tache;   and   myself—are   covered   with   the   same  
dust.   It   gets   in   through   every   opening   in   the   large  
Ford   pickup   truck   and   slowly   fills   up   our   noses   and  
mouths.   On   top   of   it   all   a   ferocious   sun   that   roasts  
the   earth   and   brings   all   life   to   a   halt.   After   thirty  
miles,   a   disturbing   noise.   We   stop.   A   spring   in  
front   is   broken,   visibly   sticking   out   from   the   clus¬  
ter   of   springs   and   brushing   against   the   rim   of   the  
tire.   Auguste   Comte   scratches   his   head   and   an¬  
nounces   that   we   can   get   it   fixed   ten   miles   up   the  
road.   I   advise   him   to   take   the   broken   spring   out  
immediately   before   it   gets   wedged   against   the   tire.  
But   he’s   optimistic   about   it.   We   go   another   three  
miles   and   stop—the   spring   is   stuck.   Auguste  
Comte   decides   to   get   a   tool:   from   a   chest   in   the  
back   of   the   truck,   he   pulls   out   a   thick   iron   rod  
which   he   uses   as   a   hammer,   banging   it   harder   and  
harder   against   the   plate,   imagining   that   he   can  
force   it   loose.  
I   explain   that   there’s   a   nut   to   take   off   and   the  
tire   itself.   But   finally   I   realize   that   he’s   set   out   on  
these   bad   roads   for   a   long   trip   without   a   monkey  
wrench.   We   wait,   beneath   a   sun   that   could   kill,   un¬  
til   finally   a   truck   comes   along,   and   the   driver,  
thank   goodness,   has   a   monkey   wrench.   The   tire   is  

SOUTH   AMERICA   119  
taken   off,   the   nut   unscrewed,   and   the   plate   of   the  
spring   is   finally   removed.   We   set   out   again   be¬  
tween   the   pale,   craggy   mountains;   from   time   to  
time   we   sight   a   starving   water   buffalo   with   an   es¬  
cort   of   sad   vultures.   At   1   o’clock   we   arrive   in   Pie-  
dade,   an   unpleasant   little   village,   where   we’re  
warmly   welcomed   by   the   innkeeper   Doha   Anesia  
whom,   at   one   time,   Andrade   must   have   courted.  
Served   by   Maria,   an   Indian   metis,   who   ends   up   of¬  
fering   me   artificial   flowers.   An   interminable   Bra¬  
zilian   meal   which   one   manages   to   get   down   thanks  
to   the   pinga,   which   is   the   name   of   the   local   cachasa.  
In   the   meantime   they’ve   repaired   the   spring,   and  
we   leave.   We’re   constantly   ascending   and   the   air   is  
becoming   very   thin.   There   are   immense   uninha¬  
bited   and   uncultivated   expanses.   The   terrible   soli¬  
tude   of   this   unlimited   wilderness   explains   certain  
things   about   this   country.   Arrive   at   Pilar   at   3.   But  
there   Auguste   Comte   realizes   that   he’s   made   a  
mistake.   We’re   told   that   we’ve   driven   40   miles   too  
far.   Which   means,   here,   two   or   three   hours   of  
traveling.   Our   bodies   aching   from   the   bumpy   ride,  
and   covered   with   dust,   we   set   off   to   find   the   right  
road.   In   fact,   it’s   not   until   the   end   of   the   day   that  
we   begin   to   descend   the   other   side   of   the   Serra.   I  
have   time   to   see   the   first   miles   of   virgin   forest,   the  
density   of   this   sea   of   vegetation,   to   imagine   the  
solitude   in   the   middle   of   this   unexplored   world,  
and   night   falls   as   we   plunge   into   the   forest.   We  

120   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
drive   for   hours,   pitching   and   rocking   along   a   nar¬  
row   road   that   runs   between   walls   of   high   trees,  
amid   a   thick,   sugary   odor.   From   time   to   time  
through   the   thickness   of   the   forest,   fireflies   pass,  
and   birds   with   red   eyes   brush   against   the   wind¬  
shield.   Apart   from   that   the   immobility   and   mute¬  
ness   of   this   dreadful   world   are   absolute,   even  
though   from   time   to   time   Andrade   thinks   he’s  
heard   an   ocelot.   The   road   weaves   and   winds,   con¬  
tinues   over   bridges   of   swaying   planks   that   cross   lit¬  
tle   rivers.   Then   comes   the   fog   and   a   fine   rain   that  
dissolves   the   light   from   our   headlights.   We’re   not  
driving,   but   literally   creeping   along.   It’s   almost  
7   p.m.,   we’ve   been   on   the   road   since   10   a   m.,   and   our  
fatigue   is   such   that   we   receive   with   a   certain   fatal¬  
ism   Auguste   Comte’s   announcement   that   we’re  
running   out   of   gas.   However,   the   forest   is   not  
quite   so   thick—and   slowly,   the   landscape   is   chang¬  
ing.   We   finally   reach   the   open   air   and   a   small   vil¬  
lage   where   we’re   halted   by   a   large   river.   Light   sig¬  
nals   on   the   other   side   and   we   see   a   large   ferry   boat  
approaching   by   means   of   rods   pulled   by   mulattoes  
in   straw   hats,   the   oldest   system   there   is. 3 3   We   em¬  
bark   and   the   ferry   drifts   slowly   across   the   Ribeira  
river.   The   river   is   wide   and   flows   gently   towards  
the   sea   and   the   night.   On   the   banks   the   forest   is  
still   dense.   Misty   stars   in   the   thick   sky.   On   board  
nobody   speaks.   The   absolute   silence   of   the   hour   is  
broken   only   by   the   lapping   of   the   river   against   the  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   121  
flanks   of   the   ferry.   In   the   bow   of   the   ferry,   I   watch  
the   river   descend;   the   strangeness   of   this   setting,  
which   is   nonetheless   familiar.   Bizarre   bird   cries  
and   the   call   of   bullfrogs   rise   from   the   two   banks.  
At   this   exact   moment   it   is   midnight   in   Paris.  
Disembarkment.   Then   we   continue   to   creep  
towards   Registro,   a   true   Japanese   capital   in   the  
middle   of   Brazil, 3 4   where   I   have   the   time   to  
glimpse   houses   delicately   decorated   and   even   a  
kimono.   We’re   told   that   Iguape   is   only   40   miles  
farther.  
We   set   off   again.   A   humid   breeze,   an   inces¬  
sant   mist   indicate   that   the   sea   is   not   far.   The   road  
becomes   sand—more   difficult   and   dangerous   than  
it   was   before.   It’s   midnight   when   we   finally   arrive  
at   Iguape.   Not   counting   stops,   it   took   us   ten   hours  
to   drive   the   180   miles   that   separate   us   from   Sao  
Paulo.  
Everything   is   closed   at   the   hotel.   A   distin¬  
guished   townsman,   whom   we   meet   by   chance   in  
the   night,   takes   us   to   the   mayor’s   house   (he’s  
called   the   prefect   here).   Through   the   door   the  
mayor   tells   us   that   we’re   sleeping   at   the   hospital.  
Set   off   for   the   hospital.   Despite   my   fatigue,   the  
city   seems   to   me   to   be   beautiful,   with   its   colonial  
churches,   the   nearby   forest,   its   low,   naked   houses  

122   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
and   the   thick   softness   of   the   damp   air.   Andrade  
imagines   that   we   can   hear   the   sea.   But   it’s   far.   At  
the   Happy   Memory   Hospital   (that’s   its   name),   the  
friendly   city   father   leads   us   to   a   renovated   ward  
that   smells   of   fresh   paint   from   thirty   yards   away. 3 5  
We’re   told   that   in   fact   it’s   been   repainted   in   our  
honor.   But   there’s   no   light:   the   local   power   plant  
shuts   down   at   11   p.m.   In   the   glow   from   our   lighters  
we   nonetheless   see   six   clean   and   simple   beds.   It’s  
our   dormitory.   We   put   down   our   suitcases.   And  
the   city   father   wants   us   to   join   him   for   a   sandwich  
at   his   club.   Exhausted,   we   go   to   the   club. 3 6   The  
club   is   a   kind   of   second   floor   bistro   where   we   meet  
other   distinguished   persons   who   shower   us   with  
their   respects.   Once   again   I   notice   the   exquisite  
Brazilian   politeness,   perhaps   a   bit   ceremonious,  
but   still   much   better   than   the   European   tactless¬  
ness.   Sandwich   and   beer.   But   a   tall   imbecile   who  
can   hardly   stand   on   his   own   feet   is   struck   with   the  
curious   idea   of   demanding   to   see   my   passport.   I  
show   him   my   passport,   and   he   tells   me   that   it’s   in¬  
valid.   Tired,   I   send   him   packing.   Indignant,   the  
personages   huddle   together   for   a   moment,   and  
then   come   over   to   tell   me   that   they’re   going   to   put  
this   policeman   (for   that’s   what   he   is)   in   prison,   and  
that   I   will   be   able   to   choose   the   charges   that   I  
want   to   press   against   him.   I   beg   of   them   not   to   put  
him   in   prison.   They   explain   to   me   that   this   foul-  
mouthed   imbecile   has   disregarded   the   great   honor  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   123  
that   I   have   done   Iguape,   and   that   his   bad   manners  
must   be   punished.   I   protest.   But   they’re   deter¬  
mined   to   honor   me   in   this   way.   The   affair   lasts   un¬  
til   the   following   evening   when   I   finally   find   the  
right   approach,   asking   them,   as   a   personal   favor   to  
me,   to   spare   this   scatter-brained   policeman.   They  
proclaim   my   chivalry   and   tell   me   that   it   shall   be  
done   according   to   my   wishes. 3 7  
In   any   case,   the   night   of   the   drama   we   leave  
for   the   hospital   and   halfway   there   meet   the  
mayor,   who   has   gotten   up   to   accompany   us   to   our  
beds.   He   has   also   awakened   the   power   plant   per¬  
sonnel,   and   we   have   lights.   They   make   sure   we’re  
comfortable   almost   to   the   point   of   tucking   us   in,  
and   finally,   at   1   a   m.,   overwhelmed   with   fatigue,   we  
try   to   sleep.   I   say   try   because   my   bed   slants   a   little  
and   my   neighbors   turn   from   side   to   side   and   Au¬  
guste   Comte   snores   ferociously.   Finally,   very   late,  
I   fall   into   a   dreamless   sleep.  
•AUGUST   6  
Wake   up   very   early.   Unfortunately,   no   water   in  
this   hospital.   I   shave   and   wash   a   little   using   min¬  
eral   water.   Then   the   personages   arrive   and   take   us  
to   the   main   ward   for   breakfast.   Finally,   we   go   out  
into   Iguape.  

124   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
In   the   little   garden   of   the   Fountain, 3 8   soft   and  
mysterious   with   clusters   of   flowers   between   the  
banana   trees   and   the   palms,   I   regain   a   little   ease  
and   tranquillity.   In   front   of   a   grotto,   some   metis,  
mulattoes   and   the   first   gauchos   that   I’ve   seen   wait  
patiently   to   obtain   some   pieces   of   the   “growing  
stone.”   In   fact   Iguape   is   a   city   where   an   effigy   of  
the   Good   Jesus   was   found   in   the   water   by   some  
fishermen   who   came   to   this   grotto   to   wash   it.   Ever  
since,   a   stone   grows   there   ineluctably,   and   people  
come   to   chisel   off   beneficent   pieces   of   it.   The   city  
itself,   between   the   forest   and   the   river,   is   crowded  
around   the   large   church   of   the   Good   Jesus.   Sev¬  
eral   hundred   houses   in   a   single   style—low,   stuc¬  
coed,   multicolored.   Beneath   the   fine   rain   that  
soaks   its   badly   paved   streets,   with   the   motley  
crowd—gauchos,   Japanese,   Indians,   metis,   ele¬  
gant,   distinguished   persons—which   is   its   popula¬  
tion,   Iguape   bears   the   colonial   stamp.   The   melan¬  
choly   there   is   particular;   it’s   the   melancholy   of  
places   that   are   at   the   ends   of   the   earth.   Aside   from  
the   heroic   route   that   we   took,   only   two   weekly  
flights   connect   Iguape   to   the   rest   of   the   world.  
One   could   find   refuge   here.  
Throughout   the   day   the   kindness   of   our   hosts  
is   constant.   But   we’ve   come   for   the   procession.   As  
soon   as   the   afternoon   begins   firecrackers   are  
going   off   everywhere,   startling   into   flight   the   bald  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   125  
vultures   adorning   the   rooftops.   The   crowd   gets  
bigger.   Some   of   these   pilgrims   have   been   travel¬  
ling   the   deplorable   inland   roads   for   five   days.   One  
of   them   who   looks   Assyrian,   with   a   beautiful   black  
beard,   tells   us   that   he   was   saved   by   the   Good   Jesus  
from   a   shipwreck,   after   one   night   and   one   day  
stranded   in   high   seas,   and   that   he   has   vowed   to  
carry   a   130-pound   stone   on   his   head   for   the   entire  
procession. 3 9   The   hour   approaches.   From   the  
church   come   penitents   in   surplices:   first   the  
blacks,   then   the   whites;   then   children   dressed   as  
angels;   then   the   “children   of   Mary”;   then   an   ef¬  
figy   of   the   Good   Jesus   himself,   behind   which   the  
bearded   man   advances,   barechested   and   carrying  
an   enormous   slab   on   his   head.   Finally   an   orchestra  
comes,   playing   a   double-step   and,   at   the   end   of   the  
procession,   the   crowd   of   pilgrims,   which   is   the  
only   really   interesting   sight,   the   rest   being   ordi¬  
nary   and   rather   sordid.   But   the   crowd   that   pro¬  
ceeds   down   a   narrow   street,   filling   it   almost   to  
bursting,   is   one   of   the   strangest   assemblages   that  
one   could   imagine.   The   ages,   races,   the   colors   of  
the   clothes,   the   classes,   the   infirmities,   all   are  
mixed   together   in   a   gaudy,   oscillating   mass,   lit   up  
at   intervals   by   bursts   of   holy   candles,   above   which  
firecrackers   explode   incessantly.   From   time   to  
time   an   airplane—out   of   place   in   this   ageless  
world—also   passes   overhead.   Mobilized   for   the  
occasion,   it   rumbles   by   at   regular   intervals   above  

126   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
the   personages   in   their   elegance   and   the   Good  
Jesus.   We   go   to   wait   for   the   procession   at   another  
strategic   point,   and   when   it   passes   in   front   of   us,  
the   bearded   man   is   wincing   with   fatigue   and   his  
legs   are   trembling.   But   he   makes   it   to   the   end  
nonetheless.   The   bells   ring,   stores   and   houses   on  
the   route   of   the   procession   which   had   closed   their  
doors   and   windows   now   open   them—and   we   go   to  
dinner.  
After   dinner,   in   the   square   the   young   gauchos  
sing,   and   everyone   sits   in   a   circle   around   them.  
The   firecrackers   continue,   and   a   child   gets   a   fin¬  
ger   blown   off.   He   cries   and   screams   as   they’re   tak¬  
ing   him   away.   “Why   did   the   Good   Jesus   do   that?”  
(This   cry   of   the   soul   is   translated   for   me.)  
I   go   right   to   bed   because   we’re   leaving   early  
the   next   day.   But   the   firecrackers   and   the   horren¬  
dous   sneezes   of   Auguste   Comte   keep   me   from   fall¬  
ing   asleep   until   very   late.  
•AUGUST   7  
Same   road,   but   we   avoid   the   detour   of   the   other  
day,   and   we   cross   three   rivers.   Saw   a   humming¬  
bird.   And   once   again   for   hours   I   watch   this   mo¬  
notonous   nature   and   these   immense   spaces:   one  
can’t   say   they   are   beautiful,   but   they   cling   insis-  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   127  
tently   to   the   soul.   Country   where   the   seasons   are  
confused   with   one   another,   where   the   vegetation  
is   so   intertwined   as   to   become   formless,   where  
bloods   are   so   mixed   up   that   the   soul   loses   its   bor¬  
ders.   A   loud   splashing,   the   sea-green   light   of   the  
forests,   the   varnish   of   red   dust   which   covers   all  
things,   the   melting   of   time,   the   slowness   of   the  
country,   the   brief   and   extravagant   excitement   of  
the   big   cities—it’s   the   country   of   indifference   and  
blood-explosions.   Try   as   it   might   the   skyscraper  
has   yet   to   overcome   the   spirit   of   the   forest   —   the  
immensity,   the   melancholy.   Sambas—the   authen¬  
tic   ones—best   express   what   I   mean.  
But   the   last   thirty   miles   are   the   most   exhaust¬  
ing.   Driving   prudently,   Auguste   Comte   lets   every¬  
one   pass   us.   But   each   car   raises   so   much   red   dust  
that   the   headlights   can’t   penetrate   this   mineral  
fog   and   we   have   to   stop   the   car.   We   no   longer  
know   where   we   are,   and   I   feel   my   nostrils   and  
mouth   being   pasted   with   suffocating   mud.   Sao  
Paulo,   the   hotel   and   a   hot   bath   are   a   welcome   re¬  
lief.  
•AUGUST   8  
All   the   latitudes   and   longitudes   which   still   lie   be¬  
fore   me   make   me   nauseous.   Gloomy,   agitated   day  
(I’m   writing   this   in   the   plane   that’s   flying   me   to  

128   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
Fort   Alesa).   At   11   a   m.   Brazilian   philosophers   come  
to   ask   me   for   several   “explanations.”   Lunch   at   a  
young   couple’s   house,   both   French   professors.  
Charming.   Then   a   visit   to   the   Alliance   Francaise.  
Walk   with   Mme.   P.   through   the   streets   of   Sao  
Paulo   where   I   happen   upon   a   photo   of   my¬  
self,   which   makes   me   feel   modest.   Cocktails   at  
Valeur’s.   Dinner   at   Sylvestre’s.   Lecture.   Once  
again   the   auditorium   is   packed   and   some   people  
have   to   stand.   A   thoughtful   French   girl   has  
brought   me   some   Gauloises. 4 0   After   the   lecture   I’m  
taken   to   a   theater   to   hear   a   Brazilian   woman   sing.  
Then   champagne   at   Andrade’s.   I   return   to   the   ho¬  
tel   drained   and   exhausted,   tired   of   human   faces.  
•AUGUST   9  
Andrade   and   Sylvestre   are   emotional,   etc.,   as   I  
depart   for   Porto   Alegre.   Lunch   on   the   plane.   For  
the   first   time   a   slight   attack   of   asthma.   But   no   one  
notices.   In   Porto   Alegre   it’s   bitter   cold.   Four   or  
five   frozen   Frenchmen   are   waiting   for   me   at   the  
airport.   They   tell   me   that   I’m   supposed   to   lecture  
this   evening,   an   event   which   was   not   scheduled.  
View   from   Kapotes 41 — the   light   is   very   beautiful.  
City   ugly.   Despite   its   five   rivers.   These   islands   of  
civilization   are   often   hideous.   Lecture   in   the   eve¬  
ning.   People   are   turned   away.   The   press   exagger¬  
ates   it.   But   this   amuses   me   more   than   anything  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   129  
else.   I   just   want   to   leave   and   to   finish   with   it,   to  
finish   once   and   for   all.   Someone   notices   that   I  
don   t   have   my   visa   for   Chile.   I   have   to   stop   at  
Montevideo,   telegraph,   etc.  
•AUGUST   10  
Walk   in   the   city.   At   2   p.m.   the   airplane,   where   I’m  
writing   this   and   what   precedes   it.   Terrible   sadness  
and   a   feeling   of   isolation.   My   mail   hasn’t   reached  
me   and   I’m   traveling   farther   and   farther   away  
from   it.  
The   French   officials   in   Montevideo   do   not  
greet   me   warmly.   My   lecture   dates   had   to   be  
changed   several   times.   But   I   wasn’t   responsible   for  
that.   They’ve   even   neglected   to   reserve   a   room  
for   me.   I   wind   up,   feeling   blue,   in   a   kind   of   closet  
—where   nonetheless   I   feel   better   by   myself   than   I  
did   before   with   those   who   were   forced   to   be   my  
hosts.   I   stay   up   late,   pacing   the   room,   and   concen¬  
trating   my   will   on   not   weakening   psychically   be¬  
fore   the   end   of   the   trip.  
Obliged   to   admit   that   for   the   first   time   in   my  
life   I   feel   myself   in   the   middle   of   a   psychological  
collapse.   Despite   all   my   efforts   this   delicate   bal¬  
ance,   which   up   until   now   has   withstood   every¬  
thing,   is   being   upset.   There   are   glaucous   waters  

130   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
within   me   where   vague   forms   pass,   diluting   my  
energies.   In   a   way   this   depression   is   hellish.   If   my  
hosts   here   knew   the   effort   I   was   making   just   to  
seem   normal,   they   would   at   least   make   an   effort   to  
smile   from   time   to   time.  
•   AUGUST   11  
Wake   up   early,   write   some   letters.   Then,   with   no  
news   from   my   official   chaperones,   I   go   out   into   a  
beautiful,   icy   day   to   look   around   Montevideo.   The  
tip   of   the   city   is   bathed   by   the   yellow   waters   of   the  
La   Plata   river.   Airy   and   orderly,   Montevideo   is  
surrounded   by   a   necklace   of   beaches   and   a   mari¬  
time   boulevard   which   I   find   rather   beautiful.  
There’s   comfort   in   this   city,   which   seems   easier   to  
live   in   than   others   I’ve   seen.   Mimosas   in   the   resi¬  
dential   neighborhoods;   palms   make   me   think   of  
Menton.   Also   relieved   to   be   in   a   Spanish-speaking  
country.   Return   to   the   hotel.   My   official   chaper¬  
ones   wake   up.   I’ll   leave   this   evening   for   Buenos  
Aires   on   the   La   Plata   riverboat.   Lunch   at   the   cul¬  
tural   attache’s   house.   Quai   d’Orsay   and   flowery  
stupidities.   In   the   evening   the   boat   leaves   Monte¬  
video.   Once   again   I   watch   the   moon   on   the   muddy  
waters.   But   my   heart   is   colder   than   it   was   on   the  
Camp   ana.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   131  
•AUGUST   12  
Morning.   Buenos   Aires.   Enormous   accumulation  
of   houses   jutting   out.   W.R.   is   waiting   for   me.   We  
discuss   the   question   of   lectures.   I   hold   firm,   add¬  
ing   that   my   lecture,   if   I   give   it,   will   be   in   part  
about   freedom   of   expression.   He   supposes   that,  
like   everything   else,   my   lecture   could   be   subjected  
to   a   preliminary   reading   by   the   censors,   and   I  
warn   him   that   I   would   flatly   refuse.   In   that   case  
he’s   of   the   opinion   that   it’s   better   not   to   go   look¬  
ing   for   trouble. 4 2   Same   for   the   ambassador.   Tour  
of   the   city—exceptionally   ugly.   Some   people   in  
the   afternoon.   I   end   up   at   V.O.’s. 4 3   Large,   pleas¬  
ant   house   in   the   Gone   with   the   Wind   style.   Grand  
and   old   luxury.   I   want   to   lie   down   there   and   sleep  
until   the   end   of   the   world.   In   fact,   I   do   fall   asleep.  
•AUGUST   13  
Good   night.   I   awake   to   a   cold,   hazy   day.   From   her  
bedroom   V.   sends   me   some   letters.   Then   the  
newspapers.   The   Peronist   press   either   ignored   or  
softened   the   declaration   I   made   yesterday   after¬  
noon.   Lunch   with   the   director   of   the   Prensa   (op¬  
position   newspaper),   police   proceedings,   etc.  
Afternoon,   forty   people.   Leaving   there,   dinner  
with   V.   and   talk   until   midnight.   She   plays   Britten’s  
Rape   of   Lucretia   and   some   recordings   of   Baude-  

132   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
laire’s   poems—wonderful.   First   evening   of   real   re¬  
laxation   since   my   departure.   I   should   stay   here   un¬  
til   the   day   I   return—to   avoid   the   continual  
struggle   that   is   exhausting   me.   There   is   a   tempo¬  
rary   peace   in   this   house.  
•AUGUST   14  
At   9   a   m.   no   news   about   the   airplane   that’s   sup¬  
posed   to   take   me   to   Chile.   At   noon   they   call.   Day  
spent   at   V.’s   waiting   to   leave.   Rafael   Alberti   is  
there,   with   his   wife.   Nice.   I   know   that   he’s   a   Com¬  
munist.   Finally   I   explain   my   point   of   view   to   him.  
And   he   agrees   with   me.   But   one   day   slander   will  
separate   me   from   this   man   who   should   remain   a  
comrade.   What’s   to   be   done?   We’re   in   the   age   of  
separation.   Finally,   at   sunset,   the   airplane   leaves.  
We   pass   the   Andes   at   night   (the   symbol   of   this  
trip),   and   I   see   nothing.   At   most,   I   catch   sight   of  
the   snow-covered   ridges   in   the   dark.   But   I   had  
time   before   nightfall   to   see   the   immense   and   mo¬  
notonous   pampas—endless.   Through   a   velvety   sky  
the   descent   into   Santiago   is   done   in   a   flash.   At   our  
feet   a   forest   of   blinking   stars.   Caressing   softness   of  
these   cities,   which   are   spread   out   in   the   night  
along   the   edge   of   oceans.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   133  
•AUGUST   13  
On   the   Pacific   with   Charvet   and   Fron.   Ch.   talks   to  
me   about   the   influence   of   earthquakes   on   the   Chi¬  
leans’   behavior.   Five   hundred   quakes   per   year—of  
which   several   are   catastrophic.   This   creates   a   psy¬  
chology   of   instability.   The   Chilean   is   a   gambler,  
spends   everything   he   makes,   and   indulges   in   capri¬  
cious   politics.  
We   drive:   the   Pacific   covered   with   long   white  
rolls.   Santiago   tucked   in   between   the   waters   and  
the   Andes—violent   colors   (the   marigolds   are   rust-  
colored),   flowering   plum   and   almond   trees   stand  
out   against   a   background   of   snowy   peaks—won¬  
derful   country.  
Afternoon:   bushed.   At   six,   a   symposium  
where   I’m   in   good   shape.   Dinner   at   Charvet’s  
where   I’m   completely   depressed.   From   fatigue   I  
drink   too   much   and   go   to   bed   late.   Wasted   time.  
•AUGUST   16  
Infernal   day.   Radio,   tourism.   Lunch   with   Vincent  
Anidobre’s   son   in   a   little   house   at   the   foot   of   the  
Andes.   Symposium   here   with   some   theater   people.  
At   7   p.m.   a   lecture   which   is   tiring   because   the   audi¬  
torium   is   so   dense   with   people.   Dinner   at   the   em-  

134   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
bassy.   I   was   bored   to   tears.   Only   the   ambassador   is  
amusing;   yesterday   he   took   off   his   jacket   and  
danced.  
•AUGUST   17  
Day   of   disturbances   and   riots.   Yesterday   there  
were   demonstrations.   But   today,   it’s   like   an   earth¬  
quake   overtaking   them.   The   issue   is   a   price   in¬  
crease   for   the   “micros”   (Santiago’s   buses).   They  
turn   the   buses   over   and   set   them   on   fire.   They  
break   the   windows   of   passing   ones.   In   the   after¬  
noon   I’m   told   that   the   university,   where   the   stu¬  
dents   were   demonstrating,   has   been   closed—and  
that   my   lecture   won’t   take   place.   Within   two   hours  
the   French   department   has   organized   a   lecture   at  
the   French   Institute.   When   I   leave   there,   stores  
have   barred   their   windows   and   armed,   helmeted  
troops   literally   occupy   the   city.   Sometimes   shoot¬  
ing   into   the   air.   It’s   a   state   of   siege.   During   the  
night   I   hear   isolated   shots.  
•AUGUST   18  
Airplane   is   late,   won’t   take   off   until   nighttime.  
The   Andes   are   blocked.   I   sleep   badly   or   very   little  
here—and   I’m   tired.   The   Charvets   come   for   me  
at   eleven,   and   I’m   asleep   on   my   feet.   But   their  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   135  
kindness   is   not   burdensome,   and   we   drive   through  
the   Chilean   countryside.   The   mimosas   and   the  
weeping   willows.   Beautiful,   strong   nature.   We   stop  
for   an   excellent   lunch,   eaten   in   front   of   a   fire¬  
place.   Then   we   fork   off   towards   the   Andes,   and  
we   stop   for   a   snack   at   a   mountain   hotel,   once  
again   in   front   of   a   beautiful   fire.   I   feel   good   in  
Chile   and   under   different   circumstances   could   live  
here   a   little   while.   When   we   return,   we   learn   that  
the   airplane   has   been   postponed   until   tomorrow.  
It’s   pouring.   Dinner   at   the   Charvets’.   Go   to   bed   at  
midnight.   At   the   hotel   I   find   goodbye   presents.   It  
takes   me   a   long   time   to   fall   asleep.  
•AUGUST   19  
At   4:30   a   m.   the   airline   company   telephones   me.   I  
should   be   at   the   field   at   6.   At   7   the   airplane   takes  
off.   But,   after   looking   for   a   way   through,   it   de¬  
scends   toward   the   south   and   at   the   end   of   a   125-  
mile   detour   enters   another   pass.   The   Andes:   pro¬  
digious,   shattered   reliefs,   tearing   through  
mountains   of   clouds—but   the   snow   dazzles   me.  
We   pitch   and   roll   incessantly   and   in   addition,   I  
suffer   a   fit   of   asthma.   I   narrowly   avoid   the   worst  
—and   pretend   to   be   sleeping.  
It’s   noon   by   the   time   we   reach   Buenos   Aires.  
At   this   moment   the   lack   of   sleep   is   overwhelming.  

136   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
V.O.   has   come   to   pick   me   up,   but   there’s   no   one  
from   the   embassy,   and   they   haven’t   reserved   me   a  
ticket   for   Montevideo,   where   I’m   supposed   to  
speak   at   6:30.   Thanks   to   V.   we   get   to   Buenos  
Aires   quickly   and   then   to   the   seaplane   terminal.  
There   are   no   seats   available.   V.   telephones   a  
friend.   Everything   is   arranged.   I   leave   at   4:45   in  
overcast,   yellow   weather   above   yellow   waters.   At  
6:15,   Montevideo.   The   embassy   has   sent   someone  
who   tells   me   that   they   have   decided   to   cancel   the  
lecture   and   to   take   me   to   the   French   high   school  
instead.   There   the   director   tells   me   that   some   peo¬  
ple   have   shown   up   anyway,   and   that   he   doesn’t  
know   what   to   do.   I   suggest   a   debate,   even   though  
I’m   exhausted.   They   accept   and   schedule   two   lec¬  
tures   for   me   for   the   next   day,   one   at   11,   the   other  
at   6.   Debate.   And   I   go   to   bed,   drunk   with   fatigue.  
•AUGUST   20  
Brutal   day.   10   am.   journalists   and   A.;   at   11,   the  
first   lecture,   in   an   auditorium   at   the   University.   In  
the   middle   of   the   lecture   a   strange   character   en¬  
ters   the   auditorium.   A   cape,   short   beard,   a   dark  
gaze.   He   stands   at   the   back   of   the   room,   and   con¬  
spicuously   opens   a   magazine   and   reads   it.   From  
time   to   time   he   coughs   loudly.   He,   at   least,   adds  
some   life   to   the   auditorium.   A   moment   with   Jose  
Bergamin, 44   refined,   face   deeply   etched,   with   the  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   137  
worn-out   look   of   a   Spanish   intellectual.   He   doesn’t  
want   to   choose   between   Catholicism   and   Commu¬  
nism   as   long   as   the   Spanish   war   is   not   over.   A   hy¬  
pertense   man   whose   energy   is   purely   spiritual.   I  
love   this   kind   of   man.  
Bergamin:   my   most   profound   temptation   is  
suicide.   And   spectacular   suicide.   (Return   to   Spain  
at   the   risk   of   being   condemned,   resist,   and   die.)  
Lunch   with   several   nice   couples,   professors   of  
French.   At   4,   press   conference.   At   5,   I   see   the   di¬  
rector   of   the   theater   that’s   going   to   put   on   Cali¬  
gula.   He   wants   to   stick   some   ballet   in   it.   It’s   an   in¬  
ternational   mania.   At   6,   Miss   Lussitch   and   the  
charming   lady   who   is   the   cultural   attache   from  
Uruguay   take   me   for   a   short   drive   through   the  
gardens   at   the   entrance   to   the   city.   The   evening   is  
soft,   short,   slightly   tender.   This   country   is   simple  
and   beautiful.   I   relax   a   little.   At   6:30,   second   lec¬  
ture.   The   ambassador   felt   obliged   to   come   with  
his   better   half.   Seated   in   the   First   row   are   the   sinis¬  
ter   faces   of   boredom   and   vulgarity.   After   the  
lecture,   I   take   a   walk   with   Bergamin.   We   end   up   in  
a   crowded   cafe.   He   doubts   the   effectiveness   of  
what   he’s   doing.   I   tell   him   that   uncompromisingly  
sustaining   a   refusal   is   a   positive   act   whose  
consequences   are   also   positive.—Then   dinner   at  
Suzannah   Soca’s.   A   crowd   of   worldly   women   who  

138   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
become   unmanageable   after   the   third   whiskey.  
Several   of   them   literally   proposition   me.   But   they  
aren’t   even   tempting.   A   French   lady   manages   to  
construct   an   apology   for   Franco   in   front   of   me.  
Exhausted,   I   lay   into   her—and   realize   that   I’d   bet¬  
ter   leave.   I   ask   the   cultural   attache   to   have   a   drink  
with   me,   and   we   escape.   At   least   this   pretty   face  
helps   me   with   the   struggle   of   living.   The   light   lies  
softly   on   Montevideo.   A   pure   sky,   the   rustling   of  
dry   palms   above   Constitution   Place,   pigeons   tak¬  
ing   flight,   white   in   the   black   sky.   The   hour   would  
be   simple   and   my   solitude—18   days   without   news,  
without   intimacy—could   be   eased   a   little.   But   my  
charming   companion   starts   reciting   for   me,   in   the  
middle   of   the   square,   some   French   verses   she   has  
written,   miming   the   tragic   style,   arms   crossed   on  
her   breast,   voice   rising   and   falling.   I   wait   it   out.  
Then   we   go   have   a   drink   and   I   take   her   home.   I  
go   to   bed,   but   anxiety   and   melancholy   keep   me  
from   sleeping.  
•AUGUST   2   1  
Out   of   bed   at   8   a   m.   I   slept   3   or   4   hours.   But   the  
airplane   is   taking   off   at   11.   Beneath   a   tender,  
fresh,   cloudy   sky,   Montevideo   unrolls   its   beaches  
—charming   city   where   everything   implies   happi¬  
ness—and   a   spiritless   happiness.   Stupidity   of   these  
airplane   trips—barbarian   and   regressive   means   of  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   139  
transportation.   At   5   p.m.   we   fly   over   Rio   and,   get¬  
ting   off   the   plane,   I   am   welcomed   by   this   close,  
humid   air—the   consistency   of   cotton-wool—  
which   I   had   forgotten   and   which   is   peculiar   to  
Rio.   At   the   same   time,   shrill   and   multicolored   par¬  
rots   and   a   peacock   with   a   discordant   voice.   Barely  
capable   of   going   to   bed,   and   still   without   news,  
since   there   was   no   mail   waiting   for   me   at   the   em¬  
bassy.  
•AUGUST   22  
They   bring   me   my   mail;   it   had   been   sitting   for   18  
days   in   some   office.   Tired,   I   stay   in   my   room   all  
day.   Evening,   a   lecture,   after   which   a   drink   at  
Mme.   Mineur’s.   Go   to   bed   with   a   fever.  
•AUGUST   23  
Get   up   a   little   better.   My   departure   is   approach¬  
ing.   It’ll   be   Thursday   or   Saturday.   I   think   of   Paris  
as   if   it   were   a   monastery.   Lunch   at   Copacabana  
facing   the   sea.   The   waves   are   high   and   supple.   It  
relaxes   me   a   little   to   watch   them.   Return   to   the  
hotel.   I   sleep   a   little.   At   5,   public   debate   with   the  
Brazilian   students.   Is   it   the   fatigue?   It’s   never   been  
so   easy   for   me.   Dinner   at   the   Claveries’   with   Mme.  
R.,   ravishing   woman   but,   it   seems   to   me,   without  
depth.  

140   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
•AUGUST   24  
I   get   up   feeling   even   better   than   yesterday.   The  
departure   has   now   been   set   for   Saturday.   Visitors  
in   the   morning   and   the   fatigue   returns.   To   the  
extent   that   I   decide   not   to   have   lunch.   At   1:30  
Pedrosa   and   his   wife   come   to   take   me   to   see   paint¬  
ings   by   the   insane,   in   a   suburban   hospital   of   mod¬  
ern   lines   and   ancient   filth.   My   heart   contracts  
seeing   faces   behind   the   tall,   barred   windows.   Two  
interesting   painters.   Without   a   doubt   the   others  
have   what   it   takes   to   send   progressive   Parisian  
minds   into   ecstasy.   But,   in   fact,   it’s   ugliness.   Even  
more   striking   in   the   ugly   and   vulgar   sculptures.  
I’m   appalled   when   I   recognize   a   psychiatrist   from  
the   hospital   as   the   young   man   who,   in   the   begin¬  
ning,   asked   me   the   most   idiotic   question   I   was  
asked   in   all   of   South   America.   He’s   the   one   who  
decides   the   fate   of   these   unfortunate   people.  
Moreover,   he’s   in   the   advanced   stages   of   illness  
himself.   But   I’m   even   more   appalled   when   he   tells  
me   that   he’s   going   to   make   the   trip   to   Paris   with  
me   on   Saturday.   Enclosed   with   him   in   a   metal  
cabin   for   36   hours—this   is   the   final   ordeal.  
In   the   evening,   dinner   at   Pedrosa’s   with   some  
intelligent   people.   Driving   rain   as   I   return   to   the  
hotel.  

SOUTH   AMERICA   •   141  
•AUGUST   2   5  
Grippe.   Without   a   doubt   I’m   not   suited   to   this   cli¬  
mate.   I   work   a   little   during   the   morning,   then   go  
to   the   zoo   to   see   the   sloth.  
But   the   sloth   is   at   liberty   and   one   is   obliged   to  
look   for   him   in   the   park’s   thousands   of   trees.   I   let  
it   drop.   Splendid   ocelots   at   least;   hideous   lizards  
and   the   anteater.   Lunch   with   Letarget   at   Copaca-  
bana.   Rio   is   veiled   by   an   incessant   rain   that   fills   the  
holes   in   the   roads   and   sidewalks   and   dissolves   the  
false   gloss   with   which   they   have   tried   to   cover   it.  
The   colonial   city   reappears   and   I   must   say   it’s  
more   attractive   like   this   with   its   mud,   its   tram¬  
pling,   its   steamy   sky.   Errands   in   the   afternoon.  
Everything   I   find   in   this   country   comes   from  
somewhere   else.   At   5   o’clock   in   the   evening,   at   the  
Mendes’   house.   Once   again   a   huge   crowd   and   I’m  
bored   without   having   the   strength   to   hide   it.   Phys¬  
ically,   I   can   no   longer   endure   large   gatherings   of  
people.   Same   thing   at   dinner   where   there   are  
seven   of   us—when   I   thought   it   would   only   be   Ped¬  
rosa   and   Barleto—where   everyone,   by   increasing  
the   amplitude   of   his   voice,   interrupts   everyone  
else.   With   my   grippe   on   top   of   it   all,   the   ordeal   be¬  
comes   infernal.   I   would   like   to   go   back   to   the   ho¬  
tel,   but   I   don’t   dare   say   so.   At   1   a   m.,   Mme.   Pedrosa  
sees   that   I   can’t   keep   my   eyes   open,   and   I   go   to  
bed.  

142   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
•AUGUST   26   AND   27  
Two   frightful   days   where   I   drag   about   with   my  
grippe   to   different   places   and   people,   blind   to  
what   I   see,   preoccupied   with   regaining   my  
strength,   amidst   people   who,   from   friendship   or  
hysteria,   perceive   nothing   of   the   state   I’m   in   and  
thus   make   it   a   little   worse.   Evening   at   the   consul’s  
where   I   hear   someone   comment   that   corporal  
punishment   is   a   necessity   in   our   colonial   armies.  
Saturday   4   p.m.   I’m   notified   that   the   airplane  
motor   has   broken   down   and   that   the   departure  
has   been   moved   to   tomorrow,   Sunday.   The   fever  
increases   and   I   begin   to   wonder   if   it’s   not   a   ques¬  
tion   of   something   more   than   the   grippe.  
•AUGUST   3   1  
Sick.   Bronchitis   at   least.   They   telephone   that  
we’re   leaving   this   afternoon.   The   day   is   radiant.  
Doctor.   Penicillin.   The   trip   ends   in   a   metallic   cof¬  
fin   between   an   insane   doctor   and   a   diplomat,  
heading   towards   Paris.  

Notes—United   States  
1.   Camus   makes   the   trip   as   a   journalist.  
2.   Port   in   Saudi   Arabia   where   foreign   diplomatic  
corps   are   stationed.  
3.   It   later   becomes   known   that   the   positions   taken   by  
Combat,   the   Resistance   newspaper   that   Camus   ed¬  
ited,   are   the   source   of   this   suspicion.  
4.   An   Italian   critic   and   writer,   a   friend   of   Albert   Ca¬  
mus.  
5.   O’Brien   translated   the   works   of   Camus   in   the  
U.S.A.  
6.   American   publisher.  
7.   Knopf   was   to   become   Camus’s   principal   publisher.  
8.   Lionel   Abel,   writer   and   journalist,   who   translated  
Camus’s   lecture   at   Harvard.  
143  

144   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
9.   W aldo   Franck,   American   writer   who   had   a   long  
correspondence   with   Camus.  
10.   American   painter   (1847-1917).   Exhibited   at   the  
Metropolitan   Museum   in   New   York.  
11.   Painter   from   Uruguay.   Friend   of   Bonnard.  
12.   This   is   already   the   theme   of   The   Rebel.  
13.   One   finds   this   disagreement   with   modern   existen¬  
tialism   in   the   letter   to   the   director   of   the   Nef.  
(.Pleiade ,   I,   p.   1745,   January   1946).  
14.   One   finds   echoes   of   this   preoccupation   in   State   of  
Siege.  
15.   Young   American   who   offered   Camus,   with   great  
discretion,   free   use   of   his   apartment   whenever   he  
wanted   it.  
16.   Cf.   “La   Mer   au   plus   pres”   (Pleiade,   II,   p.   879):   “On  
certain   days   in   New   York,   lost   at   the   bottom   of  
those   stone   and   steel   shafts   where   millions   of   men  
wander,   I   would   run   from   one   shaft   to   the   next,  
without   seeing   where   they   ended,   until,   exhausted,  
I   was   sustained   only   by   the   human   mass   seeking   its  
way   out.”   (Translated   as   “The   Sea   Close   By”   in  
Lyrical   and   Critical   Essays,   New   York:   Knopf,   1969,  
p.   173.)  
17.   “The   Rains   of   New   York”   (Forms   and   Colors,  
1947),   (Pleiade,   II,   p.   1829).  
18.   Camus   will   give   this   trait   to   Tarrou’s   father  
(Pleiade,   I,   p.   1420).  
19.   A   recurrent   theme   in   Neither   Victims   nor   Execution¬  
ers   (Ni   Victimes   ni   Bourreaux,   Pleiade,   II,   p.   332ff.).  

Notes—South   America  
4  
1.   Name   that   Camus   gave   his   car.  
2.   Cf.   “La   Mer   au   plus   pres”   (Pleiade,   II,   p.   880):  
“From   time   to   time   the   waves   lap   against   the   bow;  
a   bitter,   unctuous   foam,   the   gods’   saliva,   flows  
along   the   wood   and   loses   itself   in   the   water,   where  
it   scatters   into   shapes   that   die   and   are   reborn,   the  
hide   of   some   white   and   blue   cow,   an   exhausted  
beast   that   floats   for   a   long   time   in   our   wake.”  
(Translated   as   “The   Sea   Close   By”   in   Lyrical   and  
Critical   Essays,   New   York:   Knopf,   1969,   p.   174.)  
3.   Cf.   “La   Mer   au   plus   pres,”   p.   882:   “At   last,   at   its  
zenith,   it   lights^a   whole   corridor   of   sea,   a   rich   river  
of   milk   which,   with   the   motion   of   the   ship,   streams  
down   inexhaustibly   toward   us   across   the   dark  
ocean.”   (Knopf,   p.   176.)  
145  

146   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
4.   Cf.   “La   Mer   au   plus   pres,”   p.   880:   “Thus,  
throughout   the   morning,   we   hear   our   sails   slap¬  
ping   above   a   cheerful   pond.   The   waters   are   heavy,  
scaly,   covered   with   cool   froth.”   (Knopf,   p.   174.)  
5.   Cf.   “La   Mer   au   plus   pres,”   p.   881:   “After   an  
hour’s   cooking,   the   pale   water,   a   vast   white-hot  
iron   sheet,   sizzles.   In   a   minute   it   will   turn   and   offer  
its   damp   side,   now   hidden   in   waves   and   darkness,  
to   the   sun.”   (Knopf,   p.   175.)  
6.   Camus   is   referring   to   an   area   in   the   southern   At¬  
lantic   renowned   for   its   lack   of   wind.   The   term   de¬  
rives   from   navigators’   slang,   signifying   a   place  
from   which   one   can   not   move.   Aviators   use   the  
term   to   refer   to   poor   visibility   due   to   fog.  
7.   A   region   of   mountains   in   Algeria.  
8.   French   author   (1888-1948).  
9.   Daniel   Halevy,   French   historian   (1872-1962).  
10.   Without   a   doubt   this   is   a   memory   from   his   trip   to  
Mallorca   in   the   summer   of   1935,   mixed   with   the  
memory   of   nationalist   repression   in   Mallorca  
which   is   denounced   by   Bernanos   in   A   Diary   of   My  
Times.  
11.   Belgian   poet   (1899-1984).   Author   of   A   Barbarian  
in   Asia   (1933).  
12.   Uruguayan-born   French   poet,   dramatist,   and   nov¬  
elist   (1884-1960).   His   works   include   The   Colonel’s  
Children   (poetry,   1926),   Bolivar   (play,   1936),   and  
Along   the   Road   to   Bethlehem   (novel,   1933).  
13.   Swiss   critic,   translator,   and   editor   (1901   —  
1957).   Beguin   translated   Hoffmann   and   Goethe  
into   French.  
14.   Was   the   lover   of   Auguste   Comte,   whom   she   met   in  
1844.  

NOTES—SOUTH   AMERICA   •   147  
15.   Cf.   The   Growing   Stone”   in   Exile   and   the   Kingdom.  
The   macumba   scene   is   taken   from   three   journal  
fragments.  
16.   Cf.   La   Pierre   qui   Pousse”   (‘‘The   Growing  
Stone”),   Pleiade,   I,   p.   1674.  
17.   Ibid,   p.   1664.  
18.   Ibid,   p.   1675.  
19.   Ibid,   p.   1675.   Most   of   the   paragraph   is   used.  
20.   Ibid,   p.   1676.   This   time   it   is   about   a   black   woman.  
21.   French   historian   (1878-1956).  
22.   One   sees   here   the   reappearance   of   the   obsession  
with   the   Cold   War   which   creates   two   opposing  
camps,   and   the   idea   of   an   intermediary   force  
which   would   balance   them.  
23.   Bay   of   the   state   of   Bahia.  
24.   Approximate   quotation   from   Actuelles   I.  
25.   B.:   probably   Belcourt,   a   suburb   of   Algiers.  
26.   Camus   had   written:   “in   fact,   this   is   how   I   speak,  
with   more   clarity   and   violence   than   ever   before . ”  
27.   This   candomble   appears   in   “The   Growing   Stone,”  
where   it   is   grafted   onto   the   macumba.  
28.   French   poet   (   1907-   ).   Author   of   Hypnos   Wak¬  
ing:   Poetry   and   Prose   (1956).  
29.   Camus   had   published   an   introduction   to   Chamfort  
in   1944   (cf.   Pleiade,   II,   p.   1099).  
30.   The   Minas   Gerais,   a   state   in   central   Brazil.  
31.   There   is   an   allusion   to   this   visit   in   the   Diario   de   Sao  
Paulo   from   August   6,   1949.  
32.   The   story   “The   Growing   Stone”   is   set   in   Iguape.  
33.   Cf.   “La   Pierre   qui   Pousse,”   p.   1675.  
34.   Cf.   “La   Pierre   qui   Pousse,”   p.   1659.  
35.   Ibid,   p.   1660.  
36.   Ibid,   p.   1662.  

148   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
57.   All   of   this   episode   is   taken   up   again   in   “La   Pierre  
qui   Pousse,”   pp.   1664   and   1672.  
38 .   Cf.   “La   Pierre   qui   Pousse,”   p.   1667.  
39 .   This   is   the   character   called   “the   cook.”   The   rest  
of   the   text   is   found   in   a   transposed   form,   p.   1680  
ff.  
40 .   Cheap,   trendy   French   cigarettes.  
41 .   Camus   may   have   meant   Kapok.  
42 .   Cf.   above,   pp.   96-97.  
43 .   Victoria   Ocampo.  
44 .   Spanish   philosopher   and   essayist.  

Chronology  
11.7.13.   Birth   of   Albert   Camus   at   Mondovi,   Constan¬  
tine,   French   North   Africa.  
10.11.14.   Lucien   Camus,   his   father,   is   killed   at   the   first  
Battle   of   the   Marne.   His   mother,   nee   Catherine  
Sintes,   goes   to   live   in   Belcourt,   a   working-class   suburb  
of   Algiers.   She   works   as   a   charwoman   to   provide   for  
Camus   and   his   elder   brother   Lucien,   who   are   brought  
up   largely   by   their   maternal   grandmother.  
1918-1923.   Camus   attends   the   hole   communale   of   Bel¬  
court.   His   Nobel   Prize   speech   of   1957   is   dedicated   to  
his   teacher,   Louis   Germain.  
1923.   Wins   scholarship   to   the   lycee   in   Algiers   (now   Ly-  
cee   Albert   Camus).  
1928-1930.   Is   goalkeeper   for   the   Racing   Universitaire  
d’Alger.  
149  

150   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
1930.   First   attack   of   tuberculosis.  
1933.   First   marriage,   to   Simone   Hie.  
1934.   Joins   Communist   Party.   Works   on   the   Arab   ques¬  
tion.   Laval’s   visit   to   Moscow   in   1935   brings   about   a  
change   in   the   Party   line,   and   Camus   begins   to   feel   crit¬  
ical.   He   did   not,   however,   according   to   Roger   Quil-  
liot,   actually   leave   the   Party   until   1937,   the   date   at  
which   the   Theatre   du   Travail,   which   he   had   been   in¬  
strumental   in   founding,   broke   its   Communist   links   and  
became   the   Theatre   de   L’Equipe.  
1935.   Begins   the   cahiers.   Completes   his   licence   de   philoso¬  
phic   (B.A.)   in   June.   Plays   an   active   part   in   the   Commu¬  
nist   Maison   de   la   Culture   in   Algiers.   Cooperates   in   writ¬  
ing   Revolte   dans   les   Asturies,   a   play   about   the   revolt   of  
the   Oviedo   miners   in   Spain.   The   play   was   not   allowed  
to   be   publicly   performed   but   was   privately   published.  
Begins   research   on   Plotinus,   for   his   diplome   d’etudes  
superieures   (roughly   an   M.A.   by   thesis).   During   the  
whole   of   this   time   he   is   supporting   himself   by   various  
jobs,   and   works   for   the   Institut   de   Meteorologie.  
1936.   May.   Successfully   presents   his   thesis,   on   Neo-Pla-  
tonisme   et   Pensee   Chretienne.   Begins   to   work   as   an  
actor   for   the   touring   company   of   Radio   Algiers.   His  
first   marriage   is   dissolved.   In   the   summer,   travels   to  
Austria   and   returns   via   Prague   and   Italy.  
1937.   Publication   of   L’Envers   et   L’Endroit   (written  
1935-6).   Compelled   to   go   to   Embrun,   in   France,   for  
reasons   of   health   in   summer,   and   again   travels   back  
through   Italy.   Refuses   a   post   as   teacher   in   Sidi-bel-  
Abbes.   Breaks   with   Communist   Party.  
1938.   Foundation,   in   October,   of   Alger-Republicain,   an  
independent   left-wing   paper   edited   by   Pascal   Pia.  
Camus   joins   the   staff,   and   his   first   article   appears   on  
October   10,   1938.   He   reviews   books   regularly,   but  

CHRONOLOGY   •   151  
also   writes   a   large   number   of   other   articles.   Completes  
first   version   of   Caligula.  
1939.   J a nuary-March.   Series   of   articles   in   Alger-R'epub-  
licain   leading   to   the   acquittal   of   Michel   Hodent.   July.  
Publication   of   eleven   articles   on   Kabylia,   describing  
the   poverty   of   the   area   and   criticizing   government  
policy.   The   more   important   of   these   were   republished  
in   Actuelles   III   in   1938,   and   some   were   translated   in  
Resistance,   Rebellion,   and   Death   in   1960.  
1939.   September.   Camus   made   editor   of   the   evening  
paper   Le   Soir-Republicain,   where   he   signs   a   number   of  
articles   Jean   Mersault.   Publication   of   Noces.   Rejected  
for   military   service   for   reasons   of   health.  
1940.   January-February.   Both   Soir-Republicain   and  
Alger-Republicain   cease   to   appear.   Camus   is   unable   to  
find   a   job   in   Algeria   because   of   his   political   affilia¬  
tions,   and   goes   to   Paris,   where   Pascal   Pia   finds   him   a  
place   in   Paris-Soir.   Camus   contributed   no   articles   to  
this   paper,   which   he   disliked,   and   worked   only   as   a  
typesetter.  
1940.   June.   Leaves   Paris   with   Paris-Soir   and   goes   to  
Clermont-Ferrand.   Then   to   Bordeaux   and   Lyons.   De¬  
cember.   Second   marriage,   to   Francine   Faure.  
1941.   Return   to   Oran.   Teaches   for   a   short   time   in   a   pri¬  
vate   school.   Completes   Le   My   the   de   Sisyphe.  
December   19.   Execution   of   Gabriel   Peri—an   event  
which,   according   to   Camus   himself,   crystallized   his   re¬  
volt   against   the   Germans.  
1942.   Return   to   France.   July.   Publication   of   L’Etranger.  
Camus   joins   the   resistance   network   Combat   in   the  
Lyons   region.   January.   New   attack   of   tuberculosis.  
1943.   Publication   of   Le   Mythe   de   Sisyphe.   First   of   the  
Lettres   a   un   Ami   Allemand   (translated   in   Resistance,   Re¬  
bellion,   and   Death).   Combat   sends   him   to   Paris,   where   he  

152   •   AMERICAN   JOURNALS  
is   by   now   well   known   in   literary   circles.   He   becomes   a  
publisher’s   reader   and   permanent   member   of   the   ad¬  
ministrative   staff   at   Gallimard.   In   order   to   avoid   ever  
feeling   that   he   had   to   publish   books   in   order   to   earn  
his   living,   Camus   kept   this   job   until   the   end   of   his   life.  
1944.   August.   Editor   of   Combat.   His   unsigned,   and   sup¬  
posedly   anonymous,   editorials   are   characteristic   of   the  
hopes   and   aspirations   of   the   liberation   period,   and,  
coming   after   the   first   performance,   in   June   1944,   of  
Le   Malentendu   (written   1942-1943),   emphasized   the  
dual   nature   of   his   attitude   toward   the   world.  
1945.   Still   with   Combat,   though   writing   less   frequently.  
First   performance   of   Caligula,   in   September,   with   Ger¬  
ard   Philipe   in   title   role.   Publication   of   Lettres   a   un   Ami  
Allemand   and   of   La   Remarque   sur   la   Revolte,   starting  
point   of   L’Homme   Revolte.   Birth   of   his   twin   children,  
Catherine   and   Jean.  
1946.   Visit   to   America.   (Camus   tours   New   England,  
New   York   and   Washington,   D.C.)   Completion   of   La  
Peste.  
1947.   June.   Publication   of   La   Peste.   Great   success.   On  
June   3,   1947,   Camus   leaves   Combat,   whose   financial  
difficulties   no   longer   allow   an   independent   editorial  
policy.  
1948.   October.   First   performance   of   L’Etat   de   Siege.  
1949.   June-August.   Lecture   tour   in   South   America,   de¬  
scribed   in   detail   in   American   Journals.   Camus   falls   ill,  
and   has   to   spend   a   long   time   convalescing.  
1950.   Publication   of   Actuelles   I.   Performance   of   Les  
Justes.  
1951.   L   Homme   Revolte.  
1952.   Public   quarrel   with   Sartre.  
1953.   Replaces   Marcel   Herrand   as   producer   at   the   Fes¬  
tival   d’Angers.   Actuelles   II.  

CHRONOLOGY   •   153  
1954.   Publication   of   L’Ete,   a   collection   of   essays   written  
between   1939   and   1954.   Includes   Le   Minotaure   ou   la  
Halte   d’Oran,   many   passages   of   which   were   first   writ¬  
ten   in   the   Carnets.   (Cf.   English   translation   by   Justin  
O’Brien   in   the   volume   containing   the   1955   English  
translation   of   Le   Mythe   de   Sisyphe.)  
1955.   Travels   to   Greece.   Goes   back   to   journalism   in  
L’Express   to   support   the   election   campaign   of   Mendes-  
France.   Appeals   for   an   agreement   by   both   sides   in   the  
Algerian   War   to   respect   the   civilian   population.  
1956.   Publication   of   La   Chute.   Adaptation   of   Faulkner’s  
Requiem   for   a   Nun.  
1957.   Publication   of   the   short   stories   L’Exil   et   le   Roy-  
aume.   Publication   of   the   Reflexions   sur   la   Guillotine,   in   a  
companion   volume   with   Arthur   Koestler’s   Reflections  
on   Hanging.   Awarded   the   Nobel   Prize   for   Literature.  
1958.   Publication   of   Actuelles   III.   Articles   on   Algeria  
dating   from   1939-58.  
1959.   Adaptation   of   Dostoevsky’s   The   Possessed.   Camus  
continues   work   on   his   projected   novel   Le   Premier  
Homme.  
1960.   January   5.   Killed   in   an   automobile   accident.  
The   two   most   useful   studies   on   Camus’s   life   are   by  
Roger   Quilliot,   La   Mer   et   les   Prisons   (Gallimard,   1956),  
and   by   Germaine   Bree,   Camus   (Rutgers,   1959).  



A   Note   on   the   Author  
Albert   Camus   was   born   on   November   7,   1913   in   Mon-  
dovi,   Algeria.   His   father,   an   itinerant   agricultural  
worker,   was   killed   on   the   Marne   in   1914;   his   Spanish  
mother   worked   as   a   charwoman.   While   a   student   at   Al¬  
giers   University,   Camus   became   active   in   the   propa¬  
ganda   war   against   international   fascism   and   protested  
the   French   establishment’s   treatment   of   the   Arab   popu¬  
lation.   Before   the   outbreak   of   World   War   II,   Camus   had  
already   established   a   reputation   as   co-founder   (director,  
actor,   writer,   theorist)   of   a   theater   for   the   proletariat,  
and   as   an   essayist.   Unable   to   Find   a   job   in   Algeria   due   to  
his   political   affiliations,   he   moved   to   France   in   1942,  
where   he   assumed   editorship   of   the   Resistance   news¬  
paper   Combat   until   1947.  
Throughout   his   career,   his   writings   addressed   contem¬  
porary   political   and   moral   issues   (fascism,   genocide,   co¬  
lonialism,   and   political   repression),   as   well   as   philosophi¬  
cal   questions,   such   as   the   absurdity   of   modern   life.   He   is  
considered   by   many   to   be   the   subtlest   and   most   pro¬  
found   seeker   of   a   valid   liberal   humanism   in   the   twen¬  
tieth   century.  
Camus’s   major   works   include   The   Myth   of   Sisyphus   and  
The   Rebel   (essays);   Caligula   and   State   of   Siege   (drama);   and  
The   Stranger   and   The   Plague   (novels).   He   won   the   Nobel  
Prize   for   Literature   in   1957.   He   died   on   January   5,  
1960,   in   an   automobile   accident.  
155  



A   Note   on   the   Type  
The   text   of   American   Journals   was   set   in   Baskerville,   a  
slight   modification   of   the   classic   face   designed   by   the  
Englishman   John   Baskerville   in   the   middle   of   the   18th  
century.   It   was   during   this   period   that   a   new   handwrit¬  
ing   style,   the   roundhand,   was   developed   by   scribes   using  
the   traditional   broad-nibbed   pens   but   changing   the   writ¬  
ing   angle,   keeping   the   flat   edge   of   the   pen   parallel   to   the  
baseline.   This   made   the   down-stroke   main   line   the   heavi¬  
est   and   the   horizontal   lines   the   lightest.   Baskerville’s  
transitional   roman   design   is   more   regimented   than   the  
old   style,   maintaining   the   consistency   of   each   line   stroke  
and   ending   with   fine,   tapered   serifs.   The   Baskerville  
type   style   has   greater   contrast   between   capital   and   low¬  
ercase   letters   than   most   other   roman   faces,   resulting   in   a  
higher   degree   of   readability.   The   text   was   typeset   by  
Computer   Composition   Corporation   (Madison   Heights,  
Michigan).  
157  









$9.95   AUTOBIOGRAPHY/LITERATURE  
❖ *®'V  
_  
Nobel   laureate   Albert   Camus’s   American   Journals   offers   us   a   wonderfully  
revealing   look   into   one   of   the   most   original   minds   of   the   twentieth   century.  
Camus   kept   these   journals   during   two   lecture   tours,   one   in   North   America   in   j  
1946,   the   other   in   South   America   in   1949.  
With   extraordinary   humor   and   insight,   Camus   writes   of   America   as   a   2  
country   where   everything   is   done   to   prove   that   life   isn   t   tragic.   In   New   York,   £  
where   he   thought   that   “everyone   looks   like   they’ve   stepped   out   of   a   B-film,”   |  
he   captures   the   frivolity   of   the   Camel   Gl   blowing   smoke   rings   from   a   Times   g>  
Square   billboard   and   the   stark   poverty   of   the   Bowery.   ?  
As   he   travels   through   South   America—Rio,   Santiago,   Montevideo—   §  
Camus   turns   inward   musing   on   life’s   meaning—the   dark   contemplations   