THE REBEL  
 
Albert Camus  
 
An Essay on Man in Revolt  
A r evised and complete translation  
of  L’HOMME RÉVOLTÉ   
by   Anthony Bower  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

And openly I pledged my heart to the grave and suffering land, and often in th e consecrated 
night,  I  promised  to  love  her  faithfully  until  death,  unafraid,  with  her  heavy  burden  of 
fatality, and never to despise a single one of her enigmas. Thus did I join myself to her with 
a mortal cord.  
 
 
      HÖLDERLIN:  
 
The Death of Empedocles  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
   
         There  are  crimes  of  passion  and  crimes  of  logic.     The  boundary  between 
them  is  not  clearly  defined.     But  the  Penal  Code  makes  the  convenient 
distinction of premeditation.    We are living in the era of premedita tion and the 
perfect crime.    Our criminals are no longer helpless children who could plead 
love as their excuse.    On the contrary, they are adults and they have a perfect 
alibi: philosophy, which can be used for any purpose  –  even for transforming 
murderer s into judges.  
         Heathcliff,  in   Wuthering   Heights ,  would  kill  everybody  on  earth  in  order  to 
possess Cathy, but it would never occur to him to say that murder is reasonable or 
theoretically defensible.    He would commit it, and there hi s convictions end.    This 
implies  the  power  of  love,  and  also  strength  of  character.     Since  intense  love  is 
rare,  murder  remains  an  exception  and  preserves  its  aspect  of  infraction.     But  as 
soon as a man, through lack of character, takes refuge in doctrine,  as soon as crime 
reasons  about  itself,  it  multiplies  like  reason  itself  and  assumes  all  the  aspects  of 
the syllogism.    Once crime was as solitary as a cry of protest; now it is as universal 
as science.    Yesterday it was put on trial; today it determines t he law.  
         This is not the place for indignation.    The purpose of this essay is once again to 
face the reality of the present, which is logical crime, and to examine meticulously 
the  arguments  by  which  it  is  justified;  it  is  an  attempt  to  understand  th e  times  in 
which  we  live.     One  might  think  that  a  period  which,  in  a  space  of  fifty  years, 
uproots, enslaves, or kills seventy million human beings should be condemned out 
  2  

of  hand.     But  its  culpability  must  still  be  understood.     In  more  ingenuous  times, 
wh en  the  tyrant  razed  cities  for  his  own  greater  glory,  when  the  slave  chained  to 
the  conqueror’s  chariot  was  dragged  through  the  rejoicing  streets,  when  enemies 
were thrown to the wild beasts in front of the assembled people, the mind did not 
reel before su ch unabashed crimes, and judgement remained unclouded.    But slave 
camps under the flag of freedom, massacres justified by philanthropy or by a taste 
for the superhuman, in one sense cripple judgement.    On the day when crime dons 
the apparel of innocence  –   through a curious transposition peculiar to our times  –  it 
is  innocence  that  is  called  upon  to  justify  itself.     The  ambition  of  this  essay  is  to 
accept and examine this strange challenge.  
         Our purpose is to find out whether innocence, the moment it b ecomes involved 
in  action,  can  avoid  committing  murder.     We  can  only  act  in  terms  of  our  own 
time,  among  the  people  who  surround  us.     We  shall  know  nothing  until  we  know 
whether we have the right to kill our fellow men, or the right to let them be killed.    
In that every action today leads to murder, direct or indirect, we cannot act until we 
know whether or why we have the right to kill.  
         The important thing, therefore, is not, as yet, to go to the root of things, but, the 
world being what it is, to k now how to live in it.    In the age of negation, it was of 
some avail to examine one’s position concerning suicide.    In the age of ideologies, 
we  must  examine  our  position  in  relation  to  murder.     If  murder  has  rational 
foundations,  then  are  period  and  we  ou rselves  are  rationally  consequent.     If  it  has 
no  rational  foundations,  then  we  are  insane  and  there  is  no  alternative  but  to  find 
some  justification  or  to  avert  our  faces.     It  is  incumbent  upon  us,  at  all  events,  to 
give a definite answer to the question i mplicit in the blood and strife of this century 
th [20  century].    For we are being put to the rack.    Thirty years ago, before reaching 
a  decision  to  kill,  people  denied  many  things,  to  the  point  of  denying  themselves 
by  suicide.    God  is  deceitful;  the  whole   world  (myself  included)  is  deceitful; 
therefore  I  choose  to  die:  suicide  was  the  problem  then.     Ideology  today  is 
concerned  only  with  the  denial  of  other  human  beings,  who  alone  bear  the 
responsibility  of  deceit.     It  is  then  that  we  kill.     Each  day  at  daw n,  assassins  in 
judges’ robes slip into some cell: murder is the problem today.  
         The  two  arguments  are  inextricably  bound  together.     Or  rather  they  bind  us, 
and  so  firmly  that  we  can  no  longer  choose  our  own  problems.     They  choose  us, 
one after anoth er, and we have no alternative but to accept their choice.    This essay 
proposes,  in  the  face  of  murder  and  rebellion,  to  pursue  a  train  of  thought  which 
began with suicide and the idea of the absurd.  
   
         But,  for  the  moment,  this  train  of  thought  yiel ds  only  one  concept:  that  of  the 
absurd.     And  the  concept  of  the  absurd  leads  only  to  a  contradiction  as  far  as  the 
problem of murder is concerned.    Awareness of the absurd, when we first claim to 
  3  

deduce a rule of behaviour from it, makes murder seem a mat ter of indifference, to 
say  the  least,  and  hence  possible.     If  we  believe  in  nothing,  if  nothing  has  any 
meaning  and  if  we  can  affirm  no  values  whatsoever,  then  everything  is  possible 
and  nothing  has  any  importance.     There  is  no  pro  or  con:  the  murderer  is   neither 
right nor wrong.    We are free to stoke the crematory fires or to devote ourselves to 
the care of lepers.    Evil and virtue are mere chance or caprice.  
         We shall then decide not to act at all, which amounts to at least accepting the 
murder of  others, with perhaps certain mild reservations about the imperfection of 
the  human  race.     Again  we  may  decide  to  substitute  tragic  dilettantism  for  action, 
and in this case human lives become counters in a game.    Finally, we may propose 
to  embark  on  some  c ourse  of  action  which  is  not  entirely  gratuitous.     In  the  latter 
case,  in  that  we  have  no  higher  values  to  guide  our  behaviour,  our  aim  will  be 
immediate efficacy.    Since nothing is either true or false, good or bad, our guiding 
principle will be to demons trate that we are the most efficient  –  in other words, the 
strongest.    Then the world will no longer be divided into the just and the unjust, but 
into  masters  and  slaves.     Thus,  whichever  way  we  turn,  in  our  abyss  of  negation 
and nihilism, murder has its p rivileged position.  
         Hence, if we claim to adopt the absurdist attitude, we must prepare ourselves to 
commit  murder,  thus  admitting  that  logic  is  more  important  than  scruples  that  we 
consider  illusory.     Of  course,  we  must  have  some  predisposition  to  murder.     But, 
on the whole, less than might be supposed, to judge from experience.    Moreover, it 
is  always  possible,  as  we  can  so  often  observe,  to  delegate  murder.     Everything 
would then be made to conform to logic  –  if logic could really be satisfied in  this 
way.  
         But  logic  cannot  be  satisfied  by  an  attitude  which  first  demonstrates  that 
murder is possible and then that it is impossible.    For after having proved that the 
act  of  murder  is  at  least  a  matter  of  indifference,  absurdist  analysis,  in  its  most 
important  deduction,  finally  condemns  murder.     The  final  conclusion  of  absurdist 
reasoning is, in fact, the repudiation of suicide and the acceptance of the desperate 
encounter  between  human  inquiry  and  the  silence  of  the  universe.     Suicide  would 
mean  the end of this encounter, and absurdist reasoning considers that it could not 
consent   to   this   without   negating   its   own   premises.      According   to   absurdist 
reasoning, such a solution would be the equivalent of flight or deliverance.    But it 
is obvious that  absurdism hereby admits that human life is the only necessary good 
since it is precisely life that makes this encounter possible and since, without life, 
the absurdist wager would have no basis.    To say that life is absurd, the conscience 
must be alive.    H ow is it possible, without making remarkable concessions to one’s 
desire  for  comfort,  to  preserve  exclusively  for  oneself  the  benefits  of  such  a 
process of reasoning?    From the moment that life is recognized as good, it becomes 
good for all men.    Murder ca nnot be made coherent when suicide is not considered 
  4  

coherent.     A  mind  imbued  with  the  idea  of  the  absurd  will  undoubtedly  accept 
fatalistic  murder;  but  it  would  never  accept  calculated  murder.     In  terms  of  the 
encounter  between  human  inquiry  and  the  silen ce  of  the  universe,  murder  and 
suicide are one and the same thing, and must be accepted or rejected together.  
         Equally,  absolute  nihilism,  which  accepts  suicide  as  legitimate,  leads,  even 
more easily, to logical murder.    If our age admits, with equan imity, that murder has 
its  justifications,  it  is  because  of  this  indifference  to  life  which  is  the  mark  of 
nihilism.    Of course there have been periods of history in which the passion for life 
was so strong that it burst forth in criminal excesses.    But th ese excesses were like 
the  searing  flame  of  a  terrible  delight.     They  were  not  this  monotonous  order  of 
things  established  by  an  impoverished  logic  in  whose  eyes  everything  is  equal.    
This logic has carried the values of suicide, on which our age has been  nurtured, to 
their extreme logical consequence, which is legalized murder.    It culminates, at the 
same time, in mass suicide.    The most striking demonstration of this was provided 
by  the  Hitlerian  apocalypse  of  1945.     Self - destruction  meant  nothing  to  thos e 
madmen,  in  their  bomb - shelters,  who  were  preparing  for  their  own  death  and 
apotheosis.    All that mattered was not to destroy oneself alone and to drag a whole 
world  with  one.     In  a  way,  the  man  who  kills  himself  in  solitude  still  preserves 
certain  values   since  he,  apparently,  claims  no  rights  over  the  lives  of  others.     The 
proof  of  this  is  that  he  never  makes  use,  in  order  to  dominate  others,  of  the 
enormous power and freedom of action which his decision to die gives him.    Every 
solitary  suicide,  when  it  is  not  an  act  of  resentment,  is,  in  some  way,  either 
generous or contemptuous.    But one feels contemptuous in the name of something.    
If  the  world  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  man  who  commits  suicide,  it  is 
because he has an idea of something that is  not or could not be indifferent to him.    
He  believes  that  he  is  destroying  everything  or  taking  everything  with  him;  but 
from  this  act  of  self - destruction  itself  a  value  arises  which,  perhaps,  might  have 
made  it  worth  while  to  live.     Absolute  negation  is  therefore  not  consummated  by 
suicide.     It  can  only  be  consummated  by  absolute  destruction,  of  oneself  and  of 
others.     Or,  at  least,  it  can  only  be  lived  by  striving  toward  that  delectable  goal.    
Here  suicide  and  murder  are  two  aspects  of  a  single  system,  t he  system  of  a 
misguided intelligence that prefers, to the suffering imposed by a limited situation, 
the dark victory in which heaven and earth are annihilated.  
         By  the  same  token,  if  we  deny  that  there  are  reasons  for  suicide,  we  cannot 
claim  that  t here  are  grounds  for  murder.     There  are  no  half - measures  about 
nihilism.      Absurdist   reasoning   cannot   defend   the   continued   existence   of   its 
spokesman and, simultaneously, accept the sacrifice of others’ lives.    The moment 
that we recognize the impossibility  of absolute negation  –  and merely to be alive is 
to recognize this  –  the very first thing that cannot be denied is the right of others to 
live.    This the same idea which allowed us to believe that murder was a matter of 
  5  

indifference  now  proceeds  to  depriv e  it  of  any  justification;  and  we  return  to  the 
untenable position from which we were trying to escape.    In actual fact, this form 
of reasoning assures us at the same time that we can kill and that we cannot kill.    It 
abandons  us  in  this  contradiction  with   no  grounds  either  for  preventing  or  for 
justifying  murder,  menacing  and  menaced,  swept  along  with  a  whole  generation 
intoxicated by nihilism, and yet lost in loneliness, with weapons in our hands and a 
lump in our throats.  
   
         This basic contradictio n, however, cannot fail to be accompanied by a host of 
others  from  the  moment  that  we  claim  to  remain  firmly  in  the  absurdist  position 
and ignore the real nature of the absurd, which is that it is an experience to be lived 
through,   a   point   of   departure,   th e   equivalent,   in   existence,   of   Descartes’s 
methodical doubt.    The absurd is, in itself, contradiction.  
         It is contradictory in its content because, in wanting to uphold life, it excludes 
all value judgements, when to live is, in itself, a value judge ment.    To breathe is to 
judge.    Perhaps it is untrue to say that life is a perpetual choice.    But it is true that it 
is impossible to imagine a life deprived of all choice.    From this simplified point of 
view,  the  absurdist  position,  translated  into  action ,  is  inconceivable.     It  is  equally 
inconceivable when translated into expression.    Simply by being expressed, it gives 
a  minimum  of  coherence  to  incoherence,  and  introduces  consequence  where, 
according to its own tenets, there is none.    Speaking itself is  restorative.    The only 
coherent  attitude  based  on  non - signification  would  be  silence  –   if  silence,  in  its 
turn,  were  not  significant.     The  absurd,  in  its  purest  form,  attempts  to  remain 
dumb.    If it finds its voice, it is because it has become complacent o r, as we shall 
see,  because  it  considers  itself  provisional.     This  complacency  is  an  excellent 
indication  of  the  profound  ambiguity  of  the  absurdist  position.     In  a  certain  way, 
the  absurd  which  claims  to  express  man  in  his  solitude,  really  makes  him  live  in 
front of a mirror.    And then the initial anguish runs the risk of turning to comfort.    
The wound that is scratched with such solicitude ends by giving pleasure.  
         Great explorers in the realm of absurdity have not been lacking.    But, in the last 
an alysis, their greatness is measured by the extent to which they have rejected the 
complacencies  of  absurdism  in  order  to  accept  its  exigencies.     They  destroy  as 
much,  not  at  little,  as  they  can.     “My  enemies,”  says  Nietzsche,  “are  those  who 
want  to  destroy   without  creating  their  own  selves.”     He  himself  destroys,  but  in 
order to try to create.    He extols integrity and castigates the “hog - faced” pleasure -
seekers.    To escape complacency, absurdist reasoning then discovers renunciation.    
It refuses to be sidet racked and emerges into a position of arbitrary barrenness  –  a 
determination  to  be  silent  –   which  is  expressed  in  the  strange  asceticism  of 
rebellion.    Rimbaud, who extols “crime pulling prettily in the mud of the streets,” 
runs  away  to  Harrar  only  to  comp lain  about  having  to  live  there  without  his 
  6  

family.    Life for him was “a farce for the whole world to perform.”    But on the day 
of his death, he cries out to his sister: “I shall lie beneath the ground but you, you 
will walk in sun!”  
   
         The  absurd,  c onsidered  as  a  rule  of  life,  is  therefore  contradictory.     What  is 
astonishing about the fact that it does not provide us with values which will enable 
us  to  decide  whether  murder  is  legitimate  or  not?     Moreover,  it  is  obviously 
impossible  to  formulate  an  a ttitude  on  the  basis  of  a  specially  selected  emotion.    
The perception of the absurd is one perception among many.    That it has coloured 
so many thoughts and actions between the two wars only proves its power and its 
validity.     But  the  intensity  of  a  percep tion  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  it  is 
universal.     The  error  of  a  whole  period  of  history  has  been  to  enunciate  –   or  to 
suppose  already  enunciated  –   general  rules  of  action  founded  on  emotions  of 
despair whose inevitable course, in that they are emotion s, is continually to exceed 
themselves.    Great suffering and great happiness may be found at the beginning of 
any  process  of  reasoning.     But  it  is  impossible  to  rediscover  or  sustain  them 
throughout  the  entire  process.     Therefore,  if  it  was  legitimate  to  t ake  absurdist 
sensibility into account, to make a diagnosis of a malady to be found in ourselves 
and  in  others,  it  is  nevertheless  impossible  to  see  in  this  sensibility,  and  in  the 
nihilism  it  presupposes,  anything  but  a  point  of  departure,  a  criticism  bro ught  to 
life  –  the equivalent, in the plane of existence, of systematic doubt.    After this, the 
mirror, with its fixed stare, must be broken and we are, perforce, caught up in the 
irresistible movement by which the absurd exceeds itself.  
         Once  the  mi rror  is  broken,  nothing  remains  which  can  help  us  to  answer  the 
questions  of  our  time.     Absurdism,  like  methodical  thought,  has  wiped  the  slate 
clean.    It leaves us in a blind alley.    But, like methodical doubt, it can, by returning 
upon itself, open up a  new field of investigation, and the process of reasoning then 
pursues the same course.    I proclaim that I believe in nothing and that everything is 
absurd,  but  I  cannot  doubt  the  validity  of  my  proclamation  and  I  must  at  least 
believe  in  my  protest.     The  f irst  and  only  evidence  that  is  supplied  to  me,  within 
the  terms  of  the  absurdist  experience,  is  rebellion.     Deprived  of  all  knowledge, 
incited  to  murder  or  to  consent  to  murder,  all  I  have  at  my  disposal  is  this  single 
piece  of  evidence,  which  is  only  reaf firmed  by  the  anguish  I  suffer.     Rebellion  is 
born    of    the    spectacle    of    irrationality,    confronted    with    an    unjust    and 
incomprehensible condition.    But its blind impulse is to demand order in the midst 
of  chaos,  and  unity  in  the  very  heart  of  the  ephemeral.     It  protests,  it  demands,  it 
insists that the outrage be brought to an end, and that what has up to now been built 
upon shifting sands should henceforth be founded on rock.    Its preoccupation is to 
transform.     But  to  transform  is  to  act,  and  to  act  will  be,   tomorrow,  to  kill,  and  it 
still does not know whether murder is legitimate.    Rebellion engenders exactly the 
  7  

actions it is asked to legitimate.    Therefore it is absolutely necessary that rebellion 
find its reasons within itself, since it cannot find them  elsewhere.    It must consent 
to examine itself in order to learn how to act.  
  Two  centuries  of  rebellion,  either  metaphysical  or  historical,  present  themselves 
for  our  consideration.     Only  a  historian  could  undertake  to  set  forth  in  detail  the 
doctrines and  movements that have followed one another during this period.    But at 
least it should be possible to find a guiding principle.    The pages that follow only 
attempt   to   present   certain   historical   data   and   a   working   hypothesis.      This 
hypothesis  is  not  the  only   one  possible;  moreover,  it  is  far  from  explaining 
everything.    But it partly explains the direction in which our times are heading and 
almost entirely explains the excesses of the age.    The astonish history evoked here 
is the history of European pride.  
          In  any  event,  the  reasons  for  rebellion  cannot  be  explained  except  in  terms  of 
an inquiry into its attitudes, pretensions, and conquests.    Perhaps we may discover 
it its achievements the rule of action that the absurd has not been able to give us; an 
indication,  at  least,  about  the  right  or  the  duty  to  kill  and,  finally,  hope  for  new 
creation.    Man is the only creature who refuses to be what he is.    The problem is to 
know whether this refusal can only lead to the destruction of himself and of others, 
w hether all rebellion must end in the justification of universal murder, or whether, 
on  the  contrary,  without  laying  claim  to  an  innocence  that  is  impossible,  it  can 
discover the principle of reasonable culpability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  8  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Part One  
 
The  Rebel  
 
   
         What  is  a  rebel?     A  man  who  says  no,  but  whose  refusal  does  not  imply  a 
renunciation.    He is also a man who says yes, from the moment he makes his first 
gesture of rebellion.    A slave who has taken orders all his life suddenly decides that 
he cannot obey some new command.    What does he mean by saying “no”?  
         He means, for example, that “this has been going on too long,” “up to this point 
yes,  beyond  it  no,”  “you  are  going  too  far,”  or,  again,  “there  is  a  limit  beyond 
which  you  shall  not   go.”     In  other  words,  his  no  affirms  the  existence  of  a 
borderline.     The  same  concept  is  to  be  found  in  the  rebel’s  feeling  that  the  other 
person “is exaggerating,” that he is exerting his authority beyond a limit where he 
begins  to  infringe  on  the  rights   of  others.     Thus  the  movement  of  rebellion  is 
founded   simultaneously   on   the   categorical   rejection   of   an   intrusion   that   is 
considered  intolerable  and  on  the  confused  conviction  of  an  absolute  right  which, 
in the rebel’s mind, is more precisely the impressi on that he “has the right to ...”    
Rebellion  cannot  exist  without  the  feeling  that,  somewhere  and  somehow,  one  is 
right.     It  is  in  this  way  that  the  rebel  slave  says  yes  and  no  simultaneously.     He 
affirms that there are limits and also that he suspects  –  and  wishes to preserve  –  the 
existence  of  certain  things  on  this  side  of  the  borderline.     He  demonstrates,  with 
obstinacy, that there is something in him which “is worthwhile ...” and which must 
be  taken  into  consideration.     In  a  certain  way,  he  confronts  an  or der  of  things 
which  oppresses  him  with  the  insistence  on  a  kind  of  right  not  to  be  oppressed 
beyond the limit that he can tolerate.  
         In every act of rebellion, the rebellion simultaneously experiences a feeling of 
revulsion at the infringement of his  rights and a complete and spontaneous loyalty 
to  certain  aspects  of  himself.     Thus  he  implicitly  brings  into  play  a  standard  of 
values so far from being gratuitous that he is prepared to support it no matter what 
he risks.    Up to this point he has at leas t remained silent and has abandoned himself 
to the form of despair in which a condition is accepted even though it is considered 
unjust.     To  remain  silent  is  to  give  the  impression  that  one  has  no  opinions,  that 
one  wants  nothing,  and  in  certain  cases  it  r eally  amounts  to  wanting  nothing.    
Despair, like the absurd, has opinions and desires about everything in general and 
  9  

nothing  in  particular.     Silence  expresses  this  attitude  very  well.     But  from  the 
moment that the rebel finds his voice  –  even though he sa ys nothing but “no”  –  he 
begins  to  desire  and  to  judge.     The  rebel,  in  the  etymological  sense,  does  a 
complete  turnabout.     He  acted  under  the  lash  of  his  master’s  whip.     Suddenly  he 
turns and faces him.    He opposes what is preferable to what is not.    Not e very value 
entails rebellion, but every act of rebellion tacitly invokes a value.    Or is it really a 
question of values?  
         Awareness,  no  matter  how  confused  it  may  be,  develops  from  every  act  of 
rebellion:  the  sudden,  dazzling  perception  that  there  is   something  in  man  with 
which  he  can  identify  himself,  even  if  only  for  a  moment.     Up  to  now  this 
identification was never really experienced.    Before he rebelled, the slave accepted 
all the demands made upon him.    Very often he even took orders, without re acting 
against them, which were far more conducive to insurrection than the one at which 
he balks.    He accepted them patiently, though he may have protested inwardly, but 
in that he remained silent he was more concerned with his own immediate interests 
tha n as yet aware of his own rights.    But with loss of patience  –  with impatience  -  a 
reaction  begins  which  can  extend  to  everything  that  he  previously  accepted,  and 
which is almost always retroactive.    The very moment the slave refuses to obey the 
humiliatin g  orders  of  his  master,  he  simultaneously  rejects  the  condition  of 
slavery.     The  act  of  rebellion  carries  him  far  beyond  the  point  he  had  reached  by 
simply refusing.    He exceeds the bounds that he fixed for his antagonist, and now 
demands to be treated as  an equal.    What was at first the man’s obstinate resistance 
now  becomes  the  whole  man,  who  is  identified  with  and  summed  up  in  this 
resistance.    The part of himself that he wanted to be respected he proceeds to place 
above everything else and proclaims it  preferable to everything, even to life itself.    
It  becomes  for  him  the  supreme  good.     Having  up  to  now  been  willing  to 
compromise,  the  slave  suddenly  adopts  (“because  this  is  how  it  must  be  ...”)  an 
attitude of All or Nothing.    With rebellion, awareness is b orn.  
         But we can see that the knowledge gained is, at the same time, of an “all” that 
is still rather obscure and of a “nothing” that proclaims the possibility of sacrificing 
the  rebel  to  this  “All”.     The  rebel  himself  wants  to  be  “all”  –   to  identify   himself 
completely  with  this  good  of  which  he  has  suddenly  become  aware  and  by  which 
he  wants  to  be  personally  recognized  and  acknowledged  –   or  “nothing”;  in  other 
words,  to  be  completely  destroyed  by  the  force  that  dominates  him.     As  a  last 
resort,  he  is   willing  to  accept  the  final  defeat,  which  is  death,  rather  than  be 
deprived  of  the  personal  sacrament  that  he  would  call,  for  example,  freedom.    
Better to die on one’s feet than to live on one’s knees.  
         Values,  according  to  good  authorities,  “most  o ften  represent  a  transition  from 
fats  to  rights,  from  what  is  desired  to  what  is  desirable  (usually  through  the 
intermediary  of  what  is  generally  considered  desirable).  [Lalande:  Vocabulaire 
  10  

philosophique .]    The transition from facts to rights is manifest,  as we have seen, in 
rebellion.     So  is  the  transition  from  “this  must  be”  to  “this  is  how  I  should  like 
things  to  be,”  and  even  more  so,  perhaps,  the  idea  of  the  sublimation  of  the 
individual  in  a  henceforth  universal  good.     The  sudden  appearance  of  the  co ncept 
of  “All  or  Nothing”  demonstrates  that  rebellion,  contrary  to  current  opinion,  and 
though  it  springs  from  everything  that  is  most  strictly  individualistic  in  man, 
questions  the  very  idea  of  the  individual.     If  the  individual,  in  fact,  accepts  death 
an d  happens  to  die  as  a  consequence  of  his  act  of  rebellion,  he  demonstrates  by 
doing  so  that  he  is  willing  to  sacrifice  himself  for  the  sake  of  a  common  good 
which he considers more important than his own destiny.    If he prefers the risk of 
death to the neg ation of the rights that he defends, it is because he considers these 
rights  more  important  than  himself.     Therefore  he  is  acting  in  the  name  of  certain 
values which are still indeterminate but which he feels are common to himself and 
to  all  men.     We  see  t hat  the  affirmation  implicit  in  every  act  of  rebellion  is 
extended  to  something  that  transcends  the  individual  insofar  as  it  withdraws  him 
from his supposed solitude and provides him with a reason to act.    But it is already 
worth  noting  that  this  concept  o f  values  as  pre - existent  to  any  kind  of  action 
contradicts the purely historical philosophies, in which values are acquired (if they 
are ever acquired) after the action has been completed.    Analysis of rebellion least 
at least to the suspicion that, contra ry to the postulates of contemporary thought, a 
human  nature  does  exist,  as  the  Greeks  believed.     Why  rebel  if  there  is  nothing 
permanent in oneself worth preserving?    It is for the sake of everyone in the world 
that the slave asserts himself when he comes  to the conclusion that a command has 
infringed  on  something  in  him  which  does  not  belong  to  him  alone,  but  which  is 
common  ground  where  all  men  –   even  the  man  who  insults  and  oppresses  him  –  
have  a  natural  community.  [The  community  of  victims  is  the  same  as  that  which 
unites victim and executioner.    But the executioner does not know this.]  
         Two  observations  will  support  this  argument.     First,  we  can  see  that  an  act  of 
rebellion  is  not,  essentially,  an  egoistic  act.     Of  course,  it  can  have  egoistic 
mo tives.     But  one  can  rebel  equally  well  against  lies  as  against  oppression.    
Moreover, the rebel  –  once he has accepted the motives and at the moment of his 
greatest  impetus  –   preserves  nothing  in  that  he  risks  everything.     He  demands 
respect  for  himself,  o f  course,  but  only  insofar  as  he  identifies  himself  with  a 
natural community.  
         Then  we  note  that  rebellion  does  not  arise  only,  and  necessarily,  among  the 
oppressed,  but  that  it  can  also  be  caused  by  the  mere  spectacle  of  oppression  of 
which someone  else is the victim.    In such cases there is a feeling of identification 
with  another  individual.     And  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  this  is  not  a  question  of 
psychological identification  –  a mere subterfuge by which the individual imagines 
that it is himself  who has been offended.    On the contrary, it can often happen that 
  11  

we  cannot  bear  to  see  offences  done  to  others  which  we  ourselves  have  accepted 
without  rebelling.     The  suicides  of  the  Russian  terrorists  in  Siberia   as  a  protest 
aga inst their comrades’ being whipped is a case in point.    Not is it a question of the 
feeling  of  a  community  of  interests.     Injustices  done  to  men  whom  we  consider 
enemies can, actually, be profoundly repugnant to us.    There is only identification 
of one’s d estiny what that of others and a choice of sides.    Therefore the individual 
is  not,  in  himself  alone,  the  embodiment  of  the  values  he  wishes  to  defend.     It 
needs  all  humanity,  at  least,  to  comprise  them.     When  he  rebels,  a  man  identifies 
himself  with  other   men  and  so  surpasses  himself,  and  from  this  point  of  view 
human  solidarity  is  metaphysical.     But  for  the  moment  we  are  only  talking  of  the 
kind of solidarity that is born in chains.  
   
         It would be possible for us to define the positive aspects of th e values implicit 
in  every  act  of  rebellion  by  comparing  them  with  a  completely  negative  concept 
like that of resentment as defined by Scheler.    Rebellion is, in fact, much more than 
pursuit  of  a  claim,  in  the  strongest  sense  of  the  word.     Resentment  is  ve ry  well 
defined by Scheler as an autointoxication  –  the evil secretion, in a sealed vessel, of 
prolonged  impotence.     Rebellion,  on  the  contrary,  breaks  the  seal  and  allows  the 
whole  being  to  come  into  play.     It  liberates  stagnant  waters  and  turns  them  into   a 
raging  torrent.     Scheler  himself  emphasizes  the  passive  aspect  of  resentment  and 
remarks  on  the  prominent  place  it  occupies  in  the  psychology  of  women  who  are 
dedicated to desire and possession.    The fountainhead of rebellion, on the contrary, 
is  the  pr inciple  of  superabundant  activity  and  energy.     Scheler  is  also  right  in 
saying  that  resentment  is  always  highly  coloured  by  envy.     But  one  envies  what 
one  does  not  have,  while  the  rebel’s  aim  is  to  defend  what  he  is.     He  does  not 
merely claim some good tha t he does not possess or of which he was deprived.    His 
aim is to claim recognition for something which he has and which has already been 
recognized by him, in almost every case, as more important than anything of which 
he  could  be  envious.     Rebellion  is  n ot  realistic.     According  to  Scheler,  resentment 
always turns into either unscrupulous ambition or bitterness, depending on whether 
it is implanted in a strong person or a weak one.    But in both cases it is a question 
of  wanting  to  be  something  other  than  w hat  one  is.     Resentment  is  always 
resentment  against  oneself.     The  rebel,  on  the  contrary,  from  his  very  first  step, 
refuses to allow anyone to touch what he is.    He is fighting for the integrity of one 
part of his being.    He does not try, primarily, to co nquer, but simply to impose.  
         Finally,  it  would  seem  that  resentment  takes  delight,  in  advance,  in  the  pain 
that it would like the object of its envy to feel.    Nietzsche and Scheler are right in 
seeing  an  excellent  example  of  this  in  the  passage  wher e  Tertullian  informs  his 
readers that one of the greatest sources of happiness among the blessed will be the 
spectacle  of  the  Roman  emperors  consumed  in  the  fires  of  hell.     This  kind  of 
  12  

happiness  is  also  experienced  by  the  decent  people  who  go  to  watch  exe cutions.    
The rebel, on the contrary, limits himself, as a matter of principle, to refusing to be 
humiliated  without  asking  that  others  should  be.     He  will  even  accept  pain 
provided his integrity is respected.  
         It is therefore hard to understand why  Scheler completely identifies the spirit of 
rebellion   with   resentment.      His   criticism   of   the   resentment   to   be   found   in 
humanitarianism  (which  he  treats  as  the  non - Christian  form  of  love  for  mankind) 
could perhaps be applied to certain indeterminate forms o f humanitarian idealism, 
or  to  the  techniques  of  terror.     But  it  rings  false  in  relation  to  man’s  rebellion 
against his condition  –  the movement that enlists the individual in the defence of a 
dignity  common  to  all  men.     Scheler  wants  to  demonstrate  that  h umanitarian 
feelings  are  always  accompanied  by  a  hatred  of  the  world.     Humanity  is  loved  in 
general  in  order  to  avoid  having  to  love  anybody  in  particular.     This  is  correct,  in 
some  cases,  and  it  is  easier  to  understand  Scheler  when  we  realize  that  for  him  
humanitarianism  is  represented  by  Bentham  and  Rousseau.     But  man’s  love  for 
man  can  be  born  of  other  things  than  a  mathematical  calculation  of  the  resultant 
rewards or a theoretical confidence in human nature.    In face of the utilitarians, and 
of  Émile’s  preceptor,  there  is,  for  example,  the  kind  of  logic,  embodied  by 
Dostoievsky  in  Ivan  Karamazov,  which  progresses  from  an  act  of  rebellion  to 
metaphysical insurrection.    Scheler is aware of this and sums up the concept in the 
following  manner:  “There  is  not   enough  love  in  the  world  to  squander  it  on 
anything  but  human  beings.”     Even  if  this  proposition  were  true,  the  appalling 
despair   that   it   implies   would   merit   anything   but   contempt.    In   fact,   it 
misunderstands the tortured character of Karamazov’s rebellio n.    Ivan’s drama, on 
the  contrary,  arises  from  the  fact  that  there  is  too  much  love  without  an  object.    
This love finding no outlet and God being denied, it is then decided to lavish it on 
human beings as a generous act of complicity.  
         Nevertheless,  in  the  act  of  rebellion  as  we  have  envisaged  it  up  to  now,  an 
abstract  ideal  is  not  chosen  through  lack  of  feeling  and  in  pursuit  of  a  sterile 
demand.     We  insist  that  the  part  of  man  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  mere  ideas 
should be taken into consideration  –  the passionate side of his nature that serves no 
other purpose than to be part of the act of living.    Does this imply that no rebellion 
is  motivated  by  resentment?     No,  and  we  know  it  only  too  well  in  this  age  of 
malice.     But  we  must  consider  the  idea  of   rebellion  in  its  widest  sense  on  pain  of 
betraying  it;  and  in  its  widest  sense  rebellion  goes  far  beyond  resentment.     When 
Heathcliff, in  Wuthering   Heights , says that he puts his love above God and would 
willingly  go  to  hell  in  order  to  be   reunited  with  the  woman  he  loves,  he  is 
prompted not only by youth and humiliation, but by the consuming experience of a 
whole lifetime.    The same emotion causes Eckhart, in a surprising fit of heresy, to 
say that he prefers hell with Jesus to heaven with out Him.    This is the very essence 
  13  

of  love.     Contrary  to  Scheler,  it  would  therefore  be  impossible  to  overemphasize 
the  passionate  affirmation  that  underlies  the  act  of  rebellion  and  distinguishes  it 
from  resentment.     Rebellion,  though  apparently  negative,   since  it  creates  nothing, 
is  profoundly  positive  in  that  it  reveals  the  part  of  man  which  must  always  be 
defended.  
          
         But,  to  sum  up,  are  not  rebellion  and  the  values  that  it  implies  relative?    
Reasons for rebellion do seem to change, in fact,  with periods and civilizations.    It 
is obvious that a Hindu pariah, an Inca warrior, a primitive native of central  Africa, 
and  a  member  of  one  of  the  first  Christian  communities  had  not  at  all  the  same 
ideas  about  rebellion.     We  co uld  even  assert,  with  considerable  assurance  that  the 
idea  of  rebellion  has  no  meaning  in  these  particular  cases.     However,  a  Greek 
slave,  a  serf,  a  condottiere   of  the  Renaissance,  a  Parisian  bourgeois  during  the 
Regency,  a  Russina  intellectual  at  the  begi nning  of  the  twentieth  century,  and  a 
contemporary worker would undoubtedly agree that rebellion is legitimate, even if 
they  differed  about  the  reasons  for  it.     In  other  words,  the  problem  of  rebellion 
seems to assume a precise meaning only within the conf ines of Western thought.    It 
is  possible  to  be  even  more  explicit  by  remarking,  like  Scheler,  that  the  spirit  of 
rebellion  finds  few  means  of  expression  in  societies  where  inequalities  are  very 
great  (the  Hindu  caste  system)  or,  again,  in  those  where  there   is  absolute  equality 
(certain  primitive  societies).     The  spirit  of  rebellion  can  exist  only  in  a  society 
where  a  theoretical  equality  conceals  great  factual  inequalities.     The  problem  of 
rebellion, therefore, has no meaning except within our own Western s ociety.    One 
might be tempted to affirm that it is relative to the development of individualism if 
the preceding remarks had not put us on our guard against this conclusion.  
         On  the  basis  of  the  evidence,  the  only  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  from 
Sc heler’s  remark  is  that,  thanks  to  the  theory  of  political  freedom,  there  is,  in  the 
very heart of our society, an increasing awareness in man of the idea of man and, 
thanks    to    the    application    of    this    theory    of    freedom,    a    corresponding 
dissatisfaction.      Act ual   freedom   has   not   increased   in   proportion   to   man’s 
awareness of it.    We can only deduce from this observation that rebellion is the act 
of  an  educated  man  who  is  aware  of  his  own  rights.     But  there  is  nothing  which 
justifies us in saying that it is only  a question of individual rights.    Because of the 
sense of solidarity we have already pointed out, it would rather seem that what is at 
stake is humanity’s gradually increasing self - awareness as it pursues its course.    In 
fact, for the Inca and the pariah t he problem never arises, because for them it had 
been  solved  by  a  tradition,  even  before  they  had  had  time  to  raise  it  –   the  answer 
being  that  tradition  is  sacred.     If  in  a  world  where  things  are  held  sacred  the 
problem of rebellion does not arise, it is b ecause no real problems are to be found 
in such a world, all the answers having been given simultaneously.    Metaphysics is 
  14  

replaced  by  myth.     There  are  no  more  questions,  only  eternal  answers  and 
commentaries,  which  may  be  metaphysical.     But  before  man  acc epts  the  sacred 
world and in order that he should be able to accept it  –  or before he escapes from it 
–  there is always a period of soul - searching and rebellion.    The rebel is a man who 
is on the point of accepting or rejecting the sacred and determined on  laying claim 
to  a  human  situation  in  which  all  the  answers  are  human  –   in  other  words, 
formulated in reasonable terms.    From this moment every question, every word, is 
an  act  of  rebellion  while  in  the  sacred  world  every  word  is  an  act  of  grace.    It 
would  be possible to demonstrate in this manner that only two possible worlds can 
exist for the human mind: the sacred (or, to speak in Christian terms, the world of 
grace  [There  is,  of  course,  an  act  of  metaphysical  rebellion  at  the  beginning  of 
Christianity, b ut the resurrection of Christ and the annunciation of the kingdom of 
heaven interpreted as a promise of eternal life are the answers that render it futile.]) 
and  the  world  of  rebellion.     The  disappearance  of  one  is  equivalent  to  the 
appearance  of  the  other ,  despite  the  fact  that  this  appearance  can  take  place  in 
disconcerting  forms.     There  again  we  rediscover  the  All  or  Nothing .     The  present 
interest of the problem of rebellion only springs from the fact that nowadays whole 
societies have wanted to discard  the sacred.    We live in an unsacrosanct moment in 
history.     Insurrection  is  certainly  not  the  sum  total  of  human  experience.     But 
history today, with all its storm and strife, compels us to say that rebellion is one of 
the  essential  dimensions  of  man.     It  is  our  historic  reality.     Unless  we  choose  to 
ignore reality, we must find our values in it.    Is it possible to find a rule of conduct 
outside the realm of religion and its absolute values?    That is the question raised by 
the rebellion.  
   
         We  have  al ready  noted  the  confused  values  that  are  called  into  play  by 
incipient  rebellion.     Now  we  must  inquire  if  these  values  are  to  be  found  again  in 
contemporary  forms  of  rebellious  thought  and  action,  and  if  they  are,  we  must 
specify  their  content.     But,  befor e  going  any  farther,  let  us  note  that  the  basis  of 
these  values  is  rebellion  itself.     Man’s  solidarity  is  founded  upon  rebellion,  and 
rebellion, in its turn, can only find its justification in this solidarity.    We have, then, 
the  right  to  say  that  any  rebe llion  which  claims  the  right  to  deny  or  destroy  this 
solidarity  loses  simultaneously  its  right  to  be  called  rebellion  and  becomes  in 
reality an acquiescence in murder.    In the same way, this solidarity, except insofar 
as  religion  is  concerned,  comes  to  lif e  only  on  the  level  of  rebellion.     And  so  the 
real  drama  of  revolutionary  thought  is  announced.     In  order  to  exist,  man  must 
rebel,  but  rebellion  must  respect  the  limit  it  discovers  in  itself  –   a  limit  where 
minds  meet  and,  in  meeting,  begin  to  exist.    Reb ellious  thought,  therefore,  cannot 
dispense with memory: it is a perpetual state of tension.    In studying its actions and 
its  results,  we  shall  have  to  say,  each  time,  whether  it  remains  faithful  to  its  first 
  15  

noble  promise  or  if,  through  indolence  or  folly ,  it  forgets  its  original  purpose  and 
plunges into a mire of tyranny or servitude.  
         Meanwhile,  we  can  sum  up  the  initial  progress  that  the  spirit  of  rebellion 
provokes  in  a  mind  that  is  originally  imbued  with  the  absurdity  and  apparent 
sterility of t he world.    In absurdist experience, suffering is individual.    But from the 
moment  when  a  movement  of  rebellion  begins,  suffering  is  seen  as  a  collective 
experience.     Therefore  the  first  progressive  step  for  a  mind  overwhelmed  by  the 
strangeness of things i s to realize that this feeling of strangeness is shared with all 
men  and  that  human  reality,  in  its  entirety,  suffers  from  the  distance  which 
separates it from the rest of the universe.    The malady experienced by a single man 
becomes a mass plague.    In our  daily trials rebellion plays the same role as does the 
“ cogito”  in the realm of thought: it is the first piece of evidence.    But this evidence 
lures the individual from his solitude.    It founds its first value on the whole human 
race.    I rebel  –  therefore  we exist.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part Two    
Metaphysical Rebellion  
 
     Metaphysical  rebellion  is  the  movement  by  which  man  protests  against  his 
condition  and  against  the  whole  of  creation.     It  is  metaphysical  because  it 
contests  the  ends  of  man  and  of  creation.     The  s lave  protests  against  the 
condition   in   which   he   finds   himself   within   his   state   of   slavery;   the 
metaphysical rebel protests against the condition in which he finds himself as 
a  man.     The  rebel  slave  affirms  that  there  is  something  in  him  that  will  not 
toler ate  the  manner  in  which  his  master  treats  him;  the  metaphysical  rebel 
declares that he is frustrated by the universe.    For both of them, it is not only a 
question  of  pure  and  simple  negation.     In  both  cases,  in  fact,  we  find  a  value 
judgement in the name o f which the rebel refuses to approve the condition in 
which he finds himself.  
  16  

         The  slave  who  opposes  his  master  is  not  concerned,  let  us  note,  with 
repudiating his master as a human being.    He repudiates him as a master.    He 
denies that he has the ri ght to deny him, a slave, on grounds of necessity.    The 
master  is  discredited  to  the  exact  extent  that  he  fails  to  respond  to  a  demand 
which  he  ignores.     If  men  cannot  refer  to  a  common  value,  recognized  by  all 
as  existing  in  each  one,  then  man  is  incompre hensible  to  man.     The  rebel 
demands  that  this  value  should  be  clearly  recognized  in  himself  because  he 
knows or suspects that, without this principle, crime and disorder would reign 
throughout the world.    An act of rebellion on his part seems like a demand  for 
clarity  and  unity.     The  most  elementary  form  of  rebellion,  paradoxically, 
expresses an aspiration to order.  
         This description can be applied, word for word, to the metaphysical rebel.    He 
attacks  a  shattered  world  in  order  to  demand  unity  from  i t.     He  opposes  the 
principle of justice which he finds in himself to the principle of injustice which he 
sees  being  applied  in  the  world.     Thus  all  he  wants,  originally,  is  to  resolve  this 
contradiction and establish the unitarian reign of justice, if he c an, or of injustice, if 
he   is   driven   to   extremes.      Meanwhile,   he   denounces   the   contradiction.    
Metaphysical  rebellion  is  a  claim,  motivated  by  the  concept  of  a  complete  unity, 
against  the  suffering  of  life  and  death  and  a  protest  against  the  human  conditio n 
both for its incompleteness, thanks to death, and its wastefulness, thanks to evil.    If 
a mass death sentence defines the human condition, then rebellion, in one sense, is 
its contemporary.    At the same time that he rejects his mortality, the rebel refus es 
to   recognize   the   power   that   compels   him   to   live   in   this   condition.      The 
metaphysical  rebel  is  therefore  not  definitely  an  atheist,  as  one  might  think  him, 
but  he  is  inevitably  a  blasphemer.     Quite  simply,  he  blasphemes  primarily  in  the 
name of order, de nouncing God as the father of death and as the supreme outrage.  
         The rebel slave will help us to throw light on this point.    He established, by his 
protest, the existence of the master against whom he rebelled.    But at the same time 
he demonstrated t hat his master’s power was dependent on his own subordination 
and   he   affirmed   his   own   power:   the   power   of   continually   questioning   the 
superiority  of  his  master.     In  this  respect  master  and  slave  are  really  in  the  same 
boat:  the  temporary  sway  of  the  former   is  as  relative  as  the  submission  of  the 
latter.     The  two  forces  assert  themselves  alternately  at  the  moment  of  rebellion 
until  they  confront  each  other  for  a  fight  to  the  death,  and  one  or  the  other 
temporarily disappears.  
         In  the  same  way,  if  the  m etaphysical  rebel  ranges  himself  against  a  power 
whose  existence  he  simultaneously  affirms,  he  only  admits  the  existence  of  this 
power  at  the  very  instant  that  he  calls  it  into  question.     Then  he  involves  this 
supreme  being  in  the  same  humiliating  adventur e  as  mankind’s,  its  ineffectual 
power  being  the  equivalent  of  our  ineffectual  condition.     He  subjects  it  to  our 
  17  

power  of  refusal,  bends  it  to  the  unbending  part  of  human  nature,  forcibly 
integrates  it  into  an  existence  that  we  render  absurd,  and  finally  dr ags  it  from  its 
refuge outside time and involves it in history, very far from the eternal stability that 
it  can  find  only  in  the  unanimous  submission  of  all  men.     Thus  rebellion  affirms 
that, on its own level, any concept of superior existence is contradic tory, to say the 
least.  
         And  so  the  history  of  metaphysical  rebellion  cannot  be  confused  with  that  of 
atheism.     From  a  certain  point  of  view  it  is  even  confused  with  the  contemporary 
history of religious sentiment.    The rebel defies more than he deni es.    Originally, at 
least, he does not suppress God; he merely talks to Him as an equal.    But it is not a 
polite  dialogue.     It  is  a  polemic  animated  by  the  desire  to  conquer.     The  slave 
begins  by  demanding  justice  and  ends  by  wanting  to  wear  a  crown.     He  m ust 
dominate in his turn.    His insurrection against his condition becomes an unlimited 
campaign against the heavens for the purpose of bringing back a captive king who 
will  first  be  dethroned  and  finally  condemned  to  death.     Human  rebellion  ends  in 
metaphy sical revolution.    It progresses from appearances to acts, from the dandy to 
the revolutionary.    When the throne of God is overturned, the rebel realizes that it 
is now his own responsibility to create the justice, order, and unity that he sought 
in vain w ithin his own condition, and in this way to justify the fall of God.    Then 
begins the desperate effort to create, at the price of crime and murder if necessary, 
the dominion of man.    This will not come about without terrible consequences, of 
which  we  are  s o  far  only  aware  of  a  few.     But  these  consequences  are  in  no  way 
due to rebellion itself, or at least they only occur to the extent that the rebel forgets 
his  original  purpose,  tires  of  the  tremendous  tension  created  by  refusing  to  give  a 
positive or negat ive answer, and finally abandons himself to complete negation or 
total  submission.     Metaphysical  insurrection,  in  its  first  stages,  offers  us  the  same 
positive  content  as  the  slave’s  rebellion.     Our  task  will  be  to  examine  what 
becomes  of  this  positive  con tent  of  rebellion  in  the  actions  that  claim  to  originate 
from it and to explain where the fidelity or infidelity of the rebel to the origins of 
his revolt finally leads him.  
          
   
   
The Sons of Cain  
   
*  
   
         Metaphysical  rebellion,  in  the  real  sens e  of  the  term,  does  not  appear,  in 
coherent form, in the history of ideas until the end of the eighteenth century  –  
  18  

when  modern  times  begin  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  crash  of  falling 
ramparts.     But  from  then  on,  its  consequences  develop  uninterruptedly  a nd  it 
is no exaggeration to say that they have shaped the history of our times.    Does 
this  mean  that  metaphysical  rebellion  had  no  significance  previous  to  this 
date?    In any event, its origins must belong to the remote past, in that we like 
to  believe  tha t  we  live  in  Promethean  times.     But  is  this  really  a  Promethean 
age?  
         The  first  mythologies  describe  Prometheus  as  an  eternal  martyr,  chained  to  a 
pillar,  at  the  ends  of  the  earth,  condemned  forever  because  he  refuses  to  ask 
forgiveness.     Æschylus  ad ds  still  further  to  his  stature,  endows  him  with  lucidity 
(“no misfortune can fall upon me that I have not myself already foreseen”), makes 
him  cry  out  his  hatred  of  all  the  gods,  and,  plunging  him  into  “a  stormy  sea  of 
mortal  despair,”  finally  abandons  hi m  to  thunder  and  lightning:  “Ah!  see  the 
injustice I endure!”  
         It  cannot  be  said,  therefore,  that  the  ancients  were  unaware  of  metaphysical 
rebellion.     Long  before  Satan,  they  created  a  touching  and  noble  image  of  the 
Rebel  and  gave  us  the  most  perfe ct  myth  of  the  intelligence  in  revolt.     The 
inexhaustible genius of the Greeks, which gave such a prominent place to myths of 
unity  and  simplicity,  was  still  able  to  formulate  the  concept  of  insurrection.    
Beyond a doubt, certain characteristics of the Pro methean myth still survive in the 
history  of  rebellion  as  we  are  living  it:  the  fight  against  death     (“I  have  delivered 
men  from  being  obsessed  by  death”),  Messianism  (“I  have  instilled  blind  hopes 
into  men’s  minds”),  philanthropy  (“Enemy  of  Zeus  ...  for  hav ing  loved  mankind 
too much”).  
         But  we  must  not  forget  that  Prometheus  the  Firebringer ,  the  last  drama  of 
Æschylus’  trilogy,  proclaimed  the  reign  of  the  pardoned  rebel.     The  Greeks  are 
never vindictive.    In their most audacious flights they always rem ain faithful to the 
idea  of  moderation,  a  concept  they  deified.     Their  rebel  does  not  range  himself 
against  all  creation,  but  against  Zeus,  who  is  never  anything  more  than  one  god 
among many and who himself was mortal.    Prometheus himself is a demigod.    It  is 
a question of settling a particular account, of a dispute about what is good, and not 
of a universal struggle between good and evil.  
         The  ancients,  even  though  they  believed  in  destiny,  believed  primarily  in 
nature,   in   which   they   participated   who leheartedly.      To   rebel   against   nature 
amounted  to  rebelling  against  oneself.     It  was  butting  one’s  head  against  a  wall.    
Therefore  the  only  coherent  act  of  rebellion  was  to  commit  suicide.     Destiny,  for 
the Greeks, was a blind force to which one submitted,  just as one submitted to the 
forces  of  nature.     The  acme  of  excess  to  the  Greek  mind  was  to  beat  the  sea  with 
rods  –   an  act  of  insanity  worthy  only  of  barbarians.     Of  course,  the  Greeks 
described excess, since it exists, but they gave it its proper place  and, by doing so, 
  19  

also  defined  its  limits.     Achilles’  defiance  after  the  death  of  Patroclus,  the 
imprecations  of  the  Greek  tragic  heroes  cursing  their  fate,  do  not  imply  complete 
condemnation.     Œdipus  knows  that  he  is  not  innocent.     He  is  guilty  in  spite  o f 
himself; he is also part of destiny.    He complains, but he says nothing irreparable.    
Antigone rebels, but she does so in the name of tradition, in order that her brothers 
may  find  rest  in  the  tomb  and  that  the  appropriate  rites  may  be  observed.     In  her 
case, rebellion is, in one sense, reactionary.    The Greek mind has two aspects and 
in  its  meditations  almost  always  re - echoes,  as  counterpoint  to  its  most  tragic 
melodies,  the  eternal  words  of  Œdipus,  who,  blind  and  desperate,  recognizes  that 
all  is  for  th e  best.     Affirmation  counterbalances  negation.     Even  when  Plato 
anticipates,  with  Callicles,  the  most  common  type  of  Nietzschean,  even  when  the 
latter  exclaims:  “But  when  a  man  appears  who  has  the  necessary  character  ...  he 
will  escape,  he  will  trample  on  ou r  formulas,  our  magic  spells,  our  incantations, 
and  the  laws,  which  are  all,  without  exception,  contrary  to  nature.     Our  slave  has 
rebelled  and  has  shown  himself  to  be  the  master”  –   even  then,  though  he  rejects 
law, he speaks in the name of nature.  
         Metaphysical rebellion presupposes a simplified view of creation  –  which was 
inconceivable  to  the  Greeks.     In  their  minds,  there  were  not  gods  on  one  side  and 
men on the other, but a series of stages leading from one to the other.    The idea of 
innocence op posed to guilt, the concept of all of history summed up in the struggle 
between  good  and  evil,  was  foreign  to  them.     In  their  universe  there  were  more 
mistakes than crimes, and the only definitive crime was excess.    In a world entirely 
dominated  by  history ,  which  ours  threatens  to  become,  there  are  no  longer  any 
mistakes,  but  only  crimes,  of  which  the  greatest  is  moderation.     This  explains  the 
curious  mixture  of  ferocity  and  forbearance  which  we  find  in  Greek  mythology.    
The  Greeks  never  made  the  human  mind   into  an  armed  camp,  and  in  this  respect 
we  are  inferior  to  them.     Rebellion,  after  all,  can  only  be  imagined  in  terms  of 
opposition to someone.    The only thing that gives meaning to human protest is the 
idea   of   a   personal   god   who   has   created,   and   is   there fore   responsible   for, 
everything.     And  so  we  can  say,  without  being  paradoxical,  that  in  the  Western 
World  the  history  of  rebellion  is  inseparable  from  the  history  of  Christianity.     We 
have to wait, in fact, until the very last moments of Greek thought to  see rebellion 
begin  to  find  expression  among  transitional  thinkers  –   nowhere  more  profoundly 
than in the works of Epicurus and Lucretius.  
         The appalling sadness of Epicurus already strikes a new note.    It has its roots, 
no doubt, in the fear of death , with which the Greek mind was not unfamiliar.    But 
the  pathos  with  which  this  fear  is  expressed  is  very  revealing.     “We  can  take 
precautions against all sorts of things; but so far as death is concerned, we all of us 
live like the inhabitants of a defenc eless citadel.”    Lucretius is more explicit: “The 
substance  of  this  vast  world  is  condemned  to  death  and  ruin.”     Therefore  why 
  20  

postpone enjoyment?    “We spend our lives,” writes Epicurus, “in waiting, and we 
are  all  condemned  to  die.”     Therefore  we  must  all   enjoy  ourselves.     But  what  a 
strange  form  of  enjoyment!     It  consists  in  sealing  up  the  walls  of  the  citadel,  of 
making sure of a supply of bread and water and of living in darkness and silence.    
Death  hovers  over  us,  therefore  we  must  prove  that  death  is  of  no  importance.    
Like   Epictetus   and   Marcus   Aurelius,   Epicurus   banishes   death   from   human 
existence.     “Death  has  no  meaning  for  us  for  what  is  indefinable  is  incapable  of 
feeling,  and  what  is  incapable  of  feeling  has  no  meaning  for  us.”     Is  this  the 
equiva lent of nothingness?    No, for everything in this particular universe is matter, 
and  death  only  means  a  return  to  one’s  element.     Existence  is  epitomized  in  a 
stone.    The strange sensual pleasure of which Epicurus speaks consists, above all, 
in an absence o f pain; it is the pleasure of a stone.    By an admirable manoeuvre  –  
which  we  shall  find  again  in  the  great  French  classicists  –   Epicurus,  in  order  to 
escape   from   destiny,   destroys   sensibility,   having   first   destroyed   its   primary 
manifestation:  hope.     What  t his  Greek  philosopher  says  about  the  gods  cannot  be 
interpreted otherwise.    All the unhappiness of human beings springs from the hope 
that tempts them from the silence of the citadel and exposes them on the ramparts 
in  expectation  of  salvation.     Unreasonab le  aspirations  have  no  other  effect  than  to 
reopen carefully bandaged wounds.    That is why Epicurus does not deny the gods; 
he  banishes  them,  and  so  precipitately  that  man  has  no  alternative  but  to  retreat 
once more into the citadel. “The happy and immorta l being has no preoccupations 
of his own and no concern with the affairs of others.”    Lucretius goes even farther: 
“It  is  incontestable  that  the  gods,  by  their  very  nature,  enjoy  their  immortality  in 
perfect  peace,  completely  unaware  of  our  affairs,  from  w hich  they  are  utterly 
detached.”     Therefore  let  us  forget  the  gods,  let  us  never  even  think  about  them, 
and  “neither  your  thoughts  during  the  day  nor  your  dreams  at  night  will  be 
troubled.”  
         Later  we  shall  rediscover  this  eternal  theme  of  rebellion,  but  with  important 
modifications.    A god who does not reward or punish, a god who turns a deaf ear, 
is the rebel’s only religious conception.    But while Vigny will curse the silence of 
his  divinity,  Epicurus  considers  that,  as  death  is  inevitable,  silence  on  the  part  of 
man  is  a  better  preparation  for  this  fate  than  divine  words.     This  strange  mind 
wears itself out in a sustained attempt to build ramparts around mankind, to fortify 
the  citadel  to  stifle  the  irrepressible  cry  of  human  hope.     Only  when  this  s trategic 
retreat has been accomplished does Epicurus, like a god among men, celebrate his 
victory  with  a  song  that  clearly  denotes  the  defensive  aspect  of  his  rebellion.     “I 
have escaped your ambush, O destiny, I have closed all paths by which you might 
as sail  me.     We  shall  not  be  conquered  either  by  you  or  by  any  other  evil  power.    
And when the inevitable hour of departure strikes, our scorn for those who vainly 
cling  to  existence  will  burst  forth  in  this  proud  song:  ‘Ah,  with  what  dignity  we 
  21  

have lived.’”  
         Alone among his contemporaries Lucretius carries this logic much farther and 
finally  brings  it  to  the  central  problem  of  modern  philosophy.     He  adds  nothing 
fundamental to Epicurus.    He, too, refuses to accept any explanatory principle that 
cannot  be tested by the senses.    The atom is only a last refuge where man, reduced 
to  his  primary  elements,  pursues  a  kind  of  blind  and  deaf  immortality  –   an 
immortal  death  –   which  for  Lucretius  represents,  as  it  does  for  Epicurus,  the  only 
possible form of happi ness.    He has to admit, however, that atoms do not aggregate 
of  their  own  accord  and  rather  than  believe  in  a  superior  law  and,  finally,  in  the 
destiny he wishes to deny, he accepts the concept of a purely fortuitous mutation, 
the clinamen, in which the at oms meet and group themselves together.    Already, as 
we can see, the great problem of modern times arises: the discovery that to rescue 
man from destiny is to deliver him to chance.    That is why the contemporary mind 
is  trying  so  desperately  hard  to  restor e  destiny  to  man  –   a  historical  destiny  this 
time.     Lucretius  has  not  reached  this  point.     His  hatred  of  destiny  and  death  is 
assuaged by this blind universe where atoms accidentally form human beings and 
where  human  beings  accidentally  return  to  atoms.    B ut  his  vocabulary  bears 
witness to a new kind of sensibility.    The walled citadel becomes an armed camp.    
Mænia  mundi ,  the  ramparts  of  the  world,  is  one  of  the  key  expressions  of 
Lucretius’  rhetoric.     The  main  preoccupation  in  this  armed  camp  is,  of  course ,  to 
silence   hope.      But   Epicurus’   methodical   renunciation   is   transformed   into   a 
quivering  asceticism,  which  is  sometimes  crowned  with  execrations.     Piety,  for 
Lucretius,  undoubtedly  consists  in  “being  able  to  contemplate  everything  with  an 
untroubled mind. ”    But, nevertheless, his mind reels at the injustices done to man.    
Spurred   on   by   indignation,   he   weaves   new   concepts   of   crime,   innocence, 
culpability,  and  punishment  into  his  great  poem  on  the  nature  of  things.     In  it  he 
speaks  of  “religion’s  first  crime ,”  Iphigenia’s  martyred  innocence,  and  of  the 
tendency  of  the  divinity  to  “often  ignore  the  guilty  and  to  mete  out  undeserved 
punishment  by  slaughtering  the  innocent.”     If  Lucretius  scoffs  at  the  fear  of 
punishment  in  the  next  world,  it  is  not  as  a  gesture   of  defensive  rebellion  in  the 
manner of Epicurus, but as a process of aggressive reasoning: why should evil be 
punished when we can easily see, here on earth, that goodness is not rewarded?  
         In  Lucretius’  epic  poem,  Epicurus  himself  becomes  the  prou d  rebel  he  never 
actually  was.     “When  in  the  eyes  of  all  mankind  humanity  was  leading  an  abject 
existence on earth, crushed beneath the weight of a religion whose hideous aspect 
peered down from the heights of the celestial regions, the first to dare, a Gr eek, a 
man, raised his mortal eyes and challenged the gods.... In this way religion, in its 
turn,  was  overthrown  and  trampled  underfoot,  and  this  victory  elevates  us  to  the 
heavens.”     Here  we  can  sense  the  difference  between  this  new  type  of  blasphemy 
and  th e  ancient  malediction.     The  Greek  heroes  could  aspire  to  become  gods,  but 
  22  

simultaneously  with  the  gods  who  already  existed.     At  that  time  it  was  simply  a 
matter of promotion.    Lucretius’ hero, on the other hand, embarks on a revolution.    
By  repudiating  the   unworthy  and  criminal  gods,  he  takes  their  place  himself.     He 
sallies forth from the armed camp and opens the first attack on divinity in the name 
of  human  suffering.     In  the  ancient  world,  murder  is  both  inexplicable  and 
inexpiable.     Already  with  Lucreti us,  murder  by  man  is  only  an  answer  to  murder 
by  the  gods.     It  is  not  pure  coincidence  that  Lucretius’  poems  ends  with  a 
prodigious image of the sanctuaries of the gods swollen with the accusing corpses 
of plague victims.  
   
         This new language is inco mprehensible without the concept of a personal god, 
which  is  slowly  beginning  to  form  in  the  minds  of  Lucretius’  and  Epicurus’ 
contemporaries.     Only  a  personal  god  can  be  asked  by  the  rebel  for  a  personal 
accounting.     When  the  personal  god  begins  his  reign ,  rebellion  assumes  its  most 
resolutely ferocious aspect and pronounces a definitive no.    With Cain, the first act 
of  rebellion  coincides  with  the  first  crime.     The  history  of  rebellion,  as  we  are 
experiencing  it  today,  has  far  more  to  do  with  the  children   of  Cain  than  with  the 
disciples  of  Prometheus.     In  this  sense  it  is  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament  who  is 
primarily  responsible  for  mobilizing  the  forces  of  rebellion.     Inversely,  one  must 
submit to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob when, like Pascal, on e has run the 
full course of intellectual rebellion.    The mind most prone to doubt always aspires 
to the greatest degree of Jansenism.  
         From this point of view, the New Testament can be considered as an attempt to 
answer, in advance, every Cain in th e world, by painting the figure of God in softer 
colours and by creating an intercessor between God and man.    Christ came to solve 
two  major  problems,  evil  and  death,  which  are  precisely  the  problems  that 
preoccupy the rebel.    His solution consisted, first , in experiencing them.    The man -
god suffers, too  –  with patience.    Evil and death can no longer be entirely imputed 
to  Him  since  He  suffers  and  dies.     The  night  on   " Golgotha   is  so  important  in  the 
history  of  man  only  because,  in  its   shadow,  the  divinity  abandoned  its  traditional 
privileges and drank to the last drop, despair included, the agony of death.    This is 
the  explanation  of  the  Lama  sabactani   and  the  heartrending  doubt  of  Christ  in 
agony.     The  agony  would  have  been  mild  if  it   had  been  alleviated  by  hopes  of 
eternity.    For God to be a man, he must despair.  
         Gnosticism,  which  is  the  fruit  of  Greco - Christian  collaboration,  has  tried  for 
two  centuries,  in  reaction  against  Judaic  thought,  to  promote  this  concept.     We 
know,  fo r  example,  the  vast  number  of  intercessors  invented  by  Valentinus.     But 
the  æons  of  this  particular  metaphysical  skirmish  are  the  equivalent  of  the 
intermediary  truths  to  be  found  in  Hellenism.     Their  aim  is  to  diminish  the 
absurdity   of   an   intimate   relatio nship   between   suffering   humanity   and   an 
  23  

implacable  god.     This  is  the  special  role  of  Marcion’s  cruel  and  bellicose  second 
god.    This demiurge is responsible for the creation of a finite world and of death.    
Our duty is to hate him and at the same time to d eny everything that he has created, 
by  means  of  asceticism,  to  the  point  of  destroying,  by  sexual  abstinence,  all 
creation.    This form of asceticism is therefore both proud and rebellious.    Marcion 
simply  alters  the  course  of  rebellion  and  directs  it  towar d  an  inferior  god  so  as  to 
be  better  able  to  exalt  the  superior  god.     Gnosis,  owing  to  its  Greek  origins, 
remains  conciliatory  and  tends  to  destroy  the  Judaic  heritage  in  Christianity.     It 
also wanted to avoid Augustinism, by anticipating it, in that Augus tinism provides 
arguments  for  every  form  of  rebellion.     To  Basilides,  for  example,  the  martyrs 
were sinners, and so was Christ, because they suffered.    A strange conception, but 
whose aim is to remove the element of injustice from suffering.    The Gnostics  only 
wanted  to  substitute  the  Greek  idea  of  initiation,  which  allows  mankind  every 
possible chance, for the concept of an all - powerful and arbitrary forgiveness.    The 
enormous  number  of  sects  among  the  second - generation  Gnostics  indicates  how 
desperate and  diversified was the attempt on the part of Greek thought to make the 
Christian  universe  more  accessible  and  to  remove  the  motives  for  a  rebellion  that 
Hellenism  considered  the  worst  of  all  evils.     But  the  Church  condemned  this 
attempt and, by condemning i t, swelled the ranks of the rebels.  
         In  that  the  children  of  Cain  have  triumphed,  increasingly,  throughout  the 
centuries,  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament  can  be  said  to  have  been  incredibly 
successful.    Paradoxically, the blasphemers have injected new l ife into the jealous 
God  whom  Christianity  wished  to  banish  from  history.     One  of  their  most 
profoundly  audacious  acts  was  to  recruit  Christ  into  their  camp  by  making  His 
story  end  on  the  Cross  and  on  the  bitter  note  of  the  cry  that  precedes  His  agony.    
By   this  means  it  was  possible  to  preserve  the  implacable  face  of  a  God  of  hate  –  
which   coincided   far   better   with   creation   as   the   rebels   conceived   it.      Until 
Dostoievsky   and   Nietzsche,   rebellion   is   directed   only   against   a   cruel   and 
capricious divinity  –  a div inity who prefers, without any convincing motive, Abel’s 
sacrifice to Cain’s and, by so doing, provokes the first murder.    Dostoievsky, in the 
realm of imagination, and Nietzsche, in the realm of fact, enormously increase the 
field  of  rebellious  thought  an d  demand  an  accounting  from  the  God  of  love 
Himself.     Nietzsche  believes  that  God  is  dead  in  the  souls  of  his  contemporaries.    
Therefore  he  attacks,  like  his  predecessor  Stirner,  the  illusion  of  God  that  lingers, 
under the guise of morality, in the thought  of his times.    But until they appear upon 
the  scene,  the  freethinkers,  for  example,  were  content  to  deny  the  truth  of  the 
history  of  Christ  (“that  dull  story,”  in  Sade’s  words)  and  to  maintain,  by  their 
denials, the tradition of an avenging god.  
         On   the  other  hand,  for  as  long  as  the  Western  World  has  been  Christian,  the 
Gospels have been the interpreter between heaven and earth.    Each time a solitary 
  24  

cry of rebellion was uttered, the answer came in the form of an even more terrible 
suffering.     In  th at  Christ  had  suffered,  and  had  suffered  voluntarily,  suffering  was 
no  longer  unjust  and  all  pain  was  necessary.     In  one  sense,  Christianity’s  bitter 
intuition  and  legitimate  pessimism  concerning  human  behaviour  is  based  on  the 
assumption that over - all inj ustice is as satisfying to man as total justice.    Only the 
sacrifice  of  an  innocent  god  could  justify  the  endless  and  universal  torture  of 
innocence.    Only the most abject suffering by God could assuage man’s agony.    If 
everything,  without  exception,  in  he aven  and  earth  is  doomed  to  pain  and 
suffering, then a strange form of happiness is possible.  
         But from the moment when Christianity, emerging from its period of triumph, 
found itself submitted to the critical eye of reason  –  to the point where the d ivinity 
of Christ was denied  –  suffering once more became the lot of man.    Jesus profaned 
is no more than just one more innocent man whom the representatives of the God 
of Abraham tortured in a spectacular manner.    The abyss that separates the master 
from  the slaves opens again and the cry of revolt falls on the deaf ears of a jealous 
God.    The freethinkers have prepared the way for this new dichotomy by attacking, 
with  all  the  usual  precautions,  the  morality  and  divinity  of  Christ.     Callot’s 
universe sums  up quite satisfactorily this world of hallucination and wretchedness 
whose  inhabitants  begin  by  sniggering  up  their  sleeves  and  end  –   with  Molière’s 
Don  Juan  –   by  laughing  to  high  heaven.     During  the  two  centuries  which  prepare 
the  way  for  the  upheavals,  b oth  revolutionary  and  sacrilegious,  of  the  eighteenth 
century, all the efforts of the freethinkers are bent on making Christ an innocent, or 
a simpleton, so as to annex Him to the world of man, endowed with all the noble or 
derisory qualities of man.    Thus  the ground will be prepared for the great offensive 
against a hostile heaven.  
   
   
   
Absolute Negation  
   
*  
   
         Historically speaking, the first coherent offensive is that of Sade, who musters 
into one vast war machine the arguments of the freethinkers  up the Father Meslier 
and  Voltaire.     His  negation,  of  course,  is  also  the  most  extreme.     From  rebellion 
Sade can only deduce an absolute negative.    Twenty - seven years in prison do not, 
in  fact,  produce  a  very  conciliatory  form  of  intelligence.     Such  a  lon g  period  of 
confinement produces either weaklings or killers and sometimes a combination of 
both.    If the mind is strong enough to construct in a prison cell a moral philosophy 
  25  

that  is  not  one  of  submission,  it will generally be one of domination.    Every e thic 
based  on  solitude  implies  the  exercise  of  power.     In  this  respect  Sade  is  the 
archetype,  for  insofar  as  society  treated  him  atrociously,  he  responded  in  an 
atrocious  manner.     The  writer,  despite  a  few  happy  phrases  and  the  thoughtless 
praises  of  our  c ontemporaries,  is  secondary.     He  is  admired  today,  with  so  much 
ingenuity, for reasons which have nothing to do with literature.  
         He is exalted as the philosopher in chains and the first theoretician of absolute 
rebellion.    He might well have been.     In prison, dreams have no limits and reality is 
no curb.    Intelligence in chains loses in lucidity with it gains in intensity.    The only 
logic known to Sade was the logic of his feelings.    He did not create a philosophy, 
but  pursued  a  monstrous  dream  of  re venge.     Only  the  dream  turned  out  to  be 
prophetic.    His  desperate  demand  for  freedom  led  Sade  into  the  kingdom  of 
servitude; his inordinate thirst for a form of life he could never attain was assuaged 
in the successive frenzies of a dream of universal dest ruction.    In this way, at least, 
Sade is our contemporary.    Let us follow his successive negations.  
   
   
         A Man of Letters  
   
         Is Sade an atheist?    He says so, and we believe him, before going to prison, in 
his  Dialogue  between  a  Priest  and  a  Dyi ng  Man ;  and  from  then  on  we  are 
dumbfounded  by  his  passion  for  sacrilege.     One  of  his  cruellest  characters,  Saint -
Fond, does not in any sense deny God.    He is content to develop a gnostic theory of 
a  wicked  demiurge  and  to  draw  the  proper  conclusions  from  it.     Saint - Fond,  it  is 
said, is not Sade.    No, of course not.    A character is never the author who created 
him.     It  is  quite  likely,  however,  that  an  author  may  be  all  his  characters 
simultaneously.     Now,  all  Sade’s  atheists  suppose,  in  principle,  the  non - existence 
of  God  for  the  obvious  reason  that  His  existence  would  imply  that  He  was 
indifferent,  wicked,  or  cruel.     Sade’s  greatest  work  ends  with  a  demonstration  of 
the stupidity and spite of the divinity.    The innocent Justine runs through the storm 
and  t he  wicked  Noirceuil  swears  that  he  will  be  converted  if  divine  retribution 
consents  to  spare  his  life.     Justine  is  struck  by  lightning,  Noirceuil  triumphs,  and 
human crime continues to be man’s answer to the Pascalian wager.  
         The  idea  of  God  which  Sa de  conceives  for  himself  is,  therefore,  of  a  criminal 
divinity  who  oppresses  and  denies  mankind.     That  murder  is  an  attribute  of  the 
divinity  is  quite  evident,  according  to  Sade,  from  the  history  of  religions.     Why, 
then, should man be virtuous?    Sade’s fi rst step as a prisoner is to jump to the most 
extreme conclusions.    If God kills and repudiates mankind, there is nothing to stop 
one  from  killing  and  repudiating  one’s  fellow  men.     This  irritable  challenge  in  no 
way  resembles  the  tranquil  negation  that  is   still  to  be  found  in  the  Dialogue   of 
  26  

1782.     The  man  who  exclaims:  “I  have  nothing,  I  give  nothing,”  and  who 
concludes: “Virtue and vice are indistinguishable in the tomb,” is neither happy nor 
tranquil.    The concept of God is the only thing, according to  him, “which he cannot 
forgive  man.”     The  word  forgive   is  already  rather  strange  in  the  mouth  of  this 
expert  in  torture.     But  it  is  himself  whom  he  cannot  forgive  for  an  idea  that  his 
desperate view of the world, and his condition as a prisoner, completely  refute.    A 
double  rebellion  –   against  the  order  of  the  universe  and  against  himself  –   is 
henceforth going to be the guiding principle of Sade’s reasoning.    In that these two 
forms  of  rebellion  are  contradictory  except  in  the  disturbed  mind  of  a  victim  of 
p ersecution,  his  reason  is  always  either  ambiguous  or  legitimate  according  to 
whether it is considered in the light of logic or in an attempt at compassion.  
         He  therefore  denies  man  and  his  morality  because  God  denies  them.     But  he 
denies God even tho ugh He has served as his accomplice and guarantor up to now.    
For  what  reason?     Because  of  the  strongest  instinct  to  be  found  in  one  who  is 
condemned  by  the  hatred  of  mankind  to  live  behind  prison  walls:  the  sexual 
instinct.     What  is  this  instinct?     On  the   one  hand,  it  is  the  ultimate  expression  of 
nature  [Sade’s  great  criminals  excuse  their  crimes  on  the  ground  that  they  were 
born with uncontrollable sexual appetites about which they could do nothing.]    On 
the  one  hand,  it  is  the  ultimate  expression  of  nat ure,  and,  on  the  other,  the  blind 
force that demands the total subjection of human beings, even at the price of their 
destruction.     Sade  denies  God  in  the  name  of  nature  –   the  ideological  concepts  of 
his  time  presented  it  in  mechanistic  form  –   and  he  makes   nature  a  power  bent  on 
destruction.    For him, nature is sex; his logic leads him to a lawless universe where 
the only master is the inordinate energy of desire.    This is his delirious kingdom, in 
which  he  finds  his  finest  means  of  expression:  “What  are  al l  the  creatures  of  the 
earth  in  comparison  with  a  single  one  of  our  desires!”    The  long  arguments  by 
which Sade’s heroes demonstrate that nature has need of crime, that it must destroy 
in  order  to  create,  and  that  we  help  nature  create  from  the  moment  we  d estroy  it 
ourselves,  are  only  aimed  at  establishing  absolute  freedom  for  the  prisoner,  Sade, 
who  is  too  unjustly  punished  not  to  long  for  the  explosion  that  will  blow 
everything  to  pieces.     In  this  respect  he  goes  against  his  times:  the  freedom  he 
demands  is not one of principles, but of instincts.  
         Sade  dreamed,  no  doubt,  of  a  universal  republic,  whose  scheme  he  reveals 
through  his  wise  reformer,  Zamé.     He  shows  us,  by  this  means,  that  one  of  the 
purposes  of  rebellion  is  to  liberate  the  whole  world,  in  that,  as  the  movement 
accelerates, rebellion is less and less willing to accept limitations.    But everything 
about  him  contradicts  this  pious  dream.     He  is  no  friend  of  humanity,  he  hates 
philanthropists.     The  equality  of  which  he  sometimes  speaks  is  a  mathematical 
concept:  the  equivalence  of  the  objects  that  comprise  the  human  race,  the  abject 
equality  of  the  victims.     Real  fulfilment,  for  the  man  who  allows  absolutely  free 
  27  

rein  to  his  desires  and  who  must  dominate  everything,  lies  in  hatred.     Sade’s 
re public  is  not  founded  on  liberty  but  on  libertinism.     “Justice,”  this  peculiar 
democrat writes, “has no real existence.    It is the divinity of all the passions.”  
         Nothing  is  more  revealing  in  this  respect  than  the  famous  lampoon,  read  by 
Dolmancé  in  the  Philosophie  du  Boudoir ,  which  has  the  curious  title:  People  of 
France,  one  more  effort  if  you  want  to  be  republicans .     Pierre  Klossowski  [Sade, 
mon  prochain .]  is  right  in  attaching  so  much  importance  to  it,  for  this  lampoon 
demonstrates to the  revolutionaries that their republic is founded on the murder of 
the King  –  who was King by divine right  –  and that by guillotining God on January 
21,  1793  they  deprived  themselves  forever  of  the  right  to  outlaw  crime  or  to 
censure malevolent instincts.    Th e monarchy supported the concept of a God who, 
in  conjunction  with  itself,  created  all  laws.     As  for  the  Republic,  it  stands  alone, 
and  morality  was  supposed  to  exist  without  benefit  of  the  Commandments.     It  is 
doubtful,  however,  that  Sade,  as  Klossowski  m aintains,  had  a  profound  sense  of 
sacrilege  and  that  an  almost  religious  horror  led  him  to  the  conclusions  that  he 
expresses.     It  is  much  more  likely  that  he  came  to  these  conclusions  first  and 
afterwards  perceived  the  correct  arguments  to  justify  the  abso lute  moral  license 
that he wanted the government of his time to sanction.    Logic founded on passions 
reverses the traditional sequence of reasoning and places the conclusions before the 
premises.     To  be  convinced  of  this  we  only  have  to  appraise  the  admira ble 
sequence of sophisms by which Sade, in this passage, justifies calumny, theft, and 
murder and demands that they be tolerated under the new dispensation.  
         It  is  then,  however,  that  his  thoughts  are  most  profound.     He  rejects,  with 
exceptional  pers picacity  for  his  times,  the  presumptuous  alliance  of  freedom  with 
virtue.      Freedom,   particularly   when   it   is   a   prisoner’s   dream,   cannot   endure 
limitations.     It  must  sanction  crime  or  it  is  no  longer  freedom.     On  this  essential 
point Sade never varies.    The  man who never preached anything but contradictions 
only achieves coherence  –  and of a most complete kind  –  when he talks of capital 
punishment.     An  addict  of  refined  ways  of  execution,  a  theoretician  of  sexual 
crime, he was never able to tolerate legal cri me.    “My imprisonment by the State, 
with  the  guillotine  under  my  very  eyes,  was  far  more  horrible  to  me  than  all  the 
Bastilles  imaginable.”     From  this  feeling  of  horror  he  drew  the  strength  to  be 
moderate, publicly, during the Terror, and to intervene gene rously on behalf of his 
mother - in - law, despite the fact that she had had him imprisoned.    A few years later 
Nodier summed up, perhaps without knowing it, the position obstinately defended 
by Sade: “To kill a man in a paroxysm of passion is understandable.    To have him 
killed by someone else after calm and serious meditation and on the pretext of duty 
honourably  discharged  is  incomprehensible.”     Here  we  find  the  germ  of  an  idea 
which again will be developed by Sade: he who kills must pay with his own life.    
Sade is more moral, we see, than our contemporaries.  
  28  

         But  his  hatred  for  the  death  penalty  is  at  first  no  more  than  a  hatred  for  men 
who  are  sufficiently  convinced  of  their  own  virtue  to  dare  to  inflict  capital 
punishment,  when  they  themselves  are  cr iminals.     You  cannot  simultaneously 
choose  crime  for  yourself  and  punishment  for  others.     You  must  open  the  prison 
gates  or  give  an  impossible  proof  of  your  own  innocence.     From  the  moment  you 
accept murder, even if only once, you must allow it universally .    The criminal who 
acts according to nature cannot, without betraying his office, range himself on the 
side of the law.    “One more effort if you want to be republicans” means: “Accept 
the freedom of crime, the only reasonable attitude, and enter forever i nto a state of 
insurrection as you enter into a state of grace.”    Thus total submission to evil leads 
to   an   appalling   penitence,   which   cannot   fail   to   horrify   the   Republic   of 
enlightenment   and   of   natural   goodness.      By   a   significant   coincidence,   the 
manuscri pt  of  One  Hundred  and  Twenty  Days  of  Sodom   was  burned  during  the 
first  riot  of  the  Republic,  which  could  hardly  fail  to  denounce  Sade’s  heretical 
theories  of  freedom  and  to  throw  so  compromising  a  supporter  into  prison  one 
more.     By  so  doing,  it  gave  him  t he  regrettable  opportunity  of  developing  his 
rebellious logic still further.  
         The  universal  republic  could  be  a  dream  for  Sade,  but  never  a  temptation.     In 
politics  his  real  position  was  cynicism.     In  his  Society  of  the  Friends  of  Crime   he 
declares  h imself  ostensibly  in  favour  of  the  government  and  its  laws,  which  he 
meanwhile has every intention of violating.    It is the same impulse that makes the 
lowest  form  of  criminal  vote  for  conservative  candidates.     The  plan  that  Sade  had 
in mind assures the be nevolent neutrality of the authorities.    The republic of crime 
cannot, for the moment at least, be universal.    It must pretend to obey the law.    In a 
world that knows no other rule than murder, beneath a criminal heaven, and in the 
name of a criminal natur e, however, Sade, in reality, obeys no other law than that 
of  inexhaustible  desire.     But  to  desire  without  limit  is  the  equivalent  of  being 
desired  without  limit.     License  to  destroy  supposes  that  you  yourself  can  be 
destroyed.     Therefore  you  must  struggle   and  dominate.     The  law  of  this  world  is 
nothing but the law of force; its driving force, the will to power.  
         The advocate of crime really only respects two kinds of power: one, which he 
finds  among  his  own  class,  founded  on  the  accident  of  birth,  an d  the  other  by 
which,  thought  sheer  villainy,  an  underdog  raises  himself  to  the  level  of  the 
libertines  of  noble  birth  whom  Sade  makes  his  heroes.     This  powerful  little  group 
of initiates knows that it has all the rights.    Anyone who doubts, even for a sec ond, 
these  formidable  privileges  is  immediately  driven  from  the  flock,  and  once  more 
becomes  a  victim.     Thus  a  sort  of  aristocratic  morality  is  created  through  which  a 
little  group  of  men  and  women  manage  to  entrench  themselves  above  a  caste  of 
slaves beca use they possess the secret of a strange knowledge.    The only problem 
for  them  consists  in  organizing  themselves  so  as  to  be  able  to  exercise  fully  their 
  29  

rights which have the terrifying scope of desire.  
         They  cannot  hope  to  dominate  the  entire  unive rse  until  the  law  of  crime  has 
been  accepted  by  the  universe.     Sade  never  believed  that  his  fellow  countrymen 
would  be  capable  of  the  additional  effort  needed  to  make  it  “republican”.     But  if 
crime and desire are not the law of the entire universe, if they  do not reign at least 
over  a  specified  territory,  they  are  no  longer  unifying  principles,  but  ferments  of 
conflict.     They  are  no  longer  the  law,  and  man  returns  to  chaos  and  confusion.    
Thus  it  is  necessary  to  create  from  all  these  fragments  a  world  that  exactly 
coincides with the new law.    The need for unity, which Creation leaves unsatisfied, 
is fulfilled, at all costs, in a microcosm.    The law of power never had the patience 
to await complete control of the world.    It must fix the boundaries, without de lay, 
of  the  territory  where  it  holds  sway,  even  if  it  means  surrounding  it  with  barbed 
wire and observation towers.  
         For   Sade,   the   law   of   power   implies   barred   gates,   castles   with   seven 
circumvallations  from  which  it  is  impossible  to  escape,  and  where   a  society 
founded  on  desire  and  crime  functions  unimpeded,  according  to  the  rules  of  an 
implacable system.    The most unbridled rebellion, insistence on complete freedom, 
lead  to  the  total  subjection  of  the  majority.     For  Sade,  man’s  emancipation  is 
consum mated  in  these  strongholds  of  debauchery  where  a  kind  of  bureaucracy  of 
vice  rules  over  the  life  and  death  of  the  men  and  women  who  have  committed 
themselves forever to the hell of their desires.    His works abound with descriptions 
of   these   privileged   plac es   where   feudal   libertines,   to   demonstrate   to   their 
assembled  victims  their  absolute  impotence  and  servitude,  always  repeat  the  Duc 
de Blangis’s speech to the common people of the  One Hundred and Twenty Days 
of Sodom : “You are already dead to the world.”  
          Sade himself also inhabited the tower of Freedom, but in the Bastille.    Absolute 
rebellion  took  refuge  with  him  in  a  sordid  fortress  from  which  no  one,  either 
persecuted  or  persecutors,  could  ever  escape.     To  establish  his  freedom,  he  had  to 
create  a bsolute  necessity.     Unlimited  freedom  of  desire  implies  the  negation  of 
others  and  the  suppression  of  pity.     The  heart,  that  “weak  spot  of  the  intellect,” 
must  be  exterminated;  the  locked  room  and  the  system  will  see  to  that.     The 
system,  which  plays  a  rol e  of  capital  importance  in  Sade’s  fabulous  castles, 
perpetuates  a  universe  of  mistrust.     It  helps  to  anticipate  everything,  so  that  no 
unexpected tenderness or pity occur to upset the plans for complete enjoyment.    It 
is a curious kind of pleasure, no doub t, which obeys the commandment: “We shall 
rise  every  morning  at   " ten  o’clock ” !     But  enjoyment  must  be  prevented  from 
degenerating  into  attachment,  it  must  be  put  in  parentheses  and  toughened.    
Objects  of  enjoyment  must  also  never  be  allowed  to  appear  as  persons.     If  man  is 
“an  absolutely  material  species  of  plant,”  he  can  only  be  treated  as  an  object,  and 
as  an  object  for  experiment.     In  Sade’s  fortress  republic,  there  are  only  machines 
  30  

and   mechanics.      The   system,   which   dictates   the   m ethod   of   employing   the 
machines, puts everything in its right place.    His infamous converts have their rule 
–   significantly  copied  from  that  of  religious  communities.     Thus  the  libertine 
indulges in public confession.    But the process is changed: “If his c onduct is pure, 
he is censured.”  
         Sade,  as  was  the  custom  of  his  period,  constructed  ideal  societies.     But, 
contrary  to  the  custom  of  his  period,  he  codifies  the  natural  wickedness  of 
mankind.    He meticulously constructs a citadel of force and hatred , pioneer that he 
is,  even  to  the  point  of  calculating  mathematically  the  amount  of  the  freedom  he 
succeeded   in   destroying.      He   sums   up   his   philosophy   with   an   unemotional 
accounting of crimes.    “Massacred before the first of March: 10.    After the first of 
March:  20.     To  come:  16.     Total:  46.”     A  pioneer,  no  doubt,  but  a  limited  one,  as 
we can see.  
         If  that  were  all,  Sade  would  be  worthy  only  of  the  interest  that  attaches  to  all 
misunderstood pioneers.    But once the drawbridge is up, life in the castle  must go 
on.     No  matter  how  meticulous  the  system,  it  cannot  foresee  every  eventuality.     It 
can destroy, but it cannot create.    The masters of these tortured communities do not 
find  the  satisfaction  they  so  desperately  desire.     Sade  often  evokes  the  “pleas ant 
habit of crime.”    Nothing here, however, seems very pleasant  –  more like the fury 
of  a  man  in  chains.     The  point,  in  fact,  is  to  enjoy  oneself,  and  the  maximum  of 
enjoyment  coincides  with  the  maximum  of  destruction.     To  possess  what  one  is 
going to kil l, to copulate with suffering  –  those are the moments of freedom toward 
which  the  entire  organization  of  Sade’s  castles  is  directed.     But  from  the  moment 
when  sexual  crime  destroys  the  object  of  desire,  it  also  destroys  desire,  which 
exists  only  at  the  pre cise  moment  of  destruction.     Then  another  object  must  be 
brought  under  subjection  and  killed  again,  and  then  another,  and  so  on  to  an 
infinity of all possible objects.    This leads to that dreary accumulation of erotic and 
criminal  scenes  in  Sade’s  novels,  which,  paradoxically,  leaves  the  reader  with  the 
impression of a hideous chastity.  
         What  part,  in  this  universe,  could  pleasure  play  or  the  exquisite  joy  of 
acquiescent  and  accomplice  bodies?     In  it  we  find  an  impossible  quest  for  escape 
from  despair   –   a  quest  that  finishes,  nevertheless,  in  a  desperate  race  from 
servitude  to  servitude  and  from  prison  to  prison.    If  only  nature  is  real  and  if,  in 
nature,  only  desire  and  destruction  are  legitimate,  then,  in  that  all  humanity  does 
not  suffice  to  assuage   the  thirst  for  blood,  the  path  of  destruction  must  lead  to 
universal  annihilation.     We  must  become,  according  to  Sade’s  formula,  nature’s 
executioner.    But even that position is not achieved too easily.    When the accounts 
are  closed,  when  all  the  victims  are  massacred,  the  executioners  are  left  face  to 
face in the deserted castle.    Something is still missing.    The tortured bodies return, 
in  their  elements,  to  nature  and  will  be  born  again.     Even  murder  cannot  be  fully 
  31  

consummated: “Murder only deprives the  victim of his first life; a means must be 
found of depriving him of his second....”    Sade contemplates an attack on creation: 
“I abhor nature.... I should like to upset its plans, to thwart its progress, to halt the 
stars  in  their  courses,  to  overturn  the  flo ating  spheres  of  space,  to  destroy  what 
serves nature and to succour all that harms it; in a word, to insult it in all its works, 
and I cannot succeed in doing so.”    It is in vain that he dreams of a technician who 
can  pulverize  the  universe:  he  knows  that ,  in  the  dust  of  the  spheres,  life  will 
continue.     The  attack  against  creation  is  doomed  to  failure.     It  is  impossible  to 
destroy everything, there is always a remainder.    “I cannot succeed in doing so ...” 
the  icy  and  implacable  universe  suddenly  relents  at   the  appalling  melancholy  by 
which  Sade,  in  the  end  and  quite  unwillingly,  always  moves  us.     “We  could 
perhaps attack the sun, deprive the universe of it, or use it to set fire to the world  –  
those  would  be  real  crimes....”  Crimes,  yes,  but  not  the  definitiv e  crime.     It  is 
necessary to go farther.    The executioners eye each other with suspicion.  
         They  are  alone,  and  one  law  alone  governs  them:  the  law  of  power.     As  they 
accepted  it  when  they  were  masters,  they  cannot  reject  it  if  it  turns  against  them.    
All power tends to be unique and solitary.    Murder must be repeated: in their turn 
the  masters  will  tear  one  another  to  pieces.     Sade  accepts  this  consequence  and 
does not flinch.    A curious kind of stoicism, derived from vice, sheds a little light 
in the  dark places of his rebellious soul.    He will not try to live again in the world 
of affection and compromise.    The drawbridge will not be lowered; he will accept 
personal annihilation.    The unbridled force of his refusal achieves, at its climax, an 
uncondi tional  acceptance  that  is  not  without  nobility.     The  master  consents  to  be 
the  slave  in  his  turn  and  even,  perhaps,  wishes  to  be.     “The  scaffold  would  be  for 
me the throne of voluptuousness.”  
         Thus  the  greatest  degree  of  destruction  coincides  with  th e  greatest  degree  of 
affirmation.     The  masters  throw  themselves  on  one  another,  and  Sade’s  work, 
dedicated  to  the  glory  of  libertinism,  ends  by  being  “strewn  with  corpses  of 
libertines   struck   down   at   the   height   of   their   powers.”   [Maurice   Blanchot: 
Lautréam ont  et  Sade. ]     The  most  powerful,  the  one  who  will  survive  is  the 
solitary,  the  Unique,  whose  glorification  Sade  has  undertaken  –   in  other  words, 
himself.     At  last  he  reigns  supreme,  master  and  God.     But  at  the  moment  of  his 
greatest  victory  the  dream  van ishes.     The  Unique  turns  back  toward  the  prisoner 
whose  unbounded  imagination  gave  birth  to  him,  and  they  become  one.     He  is  in 
fact alone, imprisoned in a bloodstained Bastille, entirely constructed around a still 
unsatisfied, and henceforth undirected, d esire for pleasure.    He has only triumphed 
in  a  dream  and  those  ten  volumes  crammed  with  philosophy  and  atrocities 
recapitulate  an  unhappy  form  of  asceticism,  an  illusory  advance  from  the  total  no 
to  the  absolute  yes,  an  acquiescence  in  death  at  last,  whic h  transfigures  the 
assassination of everything and everyone into a collective suicide.  
  32  

         Sade   was   executed   in   effigy;   he,   too,   only   killed   in   his   imagination.    
Prometheus ends in Onan.    Sade is still a prisoner when he dies, but this time in a 
lunatic  asylum, acting plays on an improvised stage with other lunatics.    A derisory 
equivalent  of  the  satisfaction  that  the  order  of  the  world  failed  to  give  him  was 
provided for him by dreams and by creative activity.    The writer, of course, has no 
need to refu se him anything.    For him, at least, boundaries disappear and desire can 
be allowed free rein.    In this respect Sade is the perfect man of letters.    He created 
a  fable  in  order  to  give  himself  the  illusion  of  existing.     He  put  “the  moral  crime 
that   one   com mits   by   writing”   above   everything   else.      His   merit,   which   is 
incontestable,   lies   in   having   immediately   demonstrated,   with   the   unhappy 
perspicacity of accumulated rage, the extreme consequences of rebellious logic  –  at 
least when it forgets the truth to be  found in its origins.    These consequences are a 
complete  totalitarianism,  universal  crime,  an  aristocracy  of  cynicism,  and  the 
desire  for  an  apocalypse.     They  will  be  found  again  many  years  after  his  death.    
But having tasted them, he was caught, it seems,  on the thorns of his own dilemma 
and could only escape the dilemma in literature.    Strangely enough, it is Sade who 
sets rebellion on the path of literature down which it will be led still farther by the 
romantics.    He himself is one of those writers of w hom he says: “their corruption is 
so  dangerous,  so  active,  that  they  have  no  other  aim  in  printing  their  monstrous 
works than to extend beyond their own lives the sum total of their crimes; they can 
commit  no  more,  but  their  accursed  writings  will  lead  oth ers  to  do  so,  and  this 
comforting thought which they carry with them to the tomb consoles them for the 
obligation that death imposes on them of renouncing this life.”    Thus his rebellious 
writings  bear  witness  to  his  desire  for  survival.     Even  if  the  immor tality  he  longs 
for  is  the  immortality  of  Cain,  at  least  he  longs  for  it,  and  despite  himself  bears 
witness to what is most true in metaphysical rebellion.  
         Moreover, even his followers compel us to do him homage.    His heirs are not 
all writers.    Of  course, there is justification for saying that he suffered and died to 
stimulate the imagination of the intelligentsia in literary cafés.    But that is not all.    
Sade’s  success  in  our  day  is  explained  by  the  dream  that  he  had  in  common  with 
contemporary  tho ught:  the  demand  for  total  freedom,  and  dehumanization  coldly 
planned by the intelligence.    The reduction of man to an object of experiment, the 
rule that specifies the relation between the will to power and man as an object, the 
sealed laboratory that is  the scene of this monstrous experiment, are lessons which 
the  theoreticians  of  power  will  discover  again  when  they  come  to  organizing  the 
age of slavery.  
         Two centuries ahead of time and on a reduced scale, Sade extolled totalitarian 
societies  in  the   name  of  unbridled  freedom  –   which,  in  reality,  rebellion  does  not 
demand.    The history and the tragedy of our times really begin with him.    He only 
believed that a society founded on freedom of crime must coincide with freedom of 
  33  

morals,  as  though  servitu de  has  its  limits.     Our  times  have  limited  themselves  to 
blending, in a curious manner, his dream of a universal republic and his technique 
of degradation.    Finally, what he hated most, legal murder, has availed itself of the 
discoveries  that  he  wanted  to  put  to  the  service  of  instinctive  murder.     Crime, 
which he wanted he wanted to be the exotic and delicious fruit of unbridled vice, is 
no more today than the dismal habit of a police - controlled morality.    Such are the 
surprises of literature.  
   
   
         Th e Dandies’ Rebellion  
   
         Even  after  Sade’s  time,  men  of  letters  still  continue  to  dominate  the  scene. 
Romanticism,  Lucifer - like  in  its  rebellion,  is  really  only  useful  for  adventures  of 
the  imagination.     Like  Sade,  romanticism  is  separated  from  earlie r  forms  of 
rebellion by its preference for evil and the individual.    By putting emphasis on its 
powers of defiance and refusal, rebellion, at this stage, forgets its positive content. 
Since God claims all that is good in man, it is necessary to deride what  is good and 
choose what is evil.    Hatred of death and of injustice will lead, therefore, if not to 
the exercise, at least to the vindication, of evil and murder.  
         The struggle between Satan and death in  Paradise Lost , the favourite poem of 
the roman tics, symbolizes this drama; all the more profoundly in that death (with, 
of  course,  sin)  is  the  child  of  Satan.     In  order  to  combat  evil,  the  rebel  renounces 
good,  because  he  considers  himself  innocent,  and  once  again  gives  birth  to  evil.    
The romantic he ro first of all brings about the profound and, so to speak, religious 
blending  of  good  and  evil.  [A  dominant  theme  in  William  Blake,  for  example.]    
This  type  of  hero  is  “fatal”  because  fate  confounds  good  and  evil  without  man 
being able to prevent it.    Fat e does not allow judgements of value.    It replaces them 
by  the  statement  that  “It  is  so”  –   which  excuses  everything,  with  the  exception  of 
the  Creator,  who  alone  is  responsible  for  this  scandalous  state  of  affairs.     The 
romantic hero is also “fatal” becaus e, to the extent that he increases in power and 
genius,  the  power  of  evil  increases  in  him.     Every  manifestation  of  power,  every 
excess,  is  thus  covered  by  this  “It  is  so.”     That  the  artist,  particularly  the  poet, 
should  be  demoniac  is  a  very  ancient  idea,   which  is  formulated  provocatively  in 
the  work  of  the  romantics.     At  this  period  there  is  even  an  imperialism  of  evil, 
whose aim is to annex everything, even the most orthodox geniuses.    “What made  
Milton   write  with  constraint,”  Bla ke  observes,  “when  he  spoke  of  angels  and  of 
God, and with audacity when he spoke of demons and of hell, is that he was a real 
poet  and  on  the  side  of  the  demons,  without  knowing  it.”     The  poet,  the  genius, 
man  himself  in  his  most  exalted  image,  therefore  cry  out  simultaneously  with 
Satan: “So farewell hope, and with hope farewell fear, farewell remorse.... Evil, be 
  34  

thou my good.”    It is the cry of outraged innocence.  
         The  romantic  hero,  therefore,  considers  himself  compelled  to  do  evil  by  his 
nostalgia   for  an  unrealizable  good.     Satan  rises  against  his  Creator  because  the 
latter  employed  force  to  subjugate  him.     “Whom  reason  hath  equal’d,”  says  
Milton ’ s  Satan,  “force  hath  made  supreme  above  his  equals.”     Divine  violence  is 
thus  e xplicitly  condemned.     The  rebel  flees  from  this  aggressive  and  unworthy 
God, “Farthest from him is best,” and reigns over all the forces hostile to the divine 
order.    The Prince of Darkness has only chosen this path because good is a notion 
defined  and  uti lized  by  God  for  unjust  purposes.     Even  innocence  irritates  the 
Rebel insofar as it implies being duped.    This “dark spirit of evil who is enraged by 
innocence” creates a human injustice parallel to divine injustice.    Since violence is 
the root of all crea tion, deliberate violence shall be its answer.    The fact that there 
is  an  excess  of  despair  adds  to  the  causes  of  despair  and  brings  rebellion  to  that 
state  of  indignant  frustration  which  follows  the  long  experience  of  injustice  and 
where the distinction b etween good and evil finally disappears.    Vigny’s Satan can  
   
                                               ...  no longer find in good or evil any pleasure  
                                                nor of the sorrow that he causes take the measure.  
   
Thi s defines nihilism and authorizes murder.  
         Murder,  in  fact,  is  on  the  way  to  becoming  acceptable.     It  is  enough  to 
compare the Lucifer of the painters of the Middle Ages with the Satan of the 
romantics.     An  adolescent  “young,  sad,  charming”  (Vigny)  r eplaces  the 
horned beast.    “Beautiful, with a beauty unknown on this earth” (Lermontov), 
solitary   and   powerful,   unhappy   and   scornful,   he   is   offhand   even   in 
oppression.    But his excuse is sorrow.    “Who here,” says  Milton ’ s Satan, “wi ll 
envy  him  the  highest  place  ...  condemns  to  greatest  share  of  endless  pain.”    
So many injustices suffered, a sorrow so unrelieved, justify every excess.    The 
rebel  therefore  allows  himself  certain  advantages.     Murder,  of  course,  is  not 
recommended  for  its  own  sake.     But  it  is  implicit  in  the  value  –   supreme  for 
the   romantic  -    attached   to   frenzy.      Frenzy   is   the   reverse   of   boredom: 
Lorenzaccio  dreams  of  Han  of  Iceland.     Exquisite  sensibilities  evoke  the 
elementary  furies  of  the  beast.     The  Byronic  hero,  incap able  of  love,  or 
capable only of an impossible love, suffers endlessly.    He is solitary, languid, 
his condition exhausts him.    If he wants to feel alive, it must be in the terrible 
exaltation of a brief and destructive action.    To love someone whom one wil l 
never see again is to give a cry of exultation as one perishes in the flames of 
passion.    One lives only in and for the moment, in order to achieve “the brief 
and    vivid    union    of    a    tempestuous    heart    united    to    the    tempest” 
  35  

(LERMONTOV).      The   threat   of   morta lity   which   hangs   over   us   makes 
everything  abortive.     Only  the  cry  of  anguish  can  bring  us  to  life;  exaltation 
takes  the  place  of  truth.     To  this  extent  the  apocalypse  becomes  an  absolute 
value  in  which  everything  is  confounded  –   love  and  death,  conscience  and 
culpability.     In  a  chaotic  universe  no  other  life  exists  but  that  of  the  abyss 
where, according to Alfred Le Poittevin, human beings come “trembling with 
rage  and  exulting  in  their  crimes”  to  curse  the  Creator.     The  intoxication  of 
frenzy  and,  ultimate ly,  some  suitable  crime  reveal  in  a  moment  the  whole 
meaning  of  a  life.     Without  exactly  advocating  crime,  the  romantics  insist  on 
paying  homage  to  a  basic  system  of  privileges  which  they  illustrate  with  the 
conventional images of the outlaw, the criminal  with the heart of gold, and the 
kind brigand.    Their works are bathed in blood and shrouded in mystery.    The 
soul  is  delivered,  at  a  minimum  expenditure,  of  its  most  hideous  desires  –  
desires that a later generation will assuage in extermination camps.    Of  course 
these works are also a challenge to the society of the times.    But romanticism, 
at  the  source  of  its  inspiration,  is  chiefly  concerned  with  defying  moral  and 
divine  law.     That  is  why  its  most  original  creation  is  not,  primarily,  the 
revolutionary,  but, logically enough, the dandy.  
         Logically,  because  this  obstinate  persistence  in  Satanism  can  only  be  justified 
by the endless affirmation of injustice and, to a certain extent, by its consolidation.    
Pain,  at  this  stage,  is  acceptable  only  on  con dition  that  it  is  incurable.     The  rebel 
chooses  the  metaphysic  of  inevitable  evil,  which  is  expressed  in  the  literature  of 
damnation  from  which  we  have  not  yet  escaped.     “I  was  conscious  of  my  power 
and  I  was  conscious  of  my  chains”  (Petrus  Borel).     But  th ese  chains  are  valuable 
objects.     Without  them  it  would  be  necessary  to  prove,  or  to  exercise,  this  power 
which,  after  all,  one  is  not  very  sure  of  having.     It  is  only  too  easy  to  end  up  by 
becoming  a  government  employee  in   Algiers,   and  Prometheus,  like  the  above -
mentioned  Borel,  will  devote  the  rest  of  his  days  to  closing  the  cabarets  and 
reforming morals in the colonies.    All the same, every poet to be received into the 
fold must be damned. [French literature still feels the effect s of this.    “Poets are no 
longer  damned,”  says  Malraux.     There  are  fewer.     But  the  others  all  suffer  from 
bad  consciences.]     Charles  Lassailly,  the  same  who  planned  a  philosophic  novel, 
Robespierre  and  Jesus  Christ ,  never  went  to  bed  without  uttering  sever al  fervent 
blasphemies  to  give  himself  courage.     Rebellion  puts  on  mourning  and  exhibits 
itself   for   public   admiration.      Much   more   than   the   cult   of   the   individual, 
romanticism  inaugurates  the  cult  of  the  “character.”     It  is  at  this  point  that  it  is 
logical.     No  longer  hoping  for  the  rule  or  the  unity  of  God,  determined  to  take  up 
arms  against  an  antagonistic  destiny,  anxious  to  preserve  everything  of  which  the 
living are still capable in a world dedicated to death, romantic rebellion looked for 
a solution in  the attitude that it itself assumed.    The attitude assembled, in æsthetic 
  36  

unity,  all  mankind  who  were  in  the  hands  of  fate  and  about  to  be  destroyed  by 
divine  violence.     The  human  being  who  is  condemned  to  death  is,  at  least, 
magnificent before he disappe ars, and his magnificence is his justification.    It is an 
established fact, the only one that can be thrown in the petrified face of the God of 
hate.    The impassive rebel does not flinch before the eyes of God.    “Nothing,” says 
Milt on,  “will  change  this  determined  mind,  this  high  disdain  born  of  an  offended 
conscience.”    Everything is drawn or rushes toward the void, but even though man 
is humiliated, he is obstinate and at least preserves his pride.    A baroque romantic, 
discovered  b y  Raymond  Queneau,  claims  that  the  aim  of  all  intellectual  life  is  to 
become  God.     This  romantic  is  really  a  little  ahead  of  his  time.     The  aim,  at  that 
time, was only to equal God and remain on His level.    He is not destroyed, but by 
incessant effort He i s refused any act of submission.    Dandyism is a degraded form 
of asceticism.  
         The  dandy  creates  his  own  unity  by  æsthetic  means.     But  it  is  an  æsthetic  of 
singularity  and  of  negation.     “To  live  and  die  before  a  mirror”:  that,  according  to 
Baudelaire,  was the dandy’s slogan.    It is indeed a coherent slogan.    The dandy is, 
by  occupation,  always  in  opposition.     He  can  only  exist  by  defiance.     Up  to  now 
man  derived  his  coherence  from  his  Creator.     But  from  the  moment  that  he 
consecrates  his  rupture  with  H im,  he  finds  himself  delivered  over  to  the  fleeting 
moment,  to  the  passing  days,  and  to  wasted  sensibility.     Therefore  he  must  take 
himself in hand.    The dandy rallies his forces and creates a unity for himself by the 
very violence of his refusal.    Proflig ate, like all people without a rule of life, he is 
coherent as an actor.    But an actor implies a public; the dandy can only play a part 
by  setting  himself  up  in  opposition.     He  can  only  be  sure  of  his  own  existence  by 
finding it in the expression of others ’ faces.    Other people are his mirror.    A mirror 
that  quickly  becomes  clouded,  it  is  true,  since  human  capacity  for  attention  is 
limited.    It must be ceaselessly stimulated, spurred on by provocation.    The dandy, 
therefore,  is  always  compelled  to  astonish.     Singularity  is  his  vocation,  excess  his 
way  to  perfection.     Perpetually  incomplete,  always  on  the  fringe  of  things,  he 
compels others to create him, while denying their values.    He plays at life because 
he is unable to live it.    He plays at it until he d ies, except for the moments when he 
is  alone  and  without  a  mirror.     For  the  dandy,  to  be  alone  is  not  to  exist.     The 
romantics talked so grandly about solitude only because it was their real horror, the 
one  thing  they  could  not  bear.     Their  rebellion  thrus ts  its  roots  deep,  but  from  the 
Abbé  Prévost’s  Cleveland   up  to  the  time  of  the  Dadaists  –   including  the  frenetics 
of  1830  and  Baudelaire  and  the  decadents  of  1880  –   more  than  a  century  of 
rebellion  was  completely  glutted  by  the  audacities  of  “eccentricity” .     If  they  were 
all  able  to  talk  of  unhappiness,  it  is  because  they  despaired  of  ever  being  able  to 
conquer  it,  except  in  futile  parodies,  and  because  they  instinctively  felt  that  it 
remained their sole excuse and their real claim to nobility.  
  37  

         That  is why the heritage of romanticism was not claimed by Victor Hugo, the 
epitome   of   France,   but   by   Baudelaire   and   Lacenaire,   the   poets   of   crime.    
“Everything  in  this  world  exudes  crime,”  says  Baudelaire,  “the  newspaper,  the 
walls,  and   the  face  of  man.”     Nevertheless  crime,  which  is  the  law  of  nature, 
singularly  fails  to  appear  distinguished.     Lacenaire,  the  first  of  the  gentleman 
criminals, exploits it effectively; Baudelaire displays less tenacity, but is a genius.    
He creates the gar den of evil where crime figures only as one of the rarer species.    
Terror  itself  becomes  an  exquisite  sensation  and  a  collector’s  item.     “Not  only 
would I be happy to be a victim, but I would not even hate being an executioner in 
order  to  feel   the  revoluti on  from  both  sides.”     Even  Baudelaire’s  conformity  has 
the odour of crime.    If he chooses Maistre as his master, it is to the extent that this 
conservative  goes  to  extremes  and  centres  his  doctrine  on  death  and  on  the 
executioner.     “The  real  saint,”  Baudel aire  pretends  to  think,  “is  he  who  flogs  and 
kills people for their own good.”    His argument will be heard.    A race of real saints 
is beginning to spread over the earth for the purposes of confirming these curious 
conclusions  about  rebellion.     But  Baudelai re,  despite  his  satanic  arsenal,  his  taste 
for Sade, his blasphemies, remains too much of a theologian to be a proper rebel.    
His real drama, which made him the greatest poet of his time, was something else.    
Baudelaire can be mentioned here only to the ex tent that he was the most profound 
theoretician  of  dandyism  and  gave  definite  form  to  one  of  the  conclusions  of 
romantic revolt.  
         Romanticism  demonstrates,  in  fact,  that  rebellion  is  part  and  parcel  of 
dandyism:   one   of   its   objectives   is   appearances.      In   its   conventional   forms, 
dandyism  admits  a  nostalgia  for  ethics.     It  is  only  honour  degraded  as  a  point  of 
honour.     But  at  the  same  time  it  inaugurates  an  æsthetic  of  solitary  creators,  who 
are obstinate rivals of a God they condemn.    From romanticism o nward, the artist’s 
task will not only be to create a world, or to exalt beauty for its own sake, but also 
to  define  an  attitude.     Thus  the  artist  becomes  a  model  and  offers  himself  as  an 
example: art is his ethic.    With him begins the age of the directors  of conscience.    
When the dandies fail to commit suicide or do not go mad, they make a career and 
pursue  prosperity.     Even  when,  like  Vigny,  they  exclaim  that  they  are  going  to 
retire into silence, their silence is piercing.  
         But  at  the  very  heart  of   romanticism,  the  sterility  of  this  attitude  becomes 
apparent to a few rebels who provide a transitional type between the eccentrics (or 
the  Incredible)  and  our  revolutionary  adventurers.     Between  the  times  of  the 
eighteenth - century, Byron and Shelley are  already fighting, though only ostensibly, 
for  freedom.     They  also  expose  themselves,  but  in  another  way.     Rebellion 
gradually  leaves  the  world  of  appearances  for  the  world  of  action,  where  it  will 
completely   commit   itself.      The   French   students   in   1830   and  the   Russian 
Decembrists  will  then  appear  as  the  purest  incarnations  of  a  rebellion  which  is  at 
  38  

first solitary and which then tries, through sacrifice, to find the path of solidarity.    
But, inversely, the taste for the apocalypse and a life of frenzy will r eappear among 
present - day  revolutionaries.     The  endless  series  of  treason  trials,  the  terrible  game 
played  out  between  the  judge  and  the  accused,  the  elaborate  staging  of  cross -
examinations, sometimes lead us to believe that there is a tragic resemblance t o the 
old  subterfuge  by  which  the  romantic  rebel,  in  refusing  to  be  what  he  was, 
provisionally condemned himself to a make - believe world in the desperate hope of 
achieving a more profound existence.  
   
   
   
The Rejection of Salvation  
   
   
*  
   
         If the ro mantic rebel extols evil and the individual, this does not mean that 
he  sides  with  mankind.     Dandyism,  of  whatever  kind,  is  always  dandyism  in 
relation  to  God.     The  individual,  insofar  as  he  is  a  created  being,  can  oppose 
himself only to the Creator.    He h as need of God, when whom he carries on a 
kind  of  gloomy  flirtation.     Armand  Hoog  [ Les  Petits  Romantiques ]  rightly 
says  that,  despite  its  Nietzschean  atmosphere,  God  is  not  yet  dead  even  in 
romantic  literature.     Damnation,  so  clamorously  demanded,  is  only  a  clever 
trick played on God.    But with Dostoievsky the deception of rebellion goes a 
step   farther.      Ivan   Karamazov   sides   with   mankind   and   stresses   human 
innocence.     He  affirms  that  the  death  sentence  which  hangs  over  them  is 
unjust.    Far from making a ple a for evil, his first impulse, at least, is to plead 
for  justice,  which  he  ranks  above  the  divinity.     Thus  he  does  not  absolutely 
deny the existence of God.    He refutes Him in the name of a moral value.    The 
romantic  rebel’s  ambition  was  to  talk  to  God  as  one  equal  to  another.     Evil 
was  the  answer  to  evil,  pride  the  answer  to  cruelty.     Vigny’s  ideal,  for 
example,  is  to  answer  silence  with  silence.     Obviously,  the  point  is  to  raise 
oneself  to  the  level  of  God,  which  already  is  blasphemy.     But  there  is  no 
tho ught  of  disputing  the  power  or  position  of  the  deity.     The  blasphemy  is 
reverent, since every blasphemy is, ultimately, a participation in holiness.  
         With Ivan, however, the tone changes.    God, in His turn, is put on trial.    If evil 
is  essential  to  d ivine  creation,  then  creation  is  unacceptable.     Ivan  will  no  longer 
have recourse to this mysterious God, but to a higher principle  –  namely, justice.    
He  launches  the  essential  undertaking  of  rebellion,  which  is  that  of  replacing  the 
  39  

reign  of  grace  by  the   reign  of  justice.     He  simultaneously  begins  the  attack  on 
Christianity.     The  romantic  rebel  broke  with  God  Himself,  on  the  principle  of 
hatred,  God,  on  the  principle  of  love.     Only  love  can  make  us  consent  to  the 
injustice done to Martha, to the exploitat ion of workers, and, finally, to the death of 
innocent children.  
        “ If  the  suffering  of  children,”  says  Ivan,  “serves  to  complete  the  sum  of 
suffering necessary for the acquisition of truth, I affirm from now onward that truth 
is  not  worth  such  a  pric e.”     Ivan  rejects  the  basic  interdependence,  introduced  by 
Christianity, between suffering and truth.    Ivan’s must profound utterance, the one 
which  opens  the  deepest  chasms  beneath  the  rebel’s  feet,  is  his  even  if :  “I  would 
persist  in  my  indignation  even  if  I  were  wrong.”     Which  means  that  even  if  God 
existed, even if the mystery cloaked a truth, even if the starets Zosime were right, 
Ivan would not admit that truth should be paid for by evil, suffering, and the death 
of innocents.    Ivan incarnates the ref usal of salvation. Faith leads to immortal life.    
But  faith  presumes  the  acceptance  of  the  mystery  and  of  evil,  and  resignation  to 
injustice.     The  man  who  is  prevented  by  the  suffering  of  children  from  accepting 
faith  will  certainly  not  accept  eternal  life .     Under  these  conditions,  even  if  eternal 
life existed, Ivan would refuse it.    He rejects this bargain.    He would accept grace 
only  unconditionally,  and  that  is  why  he  makes  his  own  conditions.     Rebellion 
wants all or nothing.    “All the knowledge in the w orld is not worth a child’s tears.”    
Ivan does not say that there is no truth.    He says that if truth does exist, it can only 
be  unacceptable.     Why?     Because  it  is  unjust.     The  struggle  between  truth  and 
justice  is  begun  here  for  the  first  time;  and  it  wil l  never  end.     Ivan,  by  nature  a 
solitary  and  therefore  a  moralist,  will  satisfy  himself  with  a  kind  of  metaphysical 
Don Quixotism.    But a few decades more and an immense political conspiracy will 
attempt to prove that justice is truth.  
         In addition,  Ivan is the incarnation of the refusal to be the only one saved.    He 
throws  in  his  lot  with  the  damned  and,  for  their  sake,  rejects  eternity.     If  he  had 
faith, he could, in fact, be saved, but others would be damned and suffering would 
continue.     There  is  no  possible  salvation  for  the  man  who  feels  real  compassion.    
Ivan  will  continue  to  put  God  in  the  wrong  by  doubly  rejecting  faith  as  he  would 
reject injustice and privilege.    One step more and from  All or Nothing  we arrive at 
Everyone   or No One.  
         Th is  extreme  determination,  and  the  attitude  that  it  implies,  would  have 
sufficed  for  the  romantics.     But  Ivan,  [It  is  worth  noting  that  Ivan  is,  in  a  certain 
way,  Dostoievsky,  who  is  more  at  ease  in  this  role  than  in  the  role  of  Aliosha.] 
even though he als o gives way to dandyism, really lives his problems, torn between 
the  negative  and  the  affirmative.     From  this  moment  onward,  he  accepts  the 
consequences.     If  he  rejects  immortality,  what  remains  for  him?     Life  in  its  most 
elementary  form.     When  the  meaning   of  life  has  been  suppressed,  there  still 
  40  

remains life.    “I live,” says Ivan, “in spite of logic.”    And again: “If I no longer had 
any faith in life, if I doubted a woman I loved, or the universal order of things, if I 
were persuaded, on the contrary, that  everything was only an infernal and accursed 
chaos  –  even then I would want to live.”    Ivan will live, then, and will love as well 
“without knowing why.”    But to live is also to act.    To act in the name of what?    If 
there  is  no  immortality,  then  there  is  neither  reward  nor  punishment.     “I  believe 
that there is no virtue without immortality.”    And also: “I only know that suffering 
exists,  that  no  one  is  guilty,  that  everything  is  connected,  that  everything  passes 
away  and  equals  out.”     But  if  there  is  no  vi rtue,  there  is  no  law:  “Everything  is 
permitted.”  
         With this “everything is permitted” the history of contemporary nihilism really 
begins.     The  romantic  rebellion  did  not  go  so  far.     It  limited  itself  to  saying,  in 
short,  that  everything  was  not  perm itted,  but  that,  through  insolence,  it  allowed 
itself  to  do  what  was  forbidden.     With  the  Karamazovs,  on  the  contrary,  the  logic 
of  indignation  turned  rebellion  against  itself  and  confronted  it  with  a  desperate 
contradiction.     The  essential  difference  is  t hat  the  romantics  allowed  themselves 
moments  of  complacence,  while  Ivan  compelled  himself  to  do  evil  so  as  to  be 
coherent.    He would not allow himself to be good.    Nihilism is not only despair and 
negation, but, above all, the desire to despair and to nega te.    The same man who so 
violently took the part of innocence, who trembled at the suffering of a child, who 
wanted  to  see  “with  his  own  eyes”  the  lamb  lie  down  with  the  lion,  the  victim 
embrace his murderer, from the moment that he rejects divine coherenc e and tries 
to  discover  his  own  rule  of  life,  recognizes  the  legitimacy  of  murder.     Ivan  rebels 
against  a  murderous  God;  but  from  the  moment  that  he  begins  to  rationalize  his 
rebellion, he deduces the law of murder.    If all is permitted, he can kill his fa ther or 
at  least  allow  him  to  be  killed.     Long  reflection  on  the  condition  of  mankind  as 
people   sentenced   to   death   only   leads   to   the   justification   of   crime.      Ivan 
simultaneously hates the death penalty (describing an execution, he says furiously: 
“His  head   fell,  in  the  name  of  divine  grace”)  and  condones  crime,  in  principle.    
Every  indulgence  is  allowed  the  murderer,  none  is  allowed  the  executioner.     This 
contradiction, which Sade swallowed with ease, chokes Ivan Karamazov.  
         He  pretends  to  reason,  in  fact,  as  though  immortality  did  not  exist,  while  he 
only  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  would  refuse  it  even  if  it  did  exist.     In  order  to 
protest  against  evil  and  death,  he  deliberately  chooses  to  say  that  virtue  exists  no 
more  than  does  immortality  and  to   allow  his  father  to  be  killed.     He  consciously 
accepts  his  dilemma;  to  be  virtuous  and  illogical,  or  logical  and  criminal.     His 
prototype,  the  devil,  is  right  when  he  whispers:  “You  are  going  to  commit  a 
virtuous act and yet you do not believe in virtue;  that is what angers and torments 
you.”     The  question  that  Ivan  finally  poses,  the  question  that  constitutes  the  real 
progress  achieved  by  Dostoievsky  in  the  history  of  rebellion,  is  the  only  one  in 
  41  

which  we  are  interested  here:  can  one  live  and  stand  one’s   ground  in  a  state  of 
rebellion?  
         Ivan allows us to guess his answer: one can live in a state of rebellion only by 
pursuing  it  to  the  bitter  end.     What  is  the  bitter  end  of  metaphysical  rebellion?    
Metaphysical  revolution.     The  master  of  the  world,  a fter  his  legitimacy  has  been 
contested,  must  be  overthrown.     Man  must  occupy  his  place.     “As  God  and 
immortality  do  not  exist,  the  new  man  is  permitted  to  become  God.”     But  what 
does  becoming  God  mean?     It  means,  in  fact,  recognizing  that  everything  is 
per mitted and refusing to recognize any other law but one’s own.    Without it being 
necessary to develop the intervening arguments, we can see that to become God is 
to  accept  crime  (a  favourite  ideal  of  Dostoievsky’s  intellectuals).    Ivan’s  personal 
problem is , then, to know if he will be faithful to his logic and if, on the grounds of 
an  indignant  protest  against  innocent  suffering,  he  will  accept  the  murder  of  his 
father  and  the  indifference  of  a  man - god.     We  know  his  solution:  Ivan  allows  his 
father  to  be  ki lled.     Too  profound  to  be  satisfied  with  appearances,  to  sensitive  to 
perform the deed himself, he is content to allow it to be done.    But he goes mad.    
The  man  who  could  not  understand  how  one  could  love  one’s  neighbour  cannot 
understand  either  how  one  ca n  kill  him.     Caught  between  unjustifiable  virtue  and 
unacceptable crime, consumed with pity and incapable of love, a recluse deprived 
of   the   benefits   of   cynicism,   this   man   of   supreme   intelligence   is   killed   by 
contradiction.     “My  mind  is  of  this  world,”  he  said;  “what  good  is  it  to  try  to 
understand  what  is  not  of  this  world?”     But  he  lived  only  for  what  is  not  of  this 
world,  and  his  proud  search  for  the  absolute  is  precisely  what  removed  him  from 
the world of which he loved no part.  
         The fact that Iva n was defeated does not obviate the fact that once the problem 
is posed, the consequence must follow: rebellion is henceforth on the march toward 
action.     This  has  already  been  demonstrated  by  Dostoievsky,  with  prophetic 
intensity, in his legend of the Gra nd Inquisitor.    Ivan, finally, does not distinguish 
the  creator  from  his  creation.     “It  is  not  God  whom  I  reject,”  he  says,  “it  is 
creation.”    In other words, it is God the father, indistinguishable from what He has 
created. [Ivan allows his father to be k illed and thus chooses a direct attack against 
nature   and   procreation.      Moreover,   this   particular   father   is   infamous.      The 
repugnant  figure  of  old  Karamazov  is  continually  coming  between  Ivan  and  the 
God  of  Aliosha.]     His  plot  to  usurp  the  throne,  therefor e,  remains  completely 
moral.    He does not want to reform anything in creation.    But creation being what 
it is, he claims the right to free himself morally and to free all the rest of mankind 
with him.    On the other hand, from the moment when the spirit of  rebellion, having 
accepted the concept of “everything is permitted” and “everyone or no one,” aims 
at  reconstructing  creation  in  order  to  assert  the  sovereignty  and  divinity  of  man, 
and  from  the  moment  when  metaphysical  rebellion  extends  itself  from  ethics   to 
  42  

politics,  a  new  understanding,  of  incalculable  import,  begins,  which  also  springs, 
we  must  note,  from  the  same  nihilism.     Dostoievsky,  the  prophet  of  the  new 
religion,  had  foreseen  and  announced  it:  “If  Aliosha  had  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  neither  G od  nor  immortality  existed,  he  would  immediately  have  become  an 
atheist and a socialist.    For socialism is not only a question of the working classes; 
it is above all, in its contemporary incarnation, a question of atheism, a question of 
the  tower  of  Babel ,  which  is  constructed  without  God’s  help,  not  to  reach  to  the 
heavens,  but  to  bring  the  heavens  down  to  earth.”  [These  questions  (God  and 
immortality)  are  the  same  questions  that  socialism  poses,  but  seen  from  another 
angle.]  
         After  that,  Aliosha  ca n,  in  fact,  treat  Ivan  with  compassion  as  a  “real 
simpleton.”    The latter only made an attempt at self - control and failed.    Others will 
appear,  with  more  serious  intentions,  who,  on  the  basis  of  the  same  despairing 
nihilism,  will  insist  on  ruling  the  world .     These  are  the  Grand  Inquisitors  whom 
imprison Christ and come to tell Him that His method is not correct, that universal 
happiness cannot be achieved by the immediate freedom of choosing between good 
and  evil,  but  by  the  domination  and  unification  of  th e  world.     The  first  step  is  to 
conquer and rule.    The kingdom of heaven will, in fact, appear on earth, but it will 
be  ruled  over  by  men  –   a  mere  handful  to  begin  with,  who  will  be  the  Cæsars, 
because  they  were  the  first  to  understand  –   and  later,  with  tim e,  by  all  men.     The 
unity of all creation will be achieved by every possible means, since everything is 
permitted.    The Grand Inquisitor is old and tired, for the knowledge he possesses is 
bitter.    He knows that men are lazy rather than cowardly and that t hey prefer peace 
and  death  to  the  liberty  of  discerning  between  good  and  evil.     He  has  pity,  a  cold 
pity,  for  the  silent  prisoner  whom  history  endlessly  deceives.     He  urges  him  to 
speak,  to  recognize  his  misdeeds,  and,  in  one  sense,  to  approve  the  actions  of  the 
Inquisitors and of the Cæsars.    But the prisoner does not speak.    The enterprise will 
continue,  therefore,  without  him;  he  will  be  killed.     Legitimacy  will  come  at  the 
end of time, when the kingdom of men is assured.    “The affair as only just begun,  
it is far from being terminated, and the world has many other things to suffer, but 
we  shall  achieve  our  aim,  we  shall  be  Cæsar,  and  then  we  shall  begin  to  think 
about universal happiness.”  
         By  then  the  prisoner  has  been  executed;  the  Grand  Inquisit ors  reign  alone, 
listening  to  “the  profound  spirit,  the  spirit  of  destruction  and  death.”     The  Grand 
Inquisitors proudly refuse freedom and the bread of heaven and offer the bread of 
this  earth  without  freedom.     “Come  down  from  the  cross  and  we  will  believ e  in 
you,”  their  police  agents  are  already  crying  in  Golgotha.     But  He  did  not  come 
down and, even, at the most tortured moment of His agony, He protested to God at 
having  been  forsaken.     There  are,  thus,  no  longer  any  proofs,  but  f aith  and  the 
mystery that the rebels reject and at which the Grand Inquisitors scoff.    Everything 
  43  

is permitted and centuries of crime are prepared in that cataclysmic moment.    From 
Paul to Stalin, the popes who have chosen Cæsar have prepared the way for C æsars 
who  quickly  learn  to  despise  popes.     The  unity  of  the  world,  which  was  not 
achieved with God, will henceforth be attempted in defiance of God.  
         But  we  have  not  yet  reached  that  point.     For  the  moment,  Ivan  offers  us  only 
the  tortured  face  of  th e  rebel  plunged  in  the  abyss,  incapable  of  action,  torn 
between  the  idea  of  his  own  innocence  and  the  desire  to  kill.     He  hates  the  death 
penalty because it is the image of the human condition, and, at the same time, he is 
drawn  to  crime.     Because  he  has  t aken  the  side  of  mankind,  solitude  is  his  lot.    
With him the rebellion of reason culminates in madness.  
   
   
   
Absolute Affirmation  
   
*  
   
         From the moment that man submits God to moral judgement, he kills Him 
in his own heart.    And then what is the ba sis of morality?    God is denied in the 
name of justice, but can the idea of justice be understood without the idea of 
God?     At  this  point  are  we  not  in  the  realm  of  absurdity?     Absurdity  is  the 
concept that Nietzsche meets face to face.    In order to be abl e to dismiss it, he 
pushes  it  to  extremes:  morality  is  the  ultimate  aspect  of  God,  which  must  be 
destroyed before reconstruction can begin.    Then God no longer exists and is 
no  longer  responsible  for  our  existence;  man  must  resolve  to  act,  in  order  to 
exis t.  
   
   
         The Unique  
   
         Even  before  Nietzsche,  Stirner  wanted  to  eradicate  the  very  idea  of  God 
from man’s mind, after he had destroyed God Himself.    But, unlike Nietzsche, 
his  nihilism  was  gratified.     Stirner  laughs  in  his  blind  alley;  Nietzsche   beats 
his  head  against  the  wall.     In  1845  the  year  when  Der  Einziger  und  sein 
Eigentum  (The  Unique  and  its  Characteristics)  appeared,  Stirner  begins  to 
define  his  position.     Stirner,  who  frequented  the  “Society  of  Free  Men”  with 
the  young  Hegelians  of  the   left  (of  whom  Marx  was  one),  had  an  account  to 
settle  not  only  with  God,  but  also  with  Feuerbach’s  Man,  Hegel’s  Spirit,  and 
its  historical  incarnation,  the  State.     All  these  idols,  to  his  mind,  were 
  44  

offsprings of the same “mongolism”  –  the belief in the e ternity of ideas. Thus 
he  was  able  to  write:  “I  have  constructed  my  case  on  nothing.”     Sin  is,  of 
course, a “mongol scourge,” but it is also the law of which we are prisoners.    
God is the enemy; Stirner goes as far as he can in blasphemy (“digest the Host 
and  you  are  rid  of  it”).     But  God  is  only  one  of  the  aberrations  of  the  I,  or 
more  precisely  of  what  I  am.     Socrates,  Jesus,  Descartes,  Hegel,  all  the 
prophets  and  philosophers,  have  done  nothing  but  invent  new  methods  of 
deranging what I am, the I that St irner is so intent on distinguishing from the 
absolute  I  of  Fichte  by  reducing  it  to  its  most  specific  and  transitory  aspect.    
“It has no name,” it is the Unique.  
         For Stirner the history of the universe up to the time of Jesus is nothing but a 
susta ined effort to idealize reality.    This effort is incarnated in the ideas and rites of 
purification  which  the  ancients  employed.     From  the  time  of  Jesus,  the  goal  is 
reached,  and  another  effort  is  embarked  upon  which  consists,  on  the  contrary,  in 
attempting   to  realize  the  ideal.     The  passion  of  the  incarnation  takes  the  place  of 
purification and devastates the world, to a greater and greater degree, as socialism, 
the heir of Christ, extends its sway.    But the history of the universe is nothing but a 
continua l offence to the unique principle that “I am”  –  a living, concrete principle, 
a  triumphant  principle  that  the  world  has  always  wanted  to  subject  to  the  yoke  of 
successive   abstractions  –    God,   the   State,   society,   humanity.      For   Stirner, 
philanthropy  is  a  hoa x.     Atheistic  philosophies,  which  culminate  in  the  cult  of  the 
State  and  of  Man,  are  only  “theological  insurrections.”     “Our  atheists,”  says 
Stirner, “are really pious folk.”    There is only one religion that exists throughout all 
history,  the  belief  in  ete rnity.     This  belief  is  a  deception.     The  only  truth  is  the 
Unique, the enemy of eternity and of everything, in fact, which does not further its 
desire for domination.  
         With  Stirner,  the  concept  of  negation  which  inspires  his  rebellion  irresistibly 
su bmerges  every  aspect  of  affirmation.     It  also  sweeps  away  the  substitutes  for 
divinity  with  which  the  moral  conscience  is  encumbered.     “External  eternity  is 
swept  away,”  he  says,  “but  internal  eternity  has  become  the  new  heaven.”     Even 
revolution,   revoluti on   in   particular,   is   repugnant   to   this   rebel.      To   be   a 
revolutionary,  one  must  continue  to  believe  in  something,  even  where  there  is 
nothing in which to believe.    “The [French] Revolution ended in reaction and that 
demonstrates what the Revolution was in  r eality .”    To dedicate oneself to humanity 
is   no   more   worthwhile   than   serving   God.      Moreover,   fraternity   is   only 
“Communism in its Sunday best.”    During the week, the members of the fraternity 
become  slaves.     Therefore  there  is  only  one  form  of  freedom  for  Stirner,  “my 
power,” and only one truth, “the magnificent egotism of the stars.”  
         In this desert everything begins to flower again.    “The terrifying significance of 
an  unpremeditated  cry  of  joy  cannot  be  understood  while  the  long  night  of  faith 
  45  

and  r eason  endures.”     This  night  is  drawing  to  a  close,  and  a  dawn  will  break 
which is not the dawn of revolution but of insurrection.    Insurrection is, in itself, an 
asceticism  which  rejects  all  forms  of  consolation.     The  insurgent  will  not  be  in 
agreement wit h other men except insofar as, and as long as, their egotism coincides 
with his.    His real life is led in solitude where he will assuage, without restraint, his 
appetite for existing, which is his only reason for existence.  
         In this respect individua lism reaches a climax.    It is the negation of everything 
that  denies  the  individual  and  the  glorification  of  everything  that  exalts  and 
ministers  to  the  individual.     What,  according  to  Stirner,  is  good?     “Everything  of 
which I can make use.”    What am I, le gitimately, authorized to do?    “Everything of 
which  I  am  capable.”     Once  again,  rebellion  leads  to  the  justification  of  crime.    
Stirner not only has attempted to justify crime (in this respect the terrorist forms of 
anarchy  are  directly  descended  from  him) ,  but  is  visibly  intoxicated  by  the 
perspectives  that  he  thus  reveals.     “To  break  with  what  is  sacred,  or  rather  to 
destroy  the  sacred,  could  become  universal.     It  is  not  a  new  revolution  that  is 
approaching  –     but    is    not    a    powerful,    proud,    disrespectful,    s hameless, 
conscienceless crime swelling like a thundercloud on the horizon, and can you not 
see that the sky, heavy with foreboding, is growing dark and silent?”    Here we can 
feel the sombre joy of those who create an apocalypse in a garret.    This bitter a nd 
imperious logic can no longer be held in check, except by an I which is determined 
to  defeat  every  form  of  abstraction  and  which  has  itself  become  abstract  and 
nameless  through  being  isolated  and  cut  off  from  its  roots.     There  are  no  more 
crimes  and  no  more  imperfections,  and  therefore  no  more  sinners.     We  are  all 
perfect.    Since every I is, in itself, fundamentally criminal in its attitude toward the 
State  and  the  people,  we  must  recognize  that  to  live  is  to  transgress.     Unless  we 
accept  death,  we  must  be  willing  to  kill  in  order  to  be  unique.     “You  are  not  as 
noble  as  a  criminal,  you  who  do  not  create  anything.”     Moreover  Stirner,  still 
without the courage of his convictions, specifies: “Kill them, do not martyr them.”  
         But to decree that murder i s legitimate is to decree mobilization and war for all 
the  Unique.     Thus  murder  will  coincide  with  a  kind  of  collective  suicide.     Stirner, 
who  either  does  not  admit  or  does  not  see  this,  nevertheless  does  not  recoil  at  the 
idea of any form of destruction.    The spirit of rebellion finally discovers one of its 
bitterest  satisfactions  in  chaos.     “You  [the  German  nation]  will  be  struck  down.    
Soon  your  sister  nations  will  follow  you;  when  all  of  them  have  gone  your  way, 
humanity will be buried, and on its tomb  I, sole master of myself at last, I, heir to 
all  the  human  race,  will  shout  with  laughter.”     And  so,  among  the  ruins  of  the 
world, the desolate laughter of the individual - king illustrates the last victory of the 
spirit  of  rebellion.     But  at  this  extremity  nothing  else  is  possible  but  death  or 
resurrection.    Stirner, and with him all the nihilist rebels, rush to the utmost limits, 
drunk with destruction.    After which, when the desert has been disclosed, the next 
  46  

step is to learn how to live there.    Nietzsche ’s exhaustive search then begins.  
   
   
         Nietzsche and Nihilism  
   
        “ We deny God, we deny the responsibility of God, it is only thus that we will 
deliver the world.”    With Nietzsche, nihilism seems to become prophetic.    But we 
can draw no conclusi ons from Nietzsche except the base and mediocre cruelty that 
he hated with all his strength, unless we give first place in his work  –  well ahead of 
the  prophet  –   to  the  diagnostician.     The  provisional,  methodical  –   in  a  word, 
strategic  –   character  of  his  t hought  cannot  be  doubted  for  a  moment.     With  him 
nihilism becomes conscious for the first time.    Surgeons have this in common with 
prophets:  they  think  and  operate  in  terms  of  the  future.     Nietzsche  never  thought 
except  in  terms  of  an  apocalypse  to  come,  n ot  only  in  order  to  extol  it,  for  he 
guessed  the  sordid  and  calculating  aspect  that  this  apocalypse  would  finally 
assume,  but  in  order  to  avoid  it  and  to  transform  it  into  a  renaissance.     He 
recognized nihilism for what it was and examined it like a clinic al fact.  
         He  said  of  himself  that  he  was  the  first  complete  nihilist  of  Europe.     Not  by 
choice, but by condition, and because he was too great to refuse the heritage of his 
time.     He  diagnosed  in  himself,  and  in  others,  the  in ability  to  believe  and  the 
disappearance  of  the  primitive  foundation  of  all  faith  –   namely,  the  belief  in  life.    
The  “can  one  live  as  a  rebel?”  became  with  him  “can  one  live  believing  in 
nothing?”    His reply is affirmative.    Yes, if one creates a system ou t of absence of 
faith, if one accepts the final consequences of nihilism, and if, on emerging into the 
desert  and  putting  one’s  confidence  in  what  is  going  to  come,  one  feels,  with  the 
same primitive instinct, both pain and joy.  
         Instead of methodica l doubt, he practiced methodical negation, the determined 
destruction  of  everything  that  still  hides  nihilism  from  itself,  of  the  idols  that 
camouflage   God’s   death.      “To   raise   a   new   sanctuary,   a   sanctuary   must   be 
destroyed, that is the law.”    According to  Nietzsche, he who wants to be a creator 
of  good  or  of  evil  must  first  of  all  destroy  all  values.     “Thus  the  supreme  evil 
becomes part of the supreme good, but the supreme good is creative.”    He wrote, in 
his  own  manner,  the  Discourse  de  la  Méthode   of  his  p eriod,  without  the  freedom 
and exactitude of the seventeenth - century French he admired so much, but with the 
mad  lucidity  that  characterizes  the  twentieth  century,  which,  according  to  him,  is 
the  century  of  genius.     We  must  return  to  the  examination  of  thi s  system  of 
rebellion.  [We  are  obviously  concerned  here  with  Nietzsche’s  final  philosophic 
position,  between  1880  and  his  collapse.     This  chapter  can  be  considered  as  a 
commentary of  Der Wille zur Macht  ( The Will to Power ).]  
         Nietzsche’s  first  step  i s  to  accept  what  he  knows.     Atheism  for  him  goes 
  47  

without saying and is “constructive and radical.”    Nietzsche’s supreme vocation, so 
he  says,  is  to  provoke  a  kind  of  crisis  and  a  final  decision  about  the  problem  of 
atheism.     The  world  continues  on  its  cour se  at  random  and  there  is  nothing  final 
about it.    Thus God is useless, since He wants nothing in particular.    If He wanted 
something  –   and  here  we  recognize  the  traditional  formulation  of  the  problem  of 
evil  –   He  would  have  to  assume  the  responsibility  fo r  “a  sum  total  of  pain  and 
inconsistency which would debase the entire value of being born.”    We know that 
Nietzsche was publicly envious of Stendhal’s epigram: “The only excuse for God 
is  that  he  does  not  exist.”     Deprived  of  the  divine  will,  the  world  is   equally 
deprived of unity of finality.    That is why it is impossible to pass judgement on the 
world.     Any  attempt  to  apply  a  standard  of  values  to  the  world  leads  finally  to  a 
slander of life.    Judgements are based on what is, with reference to what shoul d be 
–  the kingdom of heaven, eternal concepts, or moral imperatives.    But what should 
be  does  not  exist;  and  this  world  cannot  be  judged  in  the  name  of  nothing.     “The 
advantages   of   our   times:   nothing   is   true,   everything   is   permitted.”      These 
magnificent  o r  ironic  formulas  which  are  echoed  by  thousands  of  others,  at  least 
suffice  to  demonstrate  that  Nietzsche  accepts  the  entire  burden  of  nihilism  and 
rebellion.    In his somewhat puerile reflections on “training and selection” he even 
formulated  the  extreme  l ogic  of  nihilistic  reasoning:  “Problem:  by  what  means 
could  we  obtain  a  strict  form  of  complete  and  contagious  nihilism  which  would 
teach and practise, with complete scientific awareness, voluntary death?”  
         But Nietzsche enlists values in the cause o f nihilism which, traditionally, have 
been considered as restraints on nihilism  –  principally morality.    Moral conduct, as 
exemplified  by  Socrates,  or  as  recommended  by  Christianity,  is  in  itself  a  sign  of 
decadence.    It wants to substitute the mere shadow  of a man for a man of flesh and 
blood.    It condemns the universe of passion and emotion in the name of an entirely 
imaginary  world  of  harmony.     If  nihilism  is  the  inability  to  believe,  then  its  most 
serious symptom is not found in atheism, but in the inab ility to believe in what is, 
to  see  what  is  happening,  and  to  live  life  as  it  is  offered.     This  infirmity  is  at  the 
root  of  all  idealism.     Morality  has  no  faith  in  the  world.     For  Nietzsche,  real 
morality  cannot  be  separated  from  lucidity.     He  is  severe  on   the  “calumniators  of 
the  world”  because  he  discerns  in  the  calumny  a  shameful  taste  for  evasion.    
Traditional morality, for him, is only a special type of immorality.    “It is virtue,” he 
says,  “which  has  need  of  justification.”     And  again:  “It  is  for  mora l  reasons  that 
good, one day, will cease to be done.”  
         Nietzsche’s   philosophy,   undoubtedly,   revolves   around   the   problem   of 
rebellion.    More precisely, it begins by being a rebellion.    But we sense the change 
of position that Nietzsche makes.    With hi m, rebellion begins with “God is dead,” 
which is assumed as an established fact; then it turns against everything that aims 
at  falsely  replacing  the  vanished  deity  and  reflects  dishonour  on  a  world  which 
  48  

doubtless has no direction but which remains neverth eless the only proving - ground 
of  the  gods.     Contrary  to  the  opinion  of  certain  of  his  Christian  critics,  Nietzsche 
did  not  form  a  project  to  kill  God.     He  found  Him  dead  in  the  soul  of  his 
contemporaries.     He  was  the  first  to  understand  the  immense  importa nce  of  the 
event  and  to  decide  that  this  rebellion  on  the  part  of  men  could  not  lead  to  a 
renaissance  unless  it  was  controlled  and  directed.     Any  other  attitude  toward  it, 
whether  regret  or  complacency,  must  lead  to  the  apocalypse.     Thus  Nietzsche  did 
not  formulate a philosophy of rebellion, but constructed a philosophy on rebellion.  
         If  he  attacks  Christianity  in  particular,  it  is  only  insofar  as  it  represents 
morality.    He always leaves intact the person of Jesus on the one hand, and on the 
other th e cynical aspects of the Church.    We know that, from the point of view of 
the  connoisseur,  he  admired  the  Jesuits.     “Basically,”  he  writes,  “only  the  God  of 
morality  is  rejected.”     Christ,  for  Nietzsche  as  for  Tolstoy,  is  not  a  rebel.     The 
essence  of  His  d octrine  is  summed  up  in  total  consent  and  in  non - resistance  to 
evil.    Thou shalt not kill, even to prevent killing.    The world must be accepted as it 
is,  nothing  must  be  added  to  its  unhappiness,  but  you  must  consent  to  suffer 
personally  from  the  evil  it  c ontains.     The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within  our 
immediate  reach.     It  is  only  an  inner  inclination  which  allows  us  to  make  our 
actions coincide with these principles and which can give us immediate salvation.    
Not faith but deeds  –  that, according to Nietzche , is Christ’s message.    From then 
on, the history of Christianity is nothing but a long betrayal of this message.    The 
New  Testament  is  already  corrupted,  and  from  the  time  of  Paul  to  the  Councils, 
subservience to faith leads to the neglect of deeds.  
          What is the profoundly corrupt addition made by Christianity to the message of 
its Master?    The idea of judgement, completely foreign to the teachings of Christ, 
and  the  correlative  notions  of  punishment  and  reward.     From  that  moment  nature 
becomes histo ry, and significant history expressed by the idea of human totality is 
born.    From the Annunciation until the Last Judgement, humanity has no other task 
but  to  conform  to  the  strictly  moral  ends  of  a  narrative  that  has  already  been 
written.     The  only  diffe rence  is  that  the  characters,  in  the  epilogue,  separate 
themselves  into  the  good  and  the  bad.     While  Christ’s  sole  judgement  consists  in 
saying that the sins of nature are unimportant, historical Christianity makes nature 
the  source  of  sin.     “What  does  Chr ist  deny?     Everything  that  at  present  bears  the 
name  of  Christian.”     Christianity  believes  that  it  is  fighting  against  nihilism 
because  it  gives  the  world  a  sense  of  direction,  while  it  is  really  nihilist  itself 
insofar as, by imposing an imaginary meaning  on life, it prevents the discovery of 
its real meaning: “Every Church is a stone rolled onto the tomb of the man - god; it 
tries to prevent the resurrection, by force.”    Nietzsche’s paradoxical but significant 
conclusion  is  that  God  has  been  killed  by  Chris tianity,  in  that  Christianity  has 
secularized  the  sacred.    Here  we  must  understand  historical  Christianity  and  “its 
  49  

profound and contemptible duplicity.”  
         The  same  process  of  reasoning  leads  to  Nietzsche’s  attitude  toward  socialism 
and  all  forms  of  h umanitarianism.     Socialism  is  only  a  degenerate  form  of 
Christianity.     In  fact,  it  preserves  a  belief  in  the  finality  of  history  which  betrays 
life  and  nature,  which  substitutes  ideal  ends  for  real  ends,  and  contributes  to 
enervating  both  the  will  and  the  imagination.     Socialism  is  nihilistic,  in  the 
henceforth precise sense that Nietzsche confers on the word.    A nihilist is not one 
who  believes  in  nothing,  but  one  who  does  not  believe  in  what  exists.     In  this 
sense, all forms of socialism are manifestation s, degraded once again, of Christian 
decadence.     For  Christianity,  reward  and  punishment  implied  the  existence  of 
humanity.    But, by inescapable logic, all history ends by implying punishment and 
reward;  and,  from  this  day  on,  collectivist  Messianism  is  bo rn.     Similarly,  the 
equality  of  souls  before  God  leads,  now  that  God  is  dead,  to  equality  pure  and 
simple.     There  again,  Nietzsche  wages  war  against  socialist  doctrines  insofar  as 
they  are  moral  doctrines.     Nihilism,  whether  manifested  in  religion  or  in  so cialist 
preachings,  is  the  logical  conclusion  of  our  so - called  superior  values.     The  free 
mind will destroy these values and denounce the illusions on which they are built, 
the bargaining that they imply, and the crime they commit in preventing the lucid 
i ntelligence  from  accomplishing  its  mission:  to  transform  passive  nihilism  into 
active nihilism.  
          
         In  this  world  rid  of  God  and  of  moral  idols,  man  is  now  alone  and  without  a 
master.     No  one  has  been  less  inclined  than  Nietzsche  (and  in  this  wa y  he 
distinguishes  himself  from  the  romantics)  to  let  it  be  believed  that  such  freedom 
would  be  easy.     This  complete  liberation  put  him  among  the  ranks  of  those  of 
whom he himself said that they suffered a new form of anguish and a new form of 
happiness.     But, at the beginning, it is only anguish that makes him cry out: “Alas, 
grant  me  madness....  Unless  I  am  above  the  law,  I  am  the  most  outcast  of  all 
outcasts.”     He  who  cannot  maintain  his  position  above  the  law  must  in  fact  find 
another law or take refuge i n madness.    From the moment that man believes neither 
in  God  nor  in  immortal  life,  he  becomes  “responsible  for  everything  alive,  for 
everything that, born of suffering, is condemned to suffer from life.”    It is he, and 
he  alone,  who  must  discover  law  and  o rder.     Then  the  time  of  exile  begins,  the 
endless  search  for  justification,  the  aimless  nostalgia,  “the  most  painful,  the  most 
heartbreaking  question,  that  of  the  heart  which  asks  itself:  where  can  I  feel  at 
home?”  
         Because his mind was free, Nietzsc he knew that freedom of the mind is not a 
comfort, but an achievement to which one aspires and at long last obtains after an 
exhausting  struggle.     He  knew  that  in  wanting  to  consider  oneself  above  the  law, 
there is a great risk of finding oneself beneath t he law.    That is why he understood 
  50  

that   only   the   mind   found   its   real   emancipation   in   the   acceptance   of   new 
obligations.    The essence of his discovery consists in saying that if the eternal law 
is not freedom, the absence of law is still less so.    If nothin g is true, if the world is 
without order, then nothing is forbidden; to prohibit an action, there must, in fact, 
be  a  standard  of  values  and  an  aim.     But,  at  the  same  time,  nothing  is  authorized; 
there  must  also  be  values  and  aims  in  order  to  choose  anothe r  course  of  action.    
Absolute  domination  by  the  law  does  not  represent  liberty,  but  no  more  does 
absolute  anarchy.     The  sum  total  of  every  possibility  does  not  amount  to  liberty, 
but  to  attempt  the  impossible  amounts  to  slavery.     Chaos  is  also  a  form  of 
se rvitude.    Freedom exists only in a world where what is possible is defined at the 
same time as what is not possible.    Without law there is no freedom.    If fate is not 
guided  by  superior  values,  if  chance  is  king,  then  there  is  nothing  but  the  step  in 
the  d ark  and  the  appalling  freedom  of  the  blind.     On  the  point  of  achieving  the 
most   complete   liberation,   Nietzsche   therefore   chooses   the   most   complete 
subordination.     “If  we  do  not  make  of  God’s  death  a  great  renunciation  and  a 
perpetual victory over ourselves , we shall have to pay for that omission.”    In other 
words,  with  Nietzsche,  rebellion  ends  in  asceticism.     A  profounder  logic  replaces 
the  “if  nothing  is  true,  everything  is  permitted”  of  Karamazov  by  “if  nothing  is 
true, nothing is permitted.”    To deny th at one single thing is forbidden in this world 
amounts  to  renouncing  everything  that  is  permitted.     At  the  point  where  it  is  no 
longer possible to say what is black and what is white, the light is extinguished and 
freedom becomes a voluntary prison.  
         It  can  be  said  that  Nietzsche,  with  a  kind  of  frightful  joy,  rushes  toward  the 
impasse  into  which  he  methodically  drives  his  nihilism.     His  avowed  aim  is  to 
render the situation untenable to his contemporaries.    His only hope seems to be to 
arrive at the  extremity of contradiction.    Then if man does not wish to perish in the 
coils that strangle him, he will have to cut them at a single blow and create his own 
values.    The death of God accomplishes nothing and can only be endured in terms 
of  preparing  a  res urrection.     “If  we  fail  to  find  grandeur  in  God,”  says  Nietzsche, 
“we find it nowhere; it must be denied or created.”    To deny it was the task of the 
world  around  him,  which  he  saw  rushing  toward  suicide.     To  create  was  the 
superhuman task for which he was  willing to die.    He knew in fact that creation is 
only possible in the extremity of solitude and that man would only commit himself 
to this staggering task if, in the most extreme distress of mind, he was compelled to 
undertake it or perish.    Nietzsche cr ies out to man that the only truth is the world, 
to which he must be faithful and in which he must live and find his salvation.    But 
at  the  same  time  he  teaches  him  that  to  live  in  a  lawless  world  is  impossible 
because to live explicitly implies a law.    Ho w can one live freely and without law?    
To this enigma man must find an answer, on pain of death.  
         Nietzsche  at  least  does  not  flinch.     He  answers  and  his  answer  is  bold: 
  51  

Damocles  never  danced  better  than  beneath  the  sword.     One  must  accept  the 
unacc eptable  and  hold  to  the  untenable.     From  the  moment  that  it  is  admitted  that 
the  world  pursues  no  end,  Nietzsche  proposes  to  concede  its  innocence,  to  affirm 
that  it  accepts  no  judgement  since  it  cannot  be  judged  on  any  intention,  and 
consequently to repla ce all judgements based on values by absolute assent, and by 
a  complete  and  exalted  allegiance  to  this  world.     Thus  from  absolute  despair  will 
spring  infinite  joy,  from  blind  servitude,  unbounded  freedom.     To  be  free  is, 
precisely,  to  abolish  ends.     The  in nocence  of  the  ceaseless  change  of  things,  as 
soon  as  one  consents  to  it,  represents  the  maximum  liberty.     The  free  mind 
willingly accepts what is necessary.    Nietzsche’s most profound concept is that the 
necessity of phenomena, if it is absolute, without  rifts, does not imply any kind of 
restraint.     Total  acceptance  of  total  necessity  is  his  paradoxical  definition  of 
freedom.     The  question  “free  of  what?”  is  thus  replaced  by  “free  for  what?”    
Liberty   coincides  with  heroism.     It  is  t he  asceticism  of  the  great  man,  “the  bow 
bent to the breaking - point.”  
         This  magnificent  consent,  born  of  abundance  and  fullness  of  spirit,  is  the 
unreserved affirmation of human imperfection and suffering, of evil and murder, of 
all that is problemat ic and strange in our existence.    It is born of an arrested wish to 
be what one is in a world that is what it is.    “To consider oneself a fatality, not to 
wish  to  be  other  than  one  is  ...”  Nietzschean  asceticism,  which  begins  with  the 
recognition  of  fatality ,  ends  in  a  deification  of  fate.     The  more  implacable  destiny 
is,  the  more  it  becomes  worthy  of  adoration.     A  moral  God,  pity,  and  love  are 
enemies of fate to the extent that they try to counter - balance it.    Nietzsche wants no 
redemption.     The  joy  of  self - realization  is  the  joy  of  annihilation.     But  only  the 
individual is annihilated.    The movement of rebellion, by which man demanded his 
own   existence,   disappears   in   the   individual’s   absolute   submission   to   the 
inevitable.     Amor   fati    replaces   what   was   an  odiu m   fati .      “Every   individual 
collaborates with the entire cosmos, whether we know it or not, whether we want it 
or  not.”     The  individual  is  lost  in  the  destiny  of  the  species  and  the  eternal 
movement of the spheres.    “Everything that has existed is eternal,  the sea throws it 
back on the shore.”  
         Nietzsche  then  turns  to  the  origins  of  thought  –   to  the  pre - Socratics.     These 
philosophers  suppressed  ultimate  causes  so  as  to  leave  intact  the  eternal  values  of 
the   principles   they   upheld.      Only   power   without   p urpose,   only   Heraclitus’ 
“chance,” is eternal.    Nietzsche’s whole effort is directed toward demonstrating the 
existence  of  the  law  that  governs  the  eternal  flux  and  of  the  element  of  chance  in 
the inevitable: “A child is innocence and forgetfulness, a new  beginning, a gamble, 
a  wheel  that  spins  automatically,  a  first  step,  the  divine  gift  of  being  able  to 
consent.”     The  world  is  divine  because  the  world  is  inconsequential.     That  is  why 
art  alone,  by  being  equally  inconsequential,  is  capable  of  grasping  it.     It  is 
  52  

impossible to give a clear account of the world, but art can teach us to reproduce it 
–   just  as  the  world  reproduces  itself  in  the  course  of  its  eternal  gyrations.     The 
primordial  sea  indefatigably  repeats  the  same  words  and  casts  up  the  same 
astoni shed  beings  on  the  same  seashore.     But  at  least  he  who  consents  to  his  own 
return  and  to  the  return  of  all  things,  who  becomes  an  echo  and  an  exalted  echo, 
participates in the divinity of the world.  
         By this subterfuge, the divinity of man is finally  introduced.    The rebel, who at 
first  denies  God,  finally  aspires  to  replace  Him.     But  Nietzsche’s  message  is  that 
the  rebel  can  only  become  God  by  renouncing  every  form  of  rebellion,  even  the 
type of rebellion that produces gods to chastise humanity.    “If  there is a God, how 
can  one  tolerate  not  being  God  oneself?”     There  is,  in  fact,  a  god  –   namely,  the 
world.    To participate in its divinity, all that is necessary is to consent.    “No longer 
to pray, but to give one’s blessing,” and the earth will abound i n men - gods.    To say 
yes  to  the  world,  to  reproduce  it,  is  simultaneously  to  re - create  the  world  and 
oneself, to become the great artist, the creator.    Nietzsche’s message is summed up 
in  the  word  creation ,  with  the  ambiguous  meaning  it  has  assumed.     Nietzs che’s 
sole  admiration  was  for  the  egotism  and  severity  proper  to  all  creators.     The 
transmutation of values consists only in replacing critical values by creative values; 
by  respect  and  admiration  for  what  exists.     Divinity  without  immortality  defines 
the  extent  of  the  creator’s  freedom.     Dionysos,  the  earth - god,  shrieks  eternally  as 
he is torn limb from limb.    But at the same time he represents the agonized beauty 
that  coincides  with  suffering.     Nietzsche  thought  that  to  accept  this  earth  and 
Dionysos  was  to  accept  his  own  sufferings.     And  to  accept  everything,  both 
suffering  and  the  supreme  contradiction  simultaneously,  was  to  be  king  of  all 
creation.     Nietzsche  agreed  to  pay  the  price  for  his  kingdom.     Only  the  “sad  and 
suffering”  world  is  true  –   the  worl d  is  the  only  divinity.     Like  Empedocles,  who 
threw himself into the crater of  Mount Etna   to find truth in the only place where it 
exists  –   namely,  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  –   Nietzsche  proposed  that  man  should 
allow  himself  to  be  engulfed  in  the  cosmos  in  order  to  rediscover  his  eternal 
divinity and to become Dionysos.     The Will to Power  ends, like Pascal’s  Pensées , 
of which it so often reminds us, with a wager.    Man does not yet obtain assurance 
but only the wish for assurance, wh ich is not at all the same thing.    Nietzsche, too, 
hesitated  on  this  brink:  “That  is  what  is  unforgivable  in  you.     You  have  the 
authority  and  you  refuse  to  sign.”     Yet  finally  he  had  to  sign.     But  the  name  of 
Dionysos  immortalized  only  the  notes  to  Ariadne ,  which  he  wrote  when  he  was 
mad.  
   
         In  a  certain  sense,  rebellion,  with  Nietzsche,  ends  again  in  the  exaltation  of 
evil.    The difference is that evil is no longer a revenge.    It is accepted as one of the 
possible aspects of good and, with rather mor e conviction, as part of destiny.    Thus 
  53  

he  considers  it  as  something  to  be  avoided  and  also  as  a  sort  of  remedy.     In 
Nietzsche’s  mind,  the  only  problem  was  to  see  that  the  human  spirit  bowed 
proudly  to  the  inevitable.     We  know,  however,  his  posterity  and  w hat  kind  of 
politics  were  to  claim  the  authorization  of  the  man  who  claimed  to  be  the  last 
antipolitical German.    He dreamed of tyrants who were artists.    But tyranny comes 
more naturally than art to mediocre men.    “Rather Cesare Borgia than Parsifal,” he 
exclaimed.     He  begat  both  Cæsar  and  Borgia,  but  devoid  of  the  distinction  of 
feeling which he attributed to the great men of the Renaissance.    As a result of his 
insistence  that  the  individual  should  bow  before  the  eternity  of  the  species  and 
should  submer ge  himself  in  the  great  cycle  of  time,  race  has  been  turned  into  a 
special aspect of the species, and the individual has been made to bow before this 
sordid god.    The life of which he spoke with fear and trembling has been degraded 
to  a  sort  of  biology  for   domestic  use.     Finally,  a  race  of  vulgar  overlords,  with  a 
blundering desire for power, adopted, in his name, the “anti - Semitic deformity” on 
which he never ceased to pour scorn.  
         He believed in courage combined with intelligence, and that was what  he called 
strength.    Courage has been turned in his name against intelligence, and the virtues 
that were really his have been transformed into their opposite: blind violence.    He 
confused  freedom  and  solitude,  as  do  all  proud  spirits.     His  “profound  solitu de  at  
midday   and  at  midnight ”  was  nevertheless  lost  in  the  mechanized  hordes  that 
finally  inundated  Europe.     Advocate  of  classic  taste,  of  irony,  of  frugal  defiance, 
aristocrat who had  the courage to say that aristocracy consisted in practising virtue 
without  asking  for  a  reason  and  that  a  man  who  had  to  have  reasons  for  being 
honest  was  not  to  be  trusted,  addict  of  integrity  (“integrity  that  has  become  an 
instinct,  a  passion”),  stubbor n  supporter  of  the  “supreme  equity  of  the  supreme 
intelligence  that  is  the  mortal  enemy  of  fanaticism,”  he  was  set  up,  thirty - three 
years after his death, by his own countrymen as the master of lies and violence, and 
his  ideas  and  virtues,  made  admirable  b y  his  sacrifice,  have  been  rendered 
detestable.      In   the   history   of   the   intelligence,   with   the   exception   of   Marx, 
Nietzsche’s adventure has not equivalent; we shall never finish making reparation 
for  the  injustice  done  to  him.     Of  course  history  records  oth er  philosophies  that 
have  been  misconstrued  and  betrayed.     But  up  to  the  time  of  Nietzsche  and 
National  Socialism,  it  was  quite  without  parallel  that  a  process  of  thought  –  
brilliantly illuminated by the nobility and by the sufferings of an exceptional min d 
–  should have been demonstrated to the eyes of the world by a parade of lies and 
by  the  hideous  accumulation  of  corpses  in  concentration  camps.     The  doctrine  of 
the  superman  led  to  the  methodical  creation  of  sub - men  –   a  fact  that  doubtless 
should be deno unced, but which also demands interpretation.    If the final result of 
the great movement of rebellion in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was to be 
this  ruthless  bondage,  then  surely  rebellion  should  be  rejected  and  Nietzsche’s 
  54  

desperate  cry  to  his  c ontemporaries  taken  up:  “My  conscience  and  yours  are  no 
longer the same conscience.”  
         We  must  first  of  all  realize  that  we  can  never  confuse  Nietzsche  with 
Rosenberg.     We  must  be  the  advocates  of  Nietzsche.     He  himself  has  sai d  so, 
denouncing  in  advance  his  bastard  progeny:  “he  who  has  liberated  his  mind  still 
has to purify himself.”    But the question is to find out if the liberation of the mind, 
as he conceived it, does not preclude purification.    The very movement that comes 
to  a  head  with  Nietzsche,  and  that  sustains  him,  has  its  laws  and  its  logic,  which, 
perhaps,  explain  the  bloody  travesty  of  his  philosophy.     Is  there  nothing  in  his 
work that can be used in support of definitive murder?    Cannot the killers, provided 
they d eny the spirit in favour of the letter (and even all that remains in the spirit of 
the  letter),  find  their  pretext  in  Nietzsche?     The  answer  must  be  yes.     From  the 
moment  that  the  methodical  aspect  of  Nietzschean  thought  is  neglected  (and  it  is 
not  certain   that  he  himself  always  observed  it),  his  rebellious  logic  knows  no 
bounds.  
         We  also  remark  that  it  is  not  in  the  Nietzschean  refusal  to  worship  idols  that 
murder  finds  its  justification,  but  in  the  passionate  approbation  that  distinguishes 
Nietzsche ’s work.    To say yes to everything supposes that one says yes to murder.    
Moreover, it expresses two ways of consenting to murder.    If the slave says yes to 
everything,  he  consents  to  the  existence  of  a  master  and  to  his  own  sufferings: 
Jesus  teaches  non - r esistance.     If  the  master  says  yes  to  everything,  he  consents  to 
slavery  and  to  the  suffering  of  others;  and  the  result  is  the  tyrant  and  the 
glorification of murder.    “Is it not laughable that we believe in a sacred, infrangible 
law  –   thou  shalt  not  lie,  thou  shalt  not  kill  –   in  an  existence  characterized  by 
perpetual  lying  and  perpetual  murder?”     Actually  metaphysical  rebellion,  in  its 
initial  stages,  was  only  a  protest  against  the  lie  and  the  crime  of  existence.     The 
Nietzschean  affirmative,  forgetful  of   the  original  negative,  disavows  rebellion  at 
the  same  time  that  it  disavows  the  ethic  that  refuses  to  accept  the  world  as  it  is.    
Nietzsche clamoured for a Roman Cæsar with the soul of Christ.    To his mind, this 
was to say yes to both slave and master.    B ut, in the last analysis, to say yes to both 
was to give one’s blessing to the stronger of the two  –  namely, the master.    Cæsar 
must  inevitably  renounce  the  domination  of  the  mind  and  choose  to  rule  in  the 
realm  of  fact.     “How  can  one  make  the  best  of  crim e?”  asks  Nietzsche,  as  a  good 
professor faithful to his system.    Cæsar must answer: by multiplying it. “When the 
ends  are  great,”  Nietzsche  wrote  to  his  own  detriment,  “humanity  employs  other 
standards and no longer judges crime as such even if it resorts  to the most frightful 
means.”    He died in 1900, at the beginning of the century in which that pretension 
was to become fatal.    It was in vain that he exclaimed in his hour of lucidity, “It is 
easy  to  talk  about  all  sorts  of  immoral  acts;  but  would  one  have   the  courage  to 
carry them through?    For example, I could not bear to break my word or to kill; I 
  55  

should languish, and eventually I should die as a result  –  that would be my fate.”    
From  the  moment  that  assent  was  given  to  the  totality  of  human  experience,   the 
way was open to others who, far from languishing, would gather strength from lies 
and  murder.     Nietzsche’s  responsibility  lies  in  having  legitimized,  for  reasons  of 
method  –  and even if only for an instant  –  the opportunity for dishonesty of which 
Dos toievsky had already said that if one offered it to people, one could always be 
sure of seeing them rushing to seize it.    But his involuntary responsibility goes still 
farther.  
         Nietzsche  is  exactly  what  he  recognized  himself  as  being:  the  must  acute  
manifestation  of  nihilism’s  conscience.     The  decisive  step  that  he  compelled 
rebellion  to  take  consists  in  making  it  jump  from  the  negation  of  the  ideal  to  the 
secularization  of  the  ideal.     Since  the  salvation  of  man  is  not  achieved  in  God,  it 
must  be  ach ieved  on  earth.     Since  the  world  has  no  direction,  man,  from  the 
moment he accepts this, must give it one that will eventually lead to a superior type 
of humanity.    Nietzsche laid claim to the direction of the future of the human race.    
“The task of govern ing the world is going to fall to our lot.”    And elsewhere: “The 
time  is  approaching  when  we  shall  have  to  struggle  for  the  domination  of  the 
world, and this struggle will be fought in the name of philosophical principles.”    In 
these  words  he  announced  the   twentieth  century.     But  he  was  able  to  announce  it 
because  he  was  warned  by  the  interior  logic  of  nihilism  and  knew  that  one  of  its 
aims was ascendancy; and thus he prepared the way for this ascendancy.  
         There  is  freedom  for  man  without  God,  as  Niet zsche  imagined  him;  in  other 
words,  for  the  solitary  man.     There  is  freedom  at  midday   when  the  wheel  of  the 
world stops spinning and man consents to things as they are.    But  what is  becomes 
what  will  be ,  and  the  ceaseless  change  of  things  must  be  accepted.     The  light 
finally  grows  dim,  the  axis  of  the  day  declines.     Then  history  begins  again  and 
freedom  must  be  sought  in  history;  history  must  be  accepted.     Nietzscheism  –   the 
theory of the individual’s will to power  –  was condemned to  support the universal 
will  to  power.     Nietzscheism  was  nothing  without  world  domination.     Nietzsche 
undoubtedly hated freethinkers and humanitarians.    He took the words  freedom of 
thought   in  their  most  extreme  sense:  the  divinity  of  the  individual  mind.     But  he 
could not stop the freethinkers from partaking of the same historical fact as himself 
–   the  death  of  God  –   nor  could  he  prevent  the  consequences  being  the  same.    
Nietzsche  saw  clearly  that  humanitarianism  was  only  a  form  of  Christianity 
deprived of  superior justification, which preserved final causes while rejecting the 
first  cause.     But  he  failed  to  perceive  that  the  doctrines  of  socialist  emancipation 
must,  by  an  inevitable  logic  of  nihilism,  lead  to  what  he  himself  had  dreamed  of: 
superhumanity.  
          Philosophy  secularizes  the  ideal.     But  tyrants  appear  who  soon  secularize  the 
philosophies that give them the right to do so.    Nietzsche had already predicted this 
  56  

development in discussing Hegel, whose originality, according to him, consisted in 
inv enting a pantheism in which evil, error, and suffering could no longer serve as 
arguments  against  the  divinity.     “But  the  State,  the  powers  that  be,  immediately 
made  use  of  this  grandiose  initiative.”     He  himself,  however,  had  conceived  of  a 
system in whic h crime could no longer serve as an argument and in which the only 
value resided in the divinity of man.    This grandiose initiative also had to be put to 
use.     National  Socialism  in  this  respect  was  only  a  transitory  heir,  only  the 
speculative  and  rabid  ou tcome  of  nihilism.     In  all  others  respects  those  who,  in 
correcting  Nietzsche  with  the  help  of  Marx,  will  choose  to  assent  only  to  history, 
and  no  longer  to  all  of  creation,  will  be  perfectly  logical.     The  rebel  whom 
Nietzsche  set  on  his  knees  before  the  c osmos  will,  from  now  on,  kneel  before 
history.     What  is  surprising  about  that?     Nietzsche,  at  least  in  his  theory  of 
superhumanity,  and  Marx  before  him,  with  his  classless  society,  both  replace  the 
Beyond  by  the  Later  On.     In  that  way  Nietzsche  betrayed  th e  Greeks  and  the 
teaching of Jesus, who, according to him, replaced the Beyond by the Immediate.    
Marx,  like  Nietzsche,  thought  in  strategic  terms,  and  like  Nietzsche  hated  formal 
virtue.    Their two rebellions, both of which finish similarly in adhesion to  a certain 
aspect  of  reality,  end  by  merging  into  Marxism - Leninism  and  being  incarnated  in 
that  caste,  already  mentioned  by  Nietzsche,  which  would  “replace  the  priest,  the 
teacher, the doctor.”    The fundamental difference is that Nietzsche, in awaiting the  
superman,  proposed  to  assent  to  what  exists  and  Marx  to  what  is  to  come.     For 
Marx, nature is to be obeyed in order to obey history; for Nietzsche, nature is to be 
obeyed in order to subjugate history.    It is the difference between the Christian and 
the  G reek.     Nietzsche,  at  least,  foresaw  what  was  going  to  happen:  “What  we 
desire is well - being.... As a result we march toward a spiritual slavery such as has 
never  been  seen....  Intellectual  Cæsarism  hovers  over  every  activity  of  the 
businessman   and   the   philosop her.”      Placed   in   the   crucible   of   Nietzschean 
philosophy,   rebellion,   in   the   intoxication   of   freedom,   ends   in   biological   or 
historical  Cæsarism.     The  absolute  negative  had  driven  Stirner  to  deify  crime 
simultaneously   with   the   individual.      But   the   absolute   af firmative   leads   to 
universalizing murder and mankind simultaneously.    Marxism - Leninism has really 
accepted  the  burden  of  Nietzsche’s  free  will  by  means  of  ignoring  several 
Nietzschean  virtues.     The  great  rebel  thus  creates  with  his  own  hands,  and  for  his 
o wn  imprisonment,  the  implacable  reign  of  necessity.     Once  he  had  escaped  from 
God’s  prison,  his  first  care  was  to  construct  the  prison  of  history  and  of  reason, 
thus putting the finishing touch to the camouflage and consecration of the nihilism 
whose conqu est he claimed.  
   
   
   
  57  

The Poet’s Rebellion  
   
*  
   
         If  metaphysical  rebellion  refuses  to  assent  and  restricts  itself  to  absolute 
negation,  it  condemns  itself  to  passive  acceptance.     If  it  prostrates  itself  in 
adoration of what exists and renounces its  right to dispute any part of reality, 
it is sooner or later compelled to act.    Ivan Karamazov  –  who represents non -
interference,  but  in  a  dolorous  aspect  –   stands  halfway  between  the  two 
positions.    Rebel poetry, at the end of the nineteenth and the beginn ing of the 
twentieth century, constantly oscillated between these two extremes: between 
literature  and  the  will  to  power,  between  the  irrational  and  the  rational,  the 
desperate  dream  and  ruthless  action.     The  rebel  poets  –   above  all,  the 
surrealists  –  ligh t the way that leads from passive acceptance to action, along a 
spectacular short - cut.  
         Hawthorne   was able to say of Melville that, as an unbeliever, he was extremely 
uneasy in his unbelief.    It can equally be said of the poet s who rushed to assault the 
heavens,  with  the  intent  of  turning  everything  upside  down,  that  by  so  doing  they 
affirmed  their  desperate  nostalgia  for  order.     As  an  ultimate  contradiction,  they 
wanted  to  extract  reason  from  unreason  and  to  systematize  the  ir rational.     Their 
heirs  of  romanticism  claimed  to  make  poetry  exemplary  and  to  find,  in  its  most 
harrowing  aspects,  the  real  way  of  life.     They  deified  blasphemy  and  transformed 
poetry  into  experience  and  into  a  means  of  action.     Until  their  time  those  who 
claimed to influence men and events, at least in the Occident, did so in the name of 
rational   rules.      On   the   contrary,   surrealism,   after   Rimbaud,   wanted   to   find 
constructive rules in insanity and destruction.    Rimbaud, through his work and only 
through   his    work,   pointed   out   the   path,   but   with   the   blinding,   momentary 
illumination of a flash of lightning.    Surrealism excavated this path and codified its 
discoveries.     By  its  excesses  as  well  as  its  retreats,  it  gave  the  last  and  most 
magnificent expression to  a practical theory of irrational rebellion at the very same 
time  when,  on  another  path,  rebellious  thought  was  founding  the  cult  of  absolute 
reason.     Lautréamont  and  Rimbaud  –   its  sources  of  inspiration  –   demonstrate  by 
what  stages  the  irrational  desire  to   accept  appearances  can  lead  the  rebel  to  adopt 
courses of action completely destructive to freedom.  
   
   
         Lautéamont and Banality  
   
         Lautéamont  demonstrates  that  the  rebel  dissimulates  the  desire  to  accept 
appearance  behind  the  desire  for  banal ity.     In  either  case,  whether  he  abases  or 
  58  

vaunts himself, the rebel wants to be other than he is, even when he is prepared to 
be  recognized  for  what  he  really  is.     The  blasphemies  and  the  conformity  of 
Lautréamont illustrate this unfortunate contradiction , which is resolved in his case 
in  the  desire  to  be  nothing  at  all.     Far  from  being  a  recantation,  as  is  generally 
supposed, the same passion for annihilation explains Maldoror’s invocation of the 
primeval night and the laborious banalities of the  Poésies .  
         Lautréamont  makes  us  understand  that  rebellion  is  adolescent.     Our  most 
effective  terrorists,  whether  they  are  armed  with  bombs  or  with  poetry,  hardly 
escape  from  infancy.     The  Songs  of  Maldoror   are  the  works  of  a  highly  talented 
schoolboy; their p athos lies precisely in the contradictions of a child’s mind ranged 
against creation and against itself.    Like the Rimbaud of the  Illuminations , beating 
against the confines of the world, the poet chooses the apocalypse and destruction 
rather  than  accept  t he  impossible  principles  that  make  him  what  he  is  in  a  world 
such as it is.  
        “ I  offer  myself  to  defend  mankind,”  says  Lautréamont,  without  wishing  to  be 
ingenuous.    Is Maldoror, then, the angel of pity?    In a certain sense he is, in that he 
pities  hi mself.     Why?     That  remains  to  be  seen.     But  pity  deceived,  outraged, 
inadmissible, and unadmitted will lead him to strange extremities.    Maldoror, in his 
own  words,  received  life  like  a  wound  and  forbade  suicide  to  heal  the  scar  ( sic ).    
Like  Rimbaud  he  is  the  one  who  suffers  and  who  rebelled;  each,  being  strangely 
reluctant  to  say  that  he  is  rebelling  against  what  he  is,  gives  the  rebel’s  eternal 
alibi: love of mankind.  
         The man who offers himself to defend mankind at the same time writes: “Show 
me on e man who is good.”    This perpetual vacillation is part of nihilist rebellion.    
We  rebel  against  the  injustice  done  to  ourselves  and  to  mankind.     But  in  the 
moment  of  lucidity,  when  we  simultaneously  perceive  the  legitimacy  of  this 
rebellion  and  its  futili ty,  the  frenzy  of  negation  is  extended  to  the  very  thing  that 
we claimed to be defending.    Not being able to atone for injustice by the elevation 
of  justice,  we  choose  to  submerge  it  in  an  even  greater  injustice,  which  is  finally 
confounded with annihilati on.    “The evil you have done me is too great, too great 
the  evil  I  have  done  you,  for  it  to  be  involuntary.”     In  order  not  to  be  overcome 
with self - hatred, one’s innocence must be proclaimed, an impossibly bold step for 
one man alone, for self - knowledge wi ll prevent him.    But at least one can declare 
that  everyone  is  innocent,  though  they  may  be  treated  as  guilty.     God  is  then  the 
criminal.  
         From the romantics to Lautréamont, there is, therefore, no real progress, except 
in  style.     Lautréamont  resusci tates,  once  again,  with  a  few  improvements,  the 
figure  of  the  God  of  Abraham  and  the  image  of  the  Luciferian  rebel.     He  places 
God  “on  a  throne  built  of  excrement,  human  and  golden,”  on  which  sits,  “with 
imbecile pride, his body covered with a shroud made  of unwashed sheets, he who 
  59  

styles  himself  the  Creator.”     “The  horrible  Eternal  One  with  the  features  of  a 
viper,” “the crafty bandit” who can be seen “stoking the fires in which young and 
old  perish,”  rolls  drunkenly  in  the  gutter,  or  seeks  base  pleasures  in  the  brothel.    
God is not dead, he has fallen.    Face to face with the fallen deity, Maldoror appears 
as  a  conventional  cavalier  in  a  black  cloak.     He  is  the  Accursed.     “Eyes  must  not 
witness  the  hideous  aspect  which  the  Supreme  Being,  with  a  smile  of  int ense 
hatred,   has   granted   me.”      He   has   forsworn   everything  –    “father,   mother, 
Providence,  love,  ideals  –   so  as  to  think  no  longer  of  anything  else  but  himself.”    
Racked  with  pride,  this  hero  has  all  the  illusions  of  the  metaphysical  dandy:  “A 
face that is more than human, sad with the sadness of the universe, beautiful as an 
act  of  suicide.”     Like  the  romantic  rebel,  Maldoror,  despairing  of  divine  justice, 
will take the side of evil.    To cause suffering and, in causing it, to suffer,  that is his 
lot.    The  Songs  are veritable litanies of evil.  
         At this point mankind is no longer even defended.    On the contrary, “to attack 
that wild beast, man, with every possible weapon, and to attack the creator ...” that 
is  the  intention  announced   by  the  Songs .     Overwhelmed  at  the  thought  of  having 
God  as  an  enemy  intoxicated  with  the  solitude  experienced  by  great  criminals  (“I 
alone  against  humanity”),  Maldoror  goes  to  war  against  creation  and  its  author.    
The  Songs  exalt “the sanctity of crime,”  announce an increasing series of “glorious 
crimes,” and stanza 20 of Song II even inaugurates a veritable pedagogy of crime 
and violence.  
         Such a burning ardour is, at this period, merely conventional.    It costs nothing.    
Lautréamont’s  real  originali ty  lies  elsewhere.  [It  accounts  for  the  difference 
between Song I, published separately, which is Byronic in a rather banal way, and 
the  other  Songs,  which  resound  with  a  monstrous  rhetoric.]     The  romantics 
maintained with the greatest care the fatal oppos ition between human solitude and 
divine  indifference  –   the  literary  expressions  of  this  solitude  being  the  isolated 
castle and the dandy.    It is quite apparent that he found this solitude insupportable 
and that, ranged against creation, he wished to destro y its limits.    Far from wanting 
to fortify the reign of humanity with crenelated towers, he wishes to merge it with 
all other reigns.    He brought back creation to the shores of the primeval seas where 
morality,  as  well  as  every  other  problem,  loses  all  mea ning  –   including  the 
problem, which he considers so terrifying, of the immortality of the soul.    He had 
no  desire  to  create  a  spectacular  image  of  the  rebel,  or  of  the  dandy,  opposed  to 
creation,  but  to  mingle  mankind  and  the  world  together  in  the  same  gen eral 
destruction.     He  attacked  the  very  frontier  that  separates  mankind  from  the 
universe.      Total   freedom,   the   freedom   of   crime   in   particular,   supposes   the 
destruction  of  human  frontiers.     It  is  not  enough  to  condemn  oneself  and  all 
mankind  to  execration.     The  reign  of  mankind  must  still  be  brought  back  to  the 
level of the reign of the instinct.    We find in Lautréamont this refusal to recognize 
  60  

rational consciousness, this return to the elementary which is one of the marks of a 
civilization  in  revolt  agains t  itself.     It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  recognizing 
appearances  by  making  a  determined  and  conscious  effort,  but  of  no  longer 
existing at all on the conscious level.  
         All  the  creatures  that  appear  in  the  Songs   are  amphibious,  because  Maldoror 
reject s the earth and its limitations.    The flora is composed of algae and seaweed.    
Maldoror’s  castle  is  built  on  the  waters.     His  native  land  is  the  timeless  sea.     The 
sea  –   a  double  symbol  –   is  simultaneously  the  place  of  annihilation  and  of 
reconciliation.     It quenches, in its own way, the thirst of souls condemned to scorn 
themselves  and  others,  and  the  thirst  for  oblivion.     Thus  the  Songs   replace  the 
Metamorphoses ,  and  the  timeless  smile  is  replaced  by  the  laughter  of  a  mouth 
slashed with a razor, by the im age of a gnashing, frantic, travesty of humour.    The 
bestiary   cannot   contain   all   the   meanings   that   have   been   given   to   it,   but 
undoubtedly  it  discloses  a  desire  for  annihilation  which  has  its  origins  in  the  very 
darkest  places  of  rebellion.     The  “stultify  y ourselves”  of  Pascal  takes  on  a  literal 
sense  with  Lautréamont.     Apparently  he  could  not  bear  the  cold  and  implacable 
clarity one must endure in order to live.    “My subjectivity and one creator  –  that is 
too much for one brain.”    And so he chose to reduce  life, and his work, to the flash 
of  a  cuttlefish’s  fin  in  the  midst  of  its  cloud  of  ink.     The  beautiful  passage  where 
Maldoror  couples  with  a  female  shark  on  the  high  seas  “in  a  long,  chaste,  and 
frightful  copulation”  –   above  all,  the  significant  passage  i n  which  Maldoror, 
transformed  into  an  octopus,  attacks  the  Creator  –   are  clear  expressions  of  an 
escape beyond the frontiers of existence and of a convulsive attack on the laws of 
nature.  
         Those  who  see  themselves  banished  from  the  harmonious  fatherl and  where 
justice and passion finally strike an even balance still prefer, to solitude, the barren 
kingdoms where words have no more meaning and where force and the instincts of 
blind  creatures  reign.     This  challenge  is,  at  the  same  time,  a  mortification.     The 
battle with the angel, in Song II, ends in the defeat and putrefaction of the angel.    
Heaven  and  earth  are  then  brought  back  and  intermingled  in  the  liquid  chasms  of 
primordial life.    Thus the man - shark of the  Songs  “only acquired the new change in 
th e extremities of his arms and legs as an expiatory punishment for some unknown 
crime.”    There is, in fact, a crime, or the illusion of crime (is it homosexuality?) in 
Maldoror’s virtually unknown life.    No reader of the  Songs  can avoid the idea that 
this b ook is in need of a  Stavrogin’s Confession .  
         But  there  is  no  confession  and  we  find  in  the  Poésies   a  redoubling  of  that 
mysterious desire for expiation.    The spirit appropriate to certain forms of rebellion 
which consists, as we shall see, in re - esta blishing reason at the end of the irrational 
adventure, of rediscovering order by means of disorder and of voluntarily loading 
oneself down with chains still heavier than those from which release was sought, is 
  61  

described in this book with such a desire for  simplification and with such cynicism 
that  this  change  of  attitude  must  definitely  have  a  meaning.     The  Songs ,  which 
exalted  absolute  negation,  are  followed  by  a  theory  of  absolute  assent,  and 
uncompromising  rebellion  is  succeeded  by  complete  conformity  –   all  this  with 
total  lucidity.     The  Poésies ,  in  fact,  give  us  the  best  explanation  of  the  Songs .    
“Despair,  fed  by  the  prejudices  of  hallucination,  imperturbably  leads  literature  to 
the mass abrogation of laws both social and divine, and to theoretical and  practical 
wickedness.”    The  Poésies  also denounce “the culpability of a writer who rolls on 
the  slopes  of  the  void  and  pours  scorn  on  himself  with  cries  of  joy.”     But  they 
prescribe  no  other  remedy  for  this  evil  than  metaphysical  conformity:  “Since  the 
po etry of doubt arrives, in this way, at such a point of theoretical wickedness and 
mournful  despair,  it  is  poetry  that  is  radically  false;  for  the  simple  reason  that  it 
discusses principles, and principles should not be discussed” (letter to Darassé).    In 
s hort,  his  reasoning  recapitulates  the  morality  of  a  choirboy  or  of  an  infantry 
manual. But conformity can be passionate, and thereby out of the ordinary.    When 
the  victory  of  the  malevolent  eagle  over  the  dragon  hope  has  been  proclaimed, 
Maldoror  can  still   obstinately  repeat  that  the  burden  of  his  song  is  nothing  but 
hope,  and  can  write:  “With  my  voice  and  with  the  solemnity  of  the  days  of  my 
glory, I recall you, O blessed Hope, to my deserted dwelling”  –  he must still try to 
convince.     To  console  humanity,   to  treat  it  as  a  brother,  to  return  to  Confucius, 
Buddha,  Socrates,  Jesus  Christ,  “moralists  who  wandered  through  villages,  dying 
of  hunger”  (which  is  of  doubtful  historical  accuracy),  are  still  the  projects  of 
despair.     Thus  virtue  and  an  ordered  life  ha ve  a  nostalgic  appeal  in  the  midst  of 
vice.    For Lautréamont refuses to pray, and Christ for him is only a moralist. What 
he  proposes,  or  rather  what  he  proposes  to  himself,  is  agnosticism  and  the 
fulfilment  of  duty.     Such  a  sound  programme,  unhappily,  sup poses  surrender,  the 
calm  of  evening,  a  heart  untouched  by  bitterness,  and  untroubled  contemplation.    
Lautréamont  rebels  when  he  suddenly  writes:  “I  know  no  other  grace  but  that  of 
being  born.”     But  one  can  sense  his  clenched  teeth  when  he  adds:  “An  impart ial 
mind finds that enough.”    But no mind is impartial when confronted with life and 
death.    With Lautéamont the rebel flees to the desert.    But this desert of conformity 
is  as  dreary  as  Rimbaud’s  Harrar.     The  taste  for  the  absolute  and  the  frenzy  of 
annih ilation   sterilize   him   again.      Just   as   Maldoror   wanted   total   rebellion, 
Lautréamont,  for  the  same  reasons,  demands  absolute  banality.     The  exclamation 
of  awareness  which  he  tried  to  drown  in  the  primeval  seas,  to  confuse  with  the 
howl of the beast, which at  another moment he tried to smother in the adoration of 
mathematics,  he  now  wants  to  stifle  by  applying  a  dismal  conformity.  The  rebel 
now tries to turn a deaf ear to the call that urges him toward the being who lies at 
the  heart  of  his  rebellion.     The  imp ortant  thing  is  to  exist  no  longer  –   either  by 
refusing to be anything at all or by accepting to be no matter what.    In either case it 
  62  

is a purely artificial convention.    Banality, too, is an attitude.  
         Conformity  is  one  of  the  nihilistic  temptations   of  rebellion  which  dominate  a 
large  part  of  our  intellectual  history.     It  demonstrates  how  the  rebel  who  takes  to 
action  is  tempted  to  succumb,  if  he  forgets  his  origins,  to  the  most  absolute 
conformity. And so it explains the twentieth century.    Lautréam ont, who is usually 
hailed  as  the  bard  of  pure  rebellion,  on  the  contrary  proclaims  the  advent  of  the 
taste  for  intellectual  servitude  which  flourishes  in  the  contemporary  world.     The 
Poésies   are  only  a  preface  to  a  “future  work”  of  which  we  can  only  surmi se  the 
contents and which was to have been the ideal end - result of literary rebellion.    But 
this  book  is  being  written  today,  despite  Lautréamont,  in  millions  of  copies,  by 
bureaucratic order.    Of course, genius cannot be separated from banality.    But it i s 
not a question of the banality of others  –  the banality that we vainly try to capture 
and which itself captures the creative writer, where necessary, with the help of the 
censors.    For the creative writer it is a question of his own form of banality, whi ch 
must be completely created.    Every genius is at once extraordinary and banal.    He 
is nothing if he is only one or the other.    We must remember this when thinking of 
rebellion.    It has its dandies and its menials, but it does not recognize its legitimate  
sons.  
   
   
         Surrealism and Revolution  
   
         This  is  not  the  place  to  deal  at  length  with  Rimbaud.     Everything  that  can  be 
said about him  –  and even more, unfortunately  –  has already been said.    It is worth 
pointing  out,  however,  for  it  concerns  ou r  subject,  that  only  in  his  work  was 
Rimbaud  the  poet  of  rebellion.     His  life,  far  from  justifying  the  myth  it  created, 
only  illustrates  (an  objective  perusal  of  the  letters  from  Harrar  suffices  to  prove 
this)  the  fact  that  he  surrendered  to  the  worst  form   of  nihilism  imaginable.    
Rimbaud has been deified for renouncing his genius, as if his renunciation implied 
superhuman virtue.    It must be pointed out, however, despite the fact that by doing 
so  we  disqualify  the  alibis  of  our  contemporaries,  that  genius  alone  –   and  not 
renunciation  of  genius  –   implies  virtue.     Rimbaud’s  greatness  does  not  lie  in  the 
first  poems  from  Charleville  nor  in  his  trading  at  Harrar.     It  shines  forth  at  the 
moment  when,  in  giving  the  most  peculiarly  appropriate  expression  to  rebell ion 
that  it  has  ever  received,  he  simultaneously  proclaims  his  triumph  and  his  agony, 
his conception of a life beyond the confines of this world and the inescapability of 
the  world,  the  yearning  for  the  unattainable  and  reality  brutally  determined  on 
restr aint,  the  rejection  of  morality  and  the  irresistible  compulsion  to  duty.     At  the 
moment  when  he  carries  in  his  breast  both  illumination  and  the  darkness  of  hell, 
when  he  hails  and  insults  beauty,  and  creates,  from  an  insoluble  conflict,  the 
  63  

intricate count erpoint of an exquisite song, he is the poet of rebellion  –  the greatest 
of  all.     The  order  in  which  he  wrote  his  two  great  works  is  of  no  importance.     In 
any  case  there  was  very  little  time  between  the  conception  of  the  two  books,  and 
any   artist   knows,   wi th   the   certainty   born   of   experience,   that   Rimbaud 
simultaneously  carried  the  seeds  of  the  Season  in  Hell  ( Une  Saison  en  Enfer )  and 
the  Illuminations   within  him.     Though  he  wrote  them  one  after  the  other,  there  is 
no doubt that he experienced the suffering  of both of them at the same time.    This 
contradiction, which killed him, was the real source of his genius.  
         But where, then, is the virtue of someone who refuses to face the contradiction 
and  betrays  his  own  genius  before  having  drunk  it  to  the  last   bitter  drop?    
Rimbaud’s silence is not a new method of rebelling; at least, we can no longer say 
so  after  the  publication  of  the  Harrar  letters.     His  metamorphosis  is  undoubtedly 
mysterious.     But  there  is  also  a  mystery  attached  to  the  banality  achieved  b y 
brilliant young girls whom marriage transforms into adding or knitting machines.    
The myth woven around Rimbaud supposes and affirms that nothing was possible 
after  the  Season  in  Hell .     But  what  is  impossible  for  the  supremely  gifted  poet  or 
for  the  inex haustibly  creative  writer?     How  can  we  imagine  anything  to  follow 
Moby  Dick ,  The  Trial ,  Zarathustra ,  The   Possessed ?     Nevertheless,  they  were 
followed  by  great  works,  which  instruct,  implement,  and  bear  witness  to  what  is 
finest  in  the  writer,  and  which  onl y  come  to  an  end  at  his  death.     Who  can  fail  to 
regret the work that would have been greater than the  Season in Hell  and of which 
we have been deprived by Rimbaud’s abdication?  
         Can  Abyssinia   be considered as a monastery; is i t Christ who shut Rimbaud’s 
mouth?  Such  a  Christ  would  be  the  kind  of  man  who  nowadays  lords  it  over  the 
cashier’s  desk  in  a  bank,  to  judge  by  the  letters  in  which  the  unhappy  poet  talks 
about his money which he wants to see “wisely invested” and “bringing  in regular 
dividends.” [It is only fair to note that the tone of these letters might be explained 
by the people to whom they are written.    But they do not suggest that Rimbaud is 
making a great effort to lie.    Not one word betrays the Rimbaud of former ti mes.]    
The man who exulted under torture, who hurled curses at God and at beauty, who 
hardened  himself  in  the  harsh  atmosphere  of  crime,  now  only  wants  to  marry 
someone “with a future”.    The mage, the seer, the convict who lived perpetually in 
the  shadow  o f  the  penal  colony,  the  man - god  on  a  godless  earth,  always  carried 
seventeen pounds of gold in a belt worn uncomfortably round his stomach, which 
he  complained  gave  him  dysentery.     Is  this  the  mythical  hero,  worshipped  by  so 
many young men who, though they  did not spit in the face of the world, would die 
of  shame  at  the  mere  idea  of  such  a  belt?     To  maintain  the  myth,  those  decisive 
letters must be ignored.    It is easy to see why they have been so little commented 
upon.    They are a sacrilege, as truth somet imes is.    A great and praiseworthy poet, 
the greatest of his time, a dazzling oracle  –  Rimbaud is all of these things.    But he 
  64  

is  not  the  man - god,  the  burning  inspiration,  the  monk  of  poetry  as  he  is  often 
presented.    The man only recaptured his greatness  in the hospital bed in which, at 
the hour of his painful end, even his mediocrity becomes moving: “How unlucky I 
am, how very unlucky I am ... and I’ve money on me that I can’t even keep an eye 
on!”    The defiant cry of those last wretched moments: “No, no, n ow I rebel against 
death!” happily restores Rimbaud to that part of common human experience which 
involuntarily coincides with greatness.    The young Rimbaud comes to life again on 
the  brink  of  the  abyss  and  with  him  revives  the  rebellion  of  the  times  when  his 
imprecations against life were only expressions of despair at the thought of death.    
It is at this point that the bourgeois trader once more rejoins the tortured adolescent 
whom  we  so  much  admired.     He  recaptures  his  youth  in  the  terror  and  bitter  pain  
finally  experienced  by  those  who  do  not  know  how  to  attain  happiness.     Only  at 
this point does his passion, and with it his truth, begin.  
         Moreover, Harrar was actually foretold in his work, but in the form of his final 
abdication.  “And  best  of  all,   a  drunken  sleep  on  the  beach.”     The  fury  of 
annihilation, appropriate to every rebel, then assumes its most common form.    The 
apocalypse  of  crime  –   as  conceived  by  Rimbaud  in  the  person  of  the  prince  who 
insatiably slaughters his subjects  –  and endless li centiousness are rebellious themes 
that  will  be  taken  up  again  by  the  surrealists.     But  finally,  even  with  Rimbaud, 
nihilist  dejection  prevailed;  the  struggle,  the  crime  itself,  proved  too  exacting  for 
his exhausted mind.    The seer who drank, if we may ven ture to say so, in order not 
to  forget  ended  by  finding  in  drunkenness  the  heavy  sleep  so  well  known  to  our 
contemporaries.     One  can  sleep  on  the  beach,  or  at  Aden.     And  one  consents,  no 
longer actively, but passively, to accept the  order of the world, even if the order is 
degrading.     Rimbaud’s  silence  is  also  a  preparation  for  the  silence  of  authority, 
which hovers over minds resigned to everything save to the necessity of putting up 
a fight.    Rimbaud’s great intellect, suddenly sub ordinated to money, proclaims the 
advent of other demands, which are at first excessive and which will later be put to 
use by the police.    To be nothing  –  that is the cry of the mind exhausted by its own 
rebellion.    This leads to the problem of suicide of  the mind, which, after all, is less 
respectable  than  the  surrealists’  suicide,  and  more  fraught  with  consequences.    
Surrealism itself, coming at the end of this great act of rebellion, is only significant 
because it attempted to perpetuate that aspect of R imbaud which alone evokes our 
sympathy.     Deriving  the  rules  for  a  rebellious  asceticism  from  the  letter  about  the 
seer and the system it implies, he illustrates the struggle between the will to be and 
the desire for annihilation, between the yes and the no , which we have discovered 
again and again at every stage of rebellion.    For all these reasons, rather than repeat 
the  endless  commentaries  that  surround  Rimbaud’s  work,  it  seemed  preferable  to 
rediscover him and to follow him among his successors.  
   
  65  

          Absolute  rebellion,  total  insubordination,  sabotage  on  principle,  the  humour 
and cult of the absurd  –  such is the nature of surrealism, which defines itself, in its 
primary intent, as the incessant examination of all values.    The refusal to draw any 
conc lusions  is  flat,  decisive,  and  provocative.     “We  are  specialists  in  rebellion.”    
Surrealism, which, according to   Aragon, is a machine for capsizing the mind, was 
first  conjured  up  by  the  Dadaist  movement,  whose  romantic  origins  and  anaemic 
dandyism  must  be  noted.     [Jarry,  one  of  the  masters  of  Dadaism,  is  the  last 
incarnation,  peculiar  rather  than  brilliant,  of  the  metaphysical  dandy.]     Non -
signification  and  contradiction  are  therefore  cultivated  for  their  own  sakes.     “The 
real Dadai sts are against Dada.    Everyone is a director of Dada.”    Or again: “What 
is  good?     What  is  ugly?     What  is  great,  strong,  weak  ...?     Don’t  know!     Don’t 
know!”     These  parlour  nihilists  were  obviously  threatened  with  having  to  act  as 
slaves to the strictest ort hodoxies.    But there is something more in surrealism than 
standard  nonconformism,  the  legacy  left  b  Rimbaud,  which,  in  fact,  Breton 
recapitulates as follows: “Must we abandon all hope at that particular point?”  
         An urgent appeal to absent life is rei nforced by a total rejection of the present 
world,  as  Breton’s  arrogant  statement  indicates:  “Incapable  of  accepting  the  fate 
assigned to me, my highest perceptions outraged by this denial of justice, I refrain 
from adapting my existence to the ridiculous  conditions of existence here below.”    
The  mind,  according  to  Breton,  can  find  no  point  of  rest  either  in  this  life  or 
beyond it.    Surrealism wants to find a solution to this endless anxiety.    It is “a cry 
of  the  mind  which  turns  against  itself  and  finally  takes  the  desperate  decision  to 
throw  off  its  bonds.”     It  protests  against  death  and  “the  laughable  duration”  of  a 
precarious  condition.     Thus  surrealism  places  itself  at  the  mercy  of  impatience.     It 
exists in a condition of wounded frenzy: at once inflexi ble and self - righteous, with 
the consequent implication of a moral philosophy.    Surrealism, the gospel of chaos, 
found  itself  compelled,  from  its  very  inception,  to  create  an  order.     But  at  first  it 
only  dreamed  of  destruction  –   by  poetry,  to  begin  with  –   on  the  plane  of 
imprecation, and later by the use of actual weapons.    The trial of the real world has 
become, by logical development, the trial of creation.  
         Surrealist  irreligion  is  methodical  and  rational.     At  first  it  established  itself  on 
the ide a of the absolute non - culpability of man, to whom one should render “all the 
power that he has been capable of putting into the word God.”    As in every history 
of rebellion, this idea of absolute non - culpability, springing from despair, was little 
by   littl e   transformed   into   a   mania   for   punishment.      The   surrealists,   while 
simultaneously  exalting  human  innocence,  believed  that  they  could  exalt  murder 
and  suicide.     They  spoke  of  suicide  as  a  solution  and  Crevel,  who  considered  this 
solution “the most probable,  just, and definitive,” killed himself, as did Rigaut and 
Vaché.    Later  Aragon   was to condemn the “babblers about suicide.”    Nevertheless 
the  fact  remains  that  to  extol  annihilation,  without  personal  involvement,  is  not  a 
  66  

very   honou rable   course.      On   this   point   surrealism   has   retained,   from   the 
“ littérature”   it  despised,  the  most  facile  excuses  and  has  justified  Rigaud’s 
staggering remark: “You are all poets, and I myself am on the side of death.”  
         Surrealism  did  not  rest  there.     It  chose  as  its  hero  Violette  Nozière  or  the 
anonymous common - law criminal, affirming in this way, in the face of crime, the 
innocence  of  man.     But  it  was  also  rash  enough  to  say  –   and  this  is  the  statement 
that André Breton must have regretted ever sinc e 1933  –  that the simplest surrealist 
act consisted in going out into the street, revolver in hand, and shooting at random 
into  the  crowd.     Whoever  refuses  to  recognize  any  other  determining  factor  apart 
from the individual and his desires, any priority ot her than that of the unconscious, 
actually  succeeds  in  rebelling  simultaneously  against  society  and  against  reason.    
The  theory  of  the  gratuitous  act  is  the  culmination  of  the  demand  for  absolute 
freedom.     What  does  it  matter  if  this  freedom  ends  by  being  embodied  in  the 
solitude  defined  by  Jarry:  “When  I’ll  have  collected  all  the  ready  cash,  in  the 
world, I’ll kill everybody and go away.”    The essential thing is that every obstacle 
should be denied and that the irrational should be triumphant.    What, in fa ct, does 
this apology for murder signify if not that, in a world without meaning and without 
honour, only the desire for existence, in all its forms, is legitimate?    The instinctive 
joy of being alive, the stimulus of the unconscious, the cry of the irrati onal, are the 
only pure truths that must be professed.    Everything that stands in the way of desire 
-   principally  society  -   must  therefore  be  mercilessly  destroyed.     Now  we  can 
understand André Breton’s remark about Sade: “Certainly man no longer consents 
to unite with nature except in crime; it remains to be seen if this is not one of the 
wildest, the most incontestable, ways of loving.”    It is easy to see that he is talking 
of  love  without  an  object,  which  is  love  as  experienced  by  people  who  are  torn 
asu nder.     But  this  empty,  avid  love,  this  insane  desire  for  possession,  is  precisely 
the  love  that  society  inevitably  thwarts.     That  is  why  Breton,  who  still  bears  the 
stigma of his declaration, was able to sing the praises of treason and declare (as the 
surr ealists  have  tried  to  prove)  that  violence  is  the  only  adequate  mode  of 
expression.  
         But society is not only composed of individuals.    It is also an institution.    Too 
well - mannered to kill everybody, the surrealists, by the very logic of their attitu de, 
came to consider that, in order to liberate desire, society must first be overthrown.    
They chose to serve the revolutionary movement of their times.    From Walpole and 
Sade  –   with  an  inevitability  that  comprises  the  subject  of  this  book  –   surrealists 
p assed  on  to  Helvétius  and  Marx.     But  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  not  the  study  of 
Marxism that led them to revolution.    [The Communists who joined the party as a 
result of having studied Marx can be counted on the fingers of one hand.    They are 
first converte d and then they read the Scriptures.]    Quite the contrary: surrealism is 
involved   in   an   incessant   effort   to   reconcile,   with   Marxism,   the   inevitable 
  67  

conclusions  that  led  it  to  revolution.     We  can  say,  without  being  paradoxical,  that 
the  surrealists  arrived  at  Marxism  on  account  of  what,  today,  they  most  detest  in 
Marx.     Knowing  the  basis  and  the  nobility  of  the  motives  that  compelled  him, 
particularly when one has shared the same lacerating experiences, one hesitates to 
remind  André  Breton  that  his  movement  implied  the  establishment  of  “ruthless 
authority” and of dictatorship, of political fanaticism, the refusal of free discussion, 
and  the  necessity  of  the  death  penalty.     The  peculiar  vocabulary  of  that  period  is 
also  astonishing  (“sabotage,”  “informer,”  etc .)  in  that  it  is  the  vocabulary  of  a 
police - dominated  revolution.     But  these  fanatics  wanted  “any  sort  of  revolution,” 
no  matter  what  as  long  as  it  rescued  them  from  the  world  of  shopkeepers  and 
compromise  in  which  they  were  forced  to  live.     In  that  they  c ould  not  have  the 
best,  they  still  preferred  the  worst.     In  that  respect  they  were  nihilists.     They  were 
not  aware  of  the  fact  that  those  among  them  who  were,  in  the  future,  to  remain 
faithful to Marxism were faithful at the same time to their initial nihi lism.    The real 
destruction of language, which the surrealists so obstinately wanted, does not lie in 
incoherence or automatism.    It lies in the word  order .    It was pointless for  Aragon  
to  begin  with  a  denunciation  of  the  “shameful  pragmatic  attitude,”  for  in  that 
attitude  he  finally  found  total  liberation  from  morality,  even  if  that  liberation 
coincided  with  another  form  of  servitude.     The  surrealist  who  meditated  most 
profoundly  about  this  problem,  Pierre  Naville,  in  trying  to  find   the  denominator 
common   to   revolutionary   action   and   surrealist   action,   localized   it,   with 
considerable penetration, in pessimism, meaning in “the intention of accompanying 
man to his downfall and of overlooking nothing that could ensure that his perdition 
might  be  useful.”     This  mixture  of  Machiavellianism  and  Augustinism  in  fact 
explains twentieth - century rebellion; no more audacious expression can be given to 
the nihilism of the times.    The renegades of surrealism were faithful to most of the 
principles o f nihilism.    In a certain way, they wanted to die.    If André Breton and a 
few  others  finally  broke  with  Marxism,  it  was  because  there  was  something  in 
them beyond nihilism, a second loyalty to what is purest in the origins of rebellion: 
they did not want t o die.  
         Certainly,  the  surrealists  wanted  to  profess  materialism.     “We  are  pleased  to 
recognize  as  one  of  the  prime  causes  of  the  mutiny  on  board  the  battleship 
Potemkin   that  terrible  piece  of  meat.”     But  there  is  not  with  them,  as  with  the 
Marxists,   a  feeling  of  friendship,  even  intellectual,  for  that  piece  of  meat.     Putrid 
meat  typifies  only  the  real  world,  which  in  fact  gives  birth  to  revolt,  but  against 
itself.    It explains nothing, even though it justifies everything.    Revolution, for the 
surreal ists, was not an end to be realized day by day, in action, but an absolute and 
consolatory myth.    It was “the real life, like love,” of which Eluard spoke, who at 
that time had no idea that his friend Kalandra would die of that sort of life.    They 
wanted  t he  “communism  of  genius,”  not  the  other  form  of  Communism.     These 
  68  

peculiar Marxists declared themselves in rebellion against history and extolled the 
heroic  individual.     “History  is  governed  by  laws,  which  are  conditioned  by  the 
cowardice  of  individuals.”     André  Breton  wanted  revolution  and  love  together  –  
and they are incompatible.    Revolution consists in loving a man who does not yet 
exist.    But he who loves a living being, if he really loves, can only consent to die 
for the sake of the being he loves.    I n reality, revolution for André Breton was only 
a particular aspect of rebellion, while for Marxists and, in general, for all political 
persuasions,  only  the  contrary  is  true.     Breton  was  not  trying  to  create,  by  action, 
the  promised  land  that  was  supposed   to  crown  history.     One  of  the  fundamental 
theses  of  surrealism  is,  in  fact,  that  there  is  no  salvation.     The  advantage  of 
revolution   was   not   that   it   gives   mankind   happiness,   “abominable   material 
comfort.”     On  the  contrary,  according  to  Breton,  it  should  p urify  and  illuminate 
man’s  tragic  condition.     World  revolution  and  the  terrible  sacrifices  it  implies 
would    only    bring    one    advantage:    “preventing    the    completely    artificial 
precariousness of the social condition from screening the real precariousness of the  
human condition.”    Quite simply, for Breton, this form of progress was excessive.    
One might as well say that revolution should be enrolled in the service of the inner 
asceticism  by  which  individual  men  can  transfigure  reality  into  the  supernatural, 
“the  brilliant revenge of man’s imagination.”    With André Breton, the supernatural 
holds the same place as the rational does with Hegel.    Thus it would be impossible 
to imagine a more complete antithesis to the political philosophy of Marxism.    The 
lengthy  hesi tations  of  those  whom  Artaud  called  the  Amiels  of  revolution  are 
easily  explained.     The  surrealists  were  more  different  from  Marx  than  were 
reactionaries  like  Joseph  de  Maistre,  for  example.     The  reactionaries  made  use  of 
the  tragedy  of  existence  to  reject   revolution  –   in  other  words,  to  create  another 
historical situation.    But make use of the human tragedy to further their pragmatic 
ends.    But Breton made use of revolution to consummate the tragedy and, in spite 
of  the  title  of  his  magazine,  made  use  of  r evolution  to  further  the  surrealist 
adventure.  
         Finally,  the  definitive  rupture  is  explained  if  one  considers  that  Marxism 
insisted  on  the  submission  of  the  irrational,  while  the  surrealists  rose  to  defend 
irrationality  to  the  death.     Marxism  tended  toward  the  conquest  of  totality,  and 
surrealism, like all spiritual experiences, tended toward unity.    Totality can demand 
the  submission  of  the  irrational,  if  rationalism  suffices  to  conquer  the  world.     But 
the desire for unity is more demanding.    It does  not suffice that everything should 
be  rational.     It  wants,  above  all,  the  rational  and  the  irrational  to  be  reconciled  on 
the same level.    There is no unity that supposes any form of mutilation.  
         For André Breton, totality could be only a stage, a n ecessary stage perhaps, but 
certainly  inadequate,  on  the  way  that  leads  to  unity.     Here  we  find  once  again  the 
theme of All or Nothing.    Surrealism tends toward universality, and the curious but 
  69  

profound  reproach  that  Breton  makes  to  Marx  consists  in  sayin g  quite  justifiably 
that  the  latter  is  not  universal.     The  surrealists  wanted  to  reconcile  Marx’s  “let  us 
transform the world” with Rimbaud’s “let us change life.”    But the first leads to the 
conquest of the totality of the world and the second to the conq uest of the unity of 
life.     Paradoxically,  every  form  of  totality  is  restrictive.     In  the  end,  the  two 
formulas succeeded in splitting the surrealist group.    By choosing Rimbaud, Breton 
demonstrated  that  surrealism  was  not  concerned  with  action,  but  with  a sceticism 
and spiritual experience.    He again gave first place to what composed the profound 
originality of his movement: the restoration of the sacred and the conquest of unity, 
which  makes  surrealism  so  invaluable  for  a  consideration  of  the  problem  of 
re bellion.    The more he elaborated on this original concept, the more irreparably he 
separated  himself  from  his  political  companions,  and  at  the  same  time  from  some 
of his first manifestoes.  
         André Breton never, actually, wavered in his support of surr ealism  –  the fusion 
of a dream and of reality, the sublimation of the old contradiction between the ideal 
and  the  real.     We  know  the  surrealist  solution:  concrete  irrationality,  objective 
risk.      Poetry   is   the   conquest,   the   only   possible   conquest,   of   the   “s upreme 
position.”    “A certain position of the mind from where life and death, the real and 
the  imaginary,  the  past  and  the  future  ...  cease  to  be  perceived  in  a  contradictory 
sense.”     What  is  this  supreme  position  that  should  mark  the  “colossal  abortion  of 
t he  Hegelian  system”?     It  is  the  search  for  the  summit - abyss,  familiar  to  the 
mystics.     Actually,  it  is  the  mysticism  without  God  which  demonstrates  and 
quenches  the  rebel’s  thirst  for  the  absolute.     The  essential  enemy  of  surrealism  is 
rationalism.    Breton ’s method, moreover, presents the peculiar spectacle of a form 
of Occidental thought in which the principle of analogy is continually favoured to 
the detriment of the principles of identity and contradiction.    More precisely, it is a 
question  of  dissolving   contradictions  in  the  fires  of  love  and  desire  and  of 
demolishing  the  walls  of  death.     Magic  rites,  primitive  or  naïve  civilizations, 
alchemy, the language of flowers, fire, or sleepless nights, are so many miraculous 
stages  on  the  way  to  unity  and  the  ph ilosophers’  stone.     If  surrealism  did  not 
change  the  world,  it  furnished  it  with  a  few  strange  myths  which  partly  justified 
Nietzsche’s  announcement  of  the  return  of  the  Greeks.     Only  partly,  because  he 
was  referring  to  unenlightened  Greece,  t he  Greece   of  mysteries  and  dark  gods.    
Finally, just as Nietzsche’s experience culminated in the acceptance of the light of 
day, surrealist experience culminates in the exaltation of the darkness of night, the 
agonized   and   obstinate   cult   of   th e   tempest.      Breton,   according   to   his   own 
statements, understood that, despite everything, life was a gift.    But his compliance 
could  never  shed  the  full  light  of  day,  the  light  that  all  of  us  need.     “There  is  too 
much of the north in me,” he said, “for me  to be a man who complies entirely.”  
         He  nevertheless  often  diminished,  to  his  own  detriment,  the  importance  of 
  70  

negation  and  advanced  the  positive  claims  of  rebellion.     He  chose  severity  rather 
than  silence  and  retained  only  the  “demand  for  morality,”   which,  according  to 
Bataille,  first  gave  life  to  surrealism;  “To  substitute  a  new  morality  for  current 
morality,  which  is  the  cause  of  all  our  evils.”     Of  course,  he  did  not  succeed  (nor 
has  anybody  in  our  time)  in  the  attempt  to  found  a  new  morality.     Bu t  he  never 
despaired of being able to do so.    Confronted with the horror of a period in which 
man,  whom  he  wanted  to  magnify,  has  been  persistently  degraded  in  the  name  of 
certain  principles  that  surrealism  adopted,  Breton  felt  constrained  to  propose, 
prov isionally,   a   return   to   traditional   morality.      That   represents   a   hesitation 
perhaps.     But  it  is  the  hesitation  of  nihilism  and  the  real  progress  of  rebellion.    
After  all,  when  he  could  not  give  himself  the  morality  and  the  values  of  whose 
necessity he was c learly aware, we know very well that Breton chose love.    In the 
general  meanness  of  his  times  –   and  this  cannot  be  forgotten  –   he  is  the  only 
person  who  wrote  profoundly  about  love.     Love  is  the  entranced  morality  that 
served  this  exile  as  a  native  land.     Of  course,  a  dimension  is  still  missing  here.    
Surrealism, in that it is neither politics nor religion, is perhaps only an unbearable 
form of wisdom.    But it is also the absolute proof that there is no comfortable form 
of  wisdom:  “We  want,  we  shall  have,  t he  hereafter  in  our  lifetime,”  Breton  has 
admirably   exclaimed.      While   reason   embarks   on   action   and   sets   its   armies 
marching  on  the  world,  the  splendid  night  in  which  Breton  delights  announces 
dawns  that  have  not  yet  broken,  and,  as  well,  the  advent  of  the  poet  of  our 
renaissance: René Char.  
   
   
   
Nihilism and History  
   
*  
   
         One  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  metaphysical  rebellion  and  of  nihilism  have 
witnessed the persistent reappearance, under different guises, of the same ravaged 
countenance:  the  face  of  human  protest.     All  of  them,  decrying  the  human 
condition and its creator, have affirmed the solitude of man and the non - existence 
of  any  kind  of  morality.     But  at  the  same  time  they  have  all  tried  to  construct  a 
purely terrestrial kingdom where their c hosen principles will hold sway.    As rivals 
of  the  Creator,  they  have  inescapably  been  led  to  the  point  of  reconstructing 
creation according to their own concepts.    Those who rejected, for the sake of the 
world  they  had  created,  all  other  principles  but  de sire  and  power,  have  rushed  to 
suicide  or  madness  and  have  proclaimed  the  apocalypse.     As  for  the  rest,  who 
  71  

wanted  to  create  their  own  principles,  they  have  chosen  pomp  and  ceremony,  the 
world of appearances, or banality, or again murder and destruction.     But Sade and 
the  romantics,  Karamazov  or  Nietzsche  only  entered  the  world  of  death  because 
they  wanted  to  discover  the  true  life.     So  that  by  a  process  of  inversion,  it  is  the 
desperate   appeal   for   order   that   rings   through   this   insane   universe.      Their 
concl usions  have  only  proved  disastrous  or  destructive  to  freedom  from  the 
moment they laid aside the burden of rebellion, fled the tension that it implies, and 
chose the comfort of tyranny or of servitude.  
         Human insurrection, in its exalted and tragic f orms, is only, and can only be, a 
prolonged  protest  against  death,  a  violent  accusation  against  the  universal  death 
penalty.    In every case that we have come across, the protest is always directed at 
everything  in  creation  which  is  dissonant,  opaque,  or  pr omises  the  solution  of 
continuity.     Essentially,  then,  we  are  dealing  with  a  perpetual  demand  for  unity.    
The   rejection   of   death,   the   desire   for   immortality   and   for   clarity,   are   the 
mainsprings  of  all  these  extravagances,  whether  sublime  or  puerile.     Is  it   only  a 
cowardly and personal refusal to die?    No, for many of these rebels have paid the 
ultimate price in order to live up to their own demands.    The rebel does not ask for 
life,  but  for  reasons  for  living.     He  rejects  the  consequences  implied  by  death.     If 
nothing lasts, then nothing is justified; everything that dies is deprived of meaning.    
To fight against death amounts to claiming that life has a meaning, to fighting for 
order and for unity.  
         The  protest  against  evil  which  is  at  the  very  core  o f  metaphysical  revolt  is 
significant  in  this  regard.     It  is  not  the  suffering  of  a  child,  which  is  repugnant  in 
itself,  but  the  fact  that  the  suffering  is  not  justified.     After  all,  pain,  exile,  or 
confinement  are  sometimes  accepted  when  dictated  by  good  s ense  or  by  the 
doctor.    In the eyes of the rebel, what is missing from the misery of the world, as 
well  as  from  its  moments  of  happiness,  is  some  principle  by  which  they  can  be 
explained.     The  insurrection  against  evil  is,  above  all,  a  demand  for  unity.    T he 
rebel  obstinately  confronts  a  world  condemned  to  death  and  the  impenetrable 
obscurity of the human condition with his demand for life and absolute clarity.    He 
is  seeking,  without  knowing  it,  a  moral  philosophy  or  a  religion.     Rebellion,  even 
though it  is blind, is a form of asceticism.    Therefore, if the rebel blasphemes, it is 
in the hope of finding a new god.    He staggers under the shock of the first and most 
profound of all religious experiences, but it is a disenchanted religious experience.    
It is  not rebellion itself that is noble, but its aims, even though its achievements are 
at times ignoble.  
         At  least  we  must  know  how  to  recognize  the  ignoble  ends  it  achieves.     Each 
time  that  it  deifies  the  total  rejection,  the  absolute  negation,  of  what  exists,  it 
destroys.    Each time that it blindly accepts what exists and gives voice to absolute 
assent, it destroys again.    Hatred of the creator can turn to hatred of creation or to 
  72  

exclusive and defiant love of what exists.    But in both cases it ends in  murder and 
loses  the  right  to  be  called  rebellion.     One  can  be  nihilist  in  two  ways,  in  both  by 
having an intemperate recourse to absolutes.    Apparently there are rebels who want 
to  die  and  those  who  want  to  cause  death.     But  they  are  identical,  consumed  w ith 
desire  for  the  true  life,  frustrated  by  their  desire  for  existence  and  therefore 
preferring  generalized  injustice  to  mutilated  justice.     At  this  pitch  of  indignation, 
reason  becomes  madness.     If  it  is  true  that  the  instinctive  rebellion  of  the  human 
he art   advances   gradually   through   the   centuries   toward   its   most   complete 
realization, it has also grown, as we have seen, in blind audacity, to the inordinate 
extent of deciding to answer universal murder by metaphysical assassination.  
         The  even if , whi ch we have already recognized as marking the most important 
moment  of  metaphysical  rebellion,  is  in  any  case  only  fulfilled  in  absolute 
destruction.    It is not the nobility of rebellion that illuminates the world today, but 
nihilism.     And  it  is  the  consequ ence  of  nihilism  that  we  must  retrace,  without 
losing  sight  of  the  truth  innate  in  its  origins.     Even  if  God  existed,  Ivan  would 
never  surrender  to  Him  in  the  face  of  the  injustice  done  to  man.     But  a  longer 
contemplation  of  this  injustice,  a  more  bitter  a pproach,  transformed  the  “even  if 
you  exist”  into  “you  do  not  deserve  to  exist,”  therefore  “you  do  not  exist.”     The 
victims  have  found  in  their  own  innocence  the  justification  for  the  final  crime.    
Convinced of their condemnation and without hope of immort ality, they decide to 
murder  God.     If  it  is  false  to  say  that  from  that  day  began  the  tragedy  of 
contemporary  man,  neither  is  it  true  to  say  that  there  was  where  it  ended.     On  the 
contrary, this attempt indicates the highest point in a drama that began wit h the end 
of the ancient world and of which the final words have not yet been spoken.    From 
this  moment,  man  decides  to  exclude  himself  from  grace  and  to  live  by  his  own 
means.     Progress,  from  the  time  of  Sade  up  to  the  present  day,  has  consisted  in 
gradua lly enlarging the stronghold where, according to his own rules, man without 
God  brutally  wields  power.     In  defiance  of  the  divinity,  the  frontiers  of  this 
stronghold  have  been  gradually  extended,  to  the  point  of  making  the  entire 
universe  into  a  fortress  e rected  against  the  fallen  and  exiled  deity.     Man,  at  the 
culmination  of  his  rebellion,  incarcerated  himself;  from  Sade’s  lurid  castle  to  the 
concentration camps, man’s greatest liberty consisted only in building the prison of 
his crimes.    But the state of  siege gradually spreads, the demand for freedom wants 
to embrace all mankind.    Then the only kingdom that is opposed to the kingdom of 
grace  must  be  founded  –   namely,  the  kingdom  of  justice  –   and  the  human 
community  must  be  reunited  among  the  debris  of  the   fallen  City  of  God.     To  kill 
God and to build a Church are the constant and contradictory purpose of rebellion.    
Absolute   freedom   finally   becomes   a   prison   of   absolute   duties,   a   collective 
asceticism,  a  story  to  be  brought  to  an  end .     The  nineteenth  century,  which  is  the 
century  of  rebellion,  thus  merges  into  the  twentieth,  the  century  of  justice  and 
  73  

ethics, in which everyone indulges in self - recrimination.    Chamfort, the moralist of 
rebellion,  had  already  provided  the  formula:  “One  must  be  just  before  being 
generous,  as  one  must  have  bread  before  having  cake.”     Thus  the  ethic  of  luxury 
will be renounced in favour of the bitter morality of the empire - builders.  
         We  must  now  embark  on  the  subject  of  this  convulsive  effort  to  contr ol  the 
world  and  to  introduce  a  universal  rule.     We  have  arrived  at  the  moment  when 
rebellion, rejecting every aspect of servitude, attempts to annex all creation.    Every 
time  it  experiences  a  setback,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  political  solution,  the 
solution  of  conquest,  is  formulated.     Henceforth,  with  the  introduction  of  moral 
nihilism, it will retain, of all its acquisitions, only the will to power.    In principle, 
the rebel only wanted to conquer his own existence and to maintain it in the face of 
God.    But he forgets his origins and, by the law of spiritual imperialism, he sets out 
in  search  of  world  conquest  by  way  of  an  infinitely  multiplied  series  of  murders.    
He  drove  God  from  His  heaven,  but  now  that  the  spirit  of  metaphysical  rebellion 
openly  joins forces with revolutionary movements, the irrational claim for freedom 
paradoxically adopts reason as a weapon, and as the only means of conquest which 
appears entirely human.    With the death of God, mankind remains; and by this we 
mean the history t hat we must understand and shape.    Nihilism, which, in the very 
midst of rebellion, smothers the force of creation, only adds that one is justified in 
using every means at one’s disposal.    Man, on an earth that he knows is henceforth 
solitary, is going to  add, to irrational crimes, the crimes of reason, that are bent on 
the triumph of man.    To the “I rebel, therefore we exist,” he adds, with prodigious 
plans in mind which even include the death of rebellion: “And we are alone.”  
 
 
Part Three  
   
Historical Reb ellion  
   
*  
   
         Freedom,  “that  terrible  word  inscribed  on  the  chariot  of  the  storm,” 
[Philothée O’Neddy] is the motivating principle of all revolutions.    Without it, 
justice   seems   inconceivable   to   the   rebel’s   mind.      There   comes   a   time, 
however, when ju stice demands the suspension of freedom.    Then terror, on a 
grand  or  small  scale,  makes  its  appearance  to  consummate  the  revolution.    
Every act of rebellion expresses a nostalgia for innocence and an appeal to the 
  74  

essence  of  being.     But  one  day  nostalgia  t akes  up  arms  and  assumes  the 
responsibility of total guilt; in other words, adopts murder and violence.    The 
servile rebellions, the regicide revolutions, and those of the twentieth century 
have   thus,   consciously,   accepted   a   burden   of   guilt   which   increased    in 
proportion  to  the  degree  of  liberation  they  proposed  to  introduce.     This 
contradiction, which has become only too obvious, prevents our contemporary 
revolutionaries  from  displaying  that  aspect  of  happiness  and  optimism  which 
shone forth from the faces  and the speeches of the members of the Constituent 
Assembly  in  1789.     Is  this  contradiction  inevitable?     Does  it  characterize  or 
betray  the  value  of  rebellion?     These  questions  are  bound  to  arise  about 
revolution as they are bound to arise about metaphysic al rebellion.    Actually, 
revolution  is  only  the  logical  consequence  of  metaphysical  rebellion,  and  we 
shall  discover,  in  our  analysis  of  the  revolutionary  movement,  the  same 
desperate  and  bloody  effort  to  affirm  the  dignity  of  man  in  defiance  of  the 
things   that  deny  its  existence.     The  revolutionary  spirit  thus  undertakes  the 
defence of that part of man which refuses to submit.    In other words, it tries to 
assure  him  his  crown  in  the  realm  of  time,  and,  rejecting  God,  it  chooses 
history with an apparently i nevitable logic.  
         In theory, the word  revolution  retains the meaning that it has in astronomy.    It 
is  a  movement  that  describes  a  complete  circle,  that  leads  from  one  form  of 
government  to  another  after  a  complete  transition.     A  change  of  regulations  
concerning  property  without  a  corresponding  change  of  government  is  not  a 
revolution,  but  a  reform.     There  is  no  kind  of  economic  revolution,  whether  its 
methods are violent or pacific, which is not, at the same time, manifestly political.    
Revolution can  already be distinguished, in this way, from rebellion.    The warning 
given to Louis XVI: “No, sire, this is not a rebellion, it is a revolution,” accents the 
essential  difference.     It  means  precisely  that  “it  is  the  absolute  certainty  of  a  new 
form of gove rnment.”    Rebellion is, by nature, limited in scope.    It is no more than 
an incoherent pronouncement.    Revolution, on the contrary, originates in the realm 
of  ideas.     Specifically,  it  is  the  injection  of  ideas  into  historical  experience,  while 
rebellion is  only the movement that leads from individual experience into the realm 
of  ideas.     While  even  the  collective  history  of  a  movement  of  rebellion  is  always 
that of a fruitless struggle with facts, of an obscure protest which involves neither 
methods nor reas on, a revolution is an attempt to shape actions to ideas, to fit the 
world  into  a  theoretic  frame.     That  is  why  rebellion  kills  men  while  revolution 
destroys  both  men  and  principles.     But,  for  the  same  reasons,  it  can  be  said  that 
there  has  not  yet  been  a  revolution  in  the  course  of  history.     There  could  only  be 
one,  and  that  would  be  the  definitive  revolution.     The  movement  that  seems  to 
complete the circle already begins to describe another at the precise moment when 
the  new  government  is  formed.     The  ana rchists,  with  Varlet  as  their  leader,  were 
  75  

made well aware of the fact that government and revolution are incompatible in the 
direct sense.    “It implies a contradiction,” says Proudhon, “that a government could 
be  revolutionary,  for  the  very  simple  reason  that  it  is  the  government.”     Now  that 
the  experiment  has  been  made,  let  us  qualify  that  statement  by  adding  that  a 
government   can   be   revolutionary   only   in   opposition   to   other   governments. 
  Revolutionary governments are obliged, most of the time, to be war  governments.    
The  more  extensive  the  revolution,  the  more  considerable  the  chances  of  the  war 
that  it  implies.     The  society  born  of  the  revolution  of  1789  wanted  to  fight  for 
Europe.      The   society   born   of   the   1917   revolution   is   fight ing   for   universal 
dominion.    Total revolution ends by demanding  –  we shall see why  –  the control of 
the world.  
         While waiting for this to happen, if happen it must, the history of man, in one 
sense, is the sum total of his successive rebellions.    In  other words, the movement 
of  transition  which  can  be  clearly  expressed  in  terms  of  space  is  only  an 
approximation  in  terms  of  time.     What  was  devoutly  called,  in  the  nineteenth 
century, the progressive emancipation of the human race appears, from the outse t, 
like  an  uninterrupted  series  of  rebellions,  which  overreach  themselves  and  try  to 
find  their  formulation  in  ideas,  but  which  have  not  yet  reached  the  point  of 
definitive   revolution   where   everything   on   heaven   and   on   earth   would   be 
stabilized.      A   superfic ial   examination   seems   to   imply,   rather   than   an   real 
emancipation,  an  affirmation  of  mankind  by  man,  an  affirmation  increasingly 
broad  in  scope,  but  always  incomplete.     In  fact,  if  there  had  ever  been  one  real 
revolution, there would be no more history.    Un ity would have been achieved, and 
death  would  have  been  satiated.     That  is  why  all  revolutionaries  finally  aspire  to 
world  unity  and  act  as  though  they  believe  that  history  was  concluded.     The 
originality of twentieth - century revolution lies in the fact th at, for the first time, it 
openly  claims  to  realize  the  ancient  dream  of  Anarchasis  Cloots  of  unity  of  the 
human race and, at the same time, the definitive consummation of history.    Just as 
the  movement  of  rebellion  led  to  the  point  of  “All  or  Nothing”  and   just  as 
metaphysical  rebellion  demanded  the  unity  of  the  world,  the  twentieth - century 
revolutionary  movement,  when  it  arrived  at  the  most  obvious  conclusions  of  its 
logic,  insisted  with  threats  of  force  on  arrogating  to  itself  the  whole  of  history.    
Rebel lion  is  therefore  compelled,  on  pain  of  appearing  futile  or  out  of  date  to 
become  revolutionary.     It  no  longer  suffices  for  the  rebel  to  deify  himself  like 
Stirner or to look to his own salvation by adopting a certain attitude of mind.    The 
species  must  be   deified,  as  Nietzsche  attempted  to  do,  and  his  ideal  of  the 
superman  must  be  adopted  so  as  to  assure  salvation  for  all  –   as  Ivan  Karamazov 
wanted.    For the first time, the Possessed appear on the scene and proceed to give 
the answer to one of the secrets  of the times: the identity of reason and of the will 
to power.    Now that God is dead, the world must be changed and organized by the 
  76  

forces  at  man’s  disposal.     The  force  of  imprecation  alone  is  not  enough;  weapons 
are   needed   and   totality   must   be   conquered.      Even   revolution,   particularly 
revolution,   which   claims   to   be   materialist,   is   only   a   limitless   metaphysical 
crusade.     But  can  totality  claim  to  be  unity?    That  is  the  question  which  this  book 
must  answer.     So  far  we  can  only  say  that  the  purpose  of  this  a nalysis  is  not  to 
give,  for  the  hundredth  time,  a  description  of  the  revolutionary  phenomenon,  nor 
once  more  to  examine  the  historic  or  economic  causes  of  great  revolutions.     Its 
purpose  is  to  discover  in  certain  revolutionary  data  the  logical  sequence,  th e 
explanations, and the invariable themes of metaphysical rebellion.  
         The  majority  of  revolutions  are  shaped  by,  and  derive  their  originality  from, 
murder.     All,  or  almost  all,  have  been  homicidal.     But  some,  in  addition,  have 
practised regicide and  deicide.    Just as the history of metaphysical rebellion began 
with  Sade,  so  our  real  inquiry  only  begins  with  his  contemporaries,  the  regicides, 
who attack the incarnation of divinity without yet daring to destroy the principle of 
eternity.    (But before th is the history of mankind also demonstrates the equivalent 
of the first movement of rebellion  –  the rebellion of the slave.)  
          
         When  a  slave  rebels  against  his  master,  the  situation  presented  is  of  one  man 
pitted against another, under a cruel  sky, far from the exalted realms of principles.    
The  final  result  is  merely  the  murder  of  man.     The  servile  rebellions,  peasant 
risings,  beggar  outbreaks,  rustic  revolts,  all  advance  the  concept  of  a  principle  of 
equality,  a  life  for  a  life,  which  despite  every  kind  of  mystification  and  audacity 
will  always  be  found  in  the  purest  manifestations  of  the  revolutionary  spirit  –  
Russian terrorism in 1905, for example.  
         Spartacus’  rebellion,  which  took  place  as  the  ancient  world  was  coming  to  an 
end,  a  few  decades  before  the  Christian  era,  is  an  excellent  illustration  of  this 
point.    First we note that this is a rebellion of gladiators  –  that is to say, of slaves 
consecrated  to  single  combat  and  condemned,  for  the  delectation  of  their  masters, 
to kill or be  killed.    Beginning with seventy men, this rebellion ended with an army 
of  seventy  thousand  insurgents,  which  crushed  the  best  Roman  legions  and 
advanced  through  Italy   to  march  on  the   Eternal   City   itself.     However,  as  André 
Proudhommeaux remarks (in  The Tragedy of Spartacus ), this rebellion introduced 
no  new  principle  into  Roman  life.     The  proclamation  issued  by  Spartacus  goes  no 
farther than to offer “equal rights” to the slaves.    The  transition from fact to right, 
which  we  analyzed  in  the  first  stage  of  rebellion,  is,  indeed,  the  only  logical 
acquisition  that  one  can  find  on  this  level  of  rebellion.     The  insurgent  rejects 
slavery and affirms his equality with his master.    He wants to b e master in his turn.  
         Spartacus’  rebellion  is  a  continual  illustration  of  this  principle  of  positive 
claims.     The  slave  army  liberates  the  slaves  and  immediately  hands  over  their 
former  masters  to  them  in  bondage.     According  to  one  tradition,  of  dou btful 
  77  

veracity  it  is  true,  gladiatorial  combats  were  even  organized  between  several 
hundred Roman citizens, while the slaves sat in the grandstands delirious with joy 
and  excitement.     But  to  kill  men  leads  to  nothing  but  killing  more  men.     For  one 
principl e  to  triumph,  another  principle  must  be  overthrown.     The  city  of  light  of 
which Spartacus dreamed could only have been built on the ruins of eternal  Rome, 
of  its  institutions  and  its  gods.     Spartacus’  army  marches  to  lay  siege  to  a  Rome  
paralyzed with fear at the prospect of having to pay for its crimes.    At the decisive 
moment, however, within sight of the sacred walls, the army halts and wavers, as if 
it were retreating before the principles, the institution s, the city of the gods.    When 
these had been destroyed, what could be put in their place except the brutal desire 
for justice, the wounded and exacerbated love that until this moment had kept these 
wretches  on  their  feet.     [Spartacus’  rebellion  recapitula tes  the  programme  of  the 
servile rebellions that preceded it.    But this programme is limited to the distribution 
of  land  and  the  abolition  of  slavery.     It  is  not  directly  concerned  with  the  gods  of 
the city.]    In any case, the army retreated without having  fought, and then made the 
curious  move  of  deciding  to  return  to  the  place  where  the  slave  rebellion 
originated, to retrace the long road of its victories and to return to Sicily.    It was as 
though these outcasts, forever alone and helpless before the grea t tasks that awaited 
them and too daunted to assail the heavens, returned to what was purest and most 
heartening  in  their  history,  to  the  land  of  their  first  awakening,  where  it  was  easy 
and right to die.  
         Then  began  their  defeat  and  martyrdom.     Befo re  the  last  battle,  Spartacus 
crucified  a  Roman  citizen  to  show  his  men  the  fate  that  was  in  store  for  them.    
During   the   battle,   Spartacus   himself   tried   with   frenzied   determination,   the 
symbolism  of  which  is  obvious,  to  reach  Crassus,  who  was  commanding  th e 
Roman  legions.     He  wanted  to  perish,  but  in  single  combat  with  the  man  who 
symbolized,  at  that  moment,  every  Roman  master;  it  was  his  dearest  wish  to  die, 
but  in  absolute  equality.     He  did  not  reach  Crassus:  principles  wage  war  at  a 
distance and the Roma n general kept himself apart.    Spartacus died, as he wished, 
but at the hands of mercenaries, slaves like himself, who killed their own freedom 
with  his.     In  revenge  for  the  one  crucified  citizen,  Crassus  crucified  thousands  of 
slaves.    The six thousand cr osses which, after such a just rebellion, staked out the 
road  from  Capua   to   Rome   demonstrated  to  the  servile  crowd  that  there  is  no 
equality in the world of power and that the masters calculate, at a usurious  rate, the 
price of their own blood.  
         The  cross  is  also  Christ’s  punishment.     One  might  imagine  that  he  chose  a 
slave’s  punishment,  a  few  years  later,  only  so  as  to  reduce  the  enormous  distance 
that  henceforth  would  separate  humiliated  humanity  from  the  implacable  face  of 
the  Master.     He  intercedes,  He  submits  to  the  most  extreme  injustice  so  that 
rebellion shall not divide the world in two, so that suffering will also light the way 
  78  

to  heaven  and  preserve  it  from  the  curses  of  mankind.     What  is  astoni shing  in  the 
fact that the revolutionary spirit, when it wanted to affirm the separation of heaven 
and earth, should begin by disembodying the divinity by killing His representatives 
on earth?    In certain aspects, the period of rebellions comes to an end i n 1793 and 
revolutionary times begin  –  on a scaffold.    [In that this book is not concerned with 
the  spirit  of  rebellion  inside  Christianity,  the  Reformation  has  no  place  here,  nor 
the numerous rebellions against ecclesiastical authority which preceded it.    But we 
can say, at least, that the Reformation prepares the way for Jacobinism and in one 
sense initiates the reforms that 1789 carries out.]  
   
   
   
The Regicides  
   
*  
   
         Kings  were  put  to  death  long  before  January  21,  1793,  an d  before  the 
regicides   of   the   nineteenth   century.      But   Ravaillac,   Damiens,   and   their 
followers  were  interested  in  attacking  the  person,  not  the  principle,  of  the 
king.     They  wanted  another  king  and  that  was  all.     It  never  occurred  to  them 
that  the  throne  c ould  remain  empty  forever.  1789  is  the  starting - point  of 
modern times, because the men of that period wished, among other things, to 
overthrow the principle of divine right and to introduce to the historical scene 
the  forces  of  negation  and  rebellion  which   had  become  the  essence  of 
intellectual   discussion   in   the   previous   centuries.      Thus   they   added   to 
traditional   tyrannicide   the   concept   of   calculated   deicide.      The   so - called 
freethinkers, the philosophers and jurists, served as levers for this revolution.    
[ The  kings  themselves  collaborated  in  this  by  allowing  political  power 
gradually  to  encroach  on  religious  power,  thus  threatening  the  very  principle 
of their legitimacy.]    In order for such an undertaking to enter into the realms 
of  possibility  and  to  be  co nsidered  legitimate,  it  was  first  necessary  for  the 
Church,  whose  infinite  responsibility  it  is,  to  place  itself  on  the  side  of  the 
masters by compromising with the executioner  –  a step that developed into the 
Inquisition  and  was  perpetuated  by  complicity  with  the  temporal  powers.    
Michelet  is  quite  correct  in  wanting  to  recognize  only  two  outstanding 
characters in the revolutionary saga: Christianity and the French Revolution.    
In  fact,  for  him,  1789  is  explained  by  the  struggle  between  divine  grace  and 
ju stice.     Although  Michelet  shared  the  taste  for  all - embracing  abstractions 
  79  

with  his  intemperate  period,  he  saw  that  this  taste  was  one  of  the  profound 
causes of the revolutionary crisis.  
         Even  if  the  monarchy  of  the  ancient  regime   was  not  always  arbit rary  in  its 
manner of governing, it was undoubtedly arbitrary in principle.    It was founded on 
divine  right,  which  means  that  its  legitimacy  could  never  be  questioned.     Its 
legitimacy  often  was  questioned,  however,  in  particular  by  various  parliaments.    
Bu t those who exercised it considered and presented it as an axiom.    Louis XIV, as 
is well known, rigidly adhered to the principle of divine right.    [Charles I clung so 
tenaciously to the principle of divine right that he considered it unnecessary to be 
just  and loyal to those who denied it.]    Bossuet gave him considerable help in this 
direction by saying to the kings of  France: “You are gods.”    The king, in one of his 
aspects,  is  the  divine  emissary  in  charge  of  human  affairs  and  ther efore  of  the 
administration of justice.    Like God Himself, he is the last recourse of the victims 
of  misery  and  injustice.     In  principle,  the  people  can  appeal  to  the  king  for  help 
against  their  oppressors.     “If  the  King  only  knew,  if  the  Czar  only  knew  ...”   was 
the  frequently  expressed  sentiment  of  the  French  and  Russian  people  during 
periods of great distress.    It is true in  France, at least, that, when the monarchy did 
know,  it  often  tried  to  defend  the  lower  classes  against  the  opp ressions  of  the 
aristocracy  and  the  bourgeoisie.     But  was  this,  essentially,  justice?     From  the 
absolute point of view, which was the point of view of the writers of the period, it 
was not.    Even though it is possible to appeal to the king, it is impossibl e to appeal 
against  him  insofar  as  he  is  the  embodiment  of  a  principle.     His  dispenses  his 
protection  and  his  assistance  if  and  when  he  wants  to.     One  of  the  attributes  of 
grace  is  that  it  is  discretionary.     Monarchy  in  its  theocratic  form  is  a  type  of 
gov ernment  which  wants  to  put  grace  before  justice  by  always  letting  it  have  the 
last  word.     Rousseau  in  his  Savoyard  curate’s  declaration,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
only original insofar as he submits God to justice and in this way inaugurates, with 
the rather n aïve solemnity of the period, contemporary history.  
         From the moment that the freethinkers began to question the existence of God, 
the  problem  of  justice  became  of  primary  importance.     The  justice  of  the  period 
was, quite simply, confused with equali ty.    The throne of God totters and justice, to 
confirm  its  support  of  equality,  must  give  it  the  final  push  by  making  a  direct 
attack on His representative on earth.    Divine right to all intents and purposes was 
already  destroyed  by  being  opposed  and  force d  to  compromise  with  natural  right 
for  three  years,  from  1789  to  1792.     In  the  last  resort,  grace  is  incapable  of 
compromise.    It can give in on certain points, but never on the final point.    But that 
does  not  suffice.     According  to  Michelet,  Louis  XVI  sti ll  wanted  to  be  king  in 
prison.     In  a  France   entirely  governed  by  new  principles,  the  principle  that  had 
been  defeated  still  survived  behind  prison  walls  through  the  mere  power  of  faith 
and  through  the  existence  of  one  human  being.     Justice  has  this  in  common  with 
  80  

grace,  and  this  alone,  that  it  wants  to  be  total  and  to  rule  absolutely.     From  the 
moment  they  conflict,  they  fight  to  the  death.     “We  do  not  want  to  condemn  the 
King,” said Danton, who had not even the good manners of a la wyer, “we want to 
kill  him.”     In  fact,  if  God  is  denied,  the  King  must  die.     Saint - Just,  it  seems,  was 
responsible  for  Louis  XVI’s  death;  but  when  he  exclaims:  “To  determine  the 
principle  in  virtue  of  which  the  accused  is  perhaps  to  die,  is  to  determine  th e 
principle by which the society that judges him lives,” he demonstrates that it is the 
philosophers who are going to kill the King: the King must die in the name of the 
social  contract.     [Rousseau  would  not,  of  course,  have  wanted  this.     It  must  be 
rememb ered, before proceeding with this analysis and in order to set its limits, that 
Rousseau  firmly  declared:  “Nothing  on  this  earth  is  worth  buying  at  the  price  of 
human blood.”]    But this demands an explanation.  
   
   
         The New Gospel  
   
         The  Social  Contract  is, primarily, an inquiry into the legitimacy of power.    But 
it  is  a  book  about  rights,  not  about  facts,  and  at  no  time  is  it  a  collection  of 
sociological observations.    It is concerned with principles and for this very reason 
is  bound  to  be  contr oversial.     It  presumes  that  traditional  legitimacy,  which  is 
supposedly  of  divine  origin,  is  not  acquired.     Thus  it  proclaims  another  sort  of 
legitimacy and other principles.    The  Social Contract  is also a catechism, of which 
it  has  both  the  tone  and  the  d ogmatic  language.     Just  as  1789  completes  the 
conquest of the English and American revolutions, so Rousseau pushes to its limits 
the  theory  of  the  social  contract  to  be  found  in  Hobbes.     The  Social  Contract  
amplifies  and  dogmatically  explains  the  new  relig ion  whose  god  is  reason, 
confused with nature, and whose representative on earth, in place of the king, is the 
people considered as an expression of the general will.  
         The attack on the traditional order is so evident that, from the very first chapte r, 
Rousseau is determined to demonstrate the precedence of the citizens’ pact, which 
established  the  people,  over  the  pact  between  the  people  and  the  king,  which 
founded  royalty.     Until  Rousseau’s  time,  God  created  kings,  who,  in  their  turn, 
created  people s.     After  The  Social  Contract ,  peoples  create  themselves  before 
creating  kings.     As  for  God,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said,  for  the  time  being.    
Here we have, in the political field, the equivalent of  Newton ’ s revolution.    Power,  
therefore, is no longer arbitrary, but derives its existence from general consent.    In 
other  words,  power  is  no  longer  what  is,  but  what  should  be.     Fortunately, 
according  to  Rousseau,  what  is  cannot  be  separated  from  what  should  be.     The 
people  are  sover eign  “only  because  they  are  always  everything  that  they  should 
be.”     Confronted  with  this  statement  of  principle,  it  is  perfectly  justifiable  to  say 
  81  

that reason, which was always obstinately invoked at that period, is not particularly 
well  treated  in  the  c ontext.     It  is  evident  that,  with  The  Social  Contract ,  we  are 
assisting  at  the  birth  of  a  new  mystique   –   the  will  of  the  people  being  substituted 
for  God  Himself.     “Each  of  us,”  says  Rousseau,  “places  his  person  and  his  entire 
capabilities  under  the  suprem e  guidance  of  the  will  of  the  people,  and  we  receive 
each individual member into the body as an indivisible part of the whole.”  
         This  political  entity,  proclaimed  sovereign,  is  also  defined  as  a  divine  entity.    
Moreover, it has all the attributes of  a divine entity.    It is, in fact, infallible in that, 
in its role of sovereign, it cannot even wish to commit abuses.    “Under the law of 
reason, nothing is done without cause.”    It is totally free, if it is true that absolute 
freedom is freedom in regard t o oneself.    Thus Rousseau declares that it is against 
the nature of the body politic for the sovereign power to impose a law upon itself 
that it cannot violate.    It is also inalienable, indivisible; and, finally, it even aims at 
solving  the  great  theologic al  problem,  the  contradiction  between  absolute  power 
and divine innocence.    The will of the people is, in fact, coercive; its power has no 
limits.     But  the  punishment  it  inflicts  on  those  who  refuse  to  obey  it  is  nothing 
more than a means of “compelling th em to be free.”    The deification is completed 
when  Rousseau,  separating  the  sovereign  from  his  very  origins,  reaches  the  point 
of distinguishing between the general will and the will of all.    This can be logically 
deduced  from  Rousseau’s  premises.     If  man  is  naturally  good,  if  nature  as 
expressed  in  him  is  identified  with  reason,  [Every  ideology  is  contrary  to  human 
psychology.] he will express the pre - eminence of reason, on the one condition that 
he expresses himself freely and naturally.    He can no longer , therefore, go back on 
his  decision,  which  henceforth  hovers  over  him.     The  will  of  the  people  is 
primarily the expression of universal reason, which is categorical.    The new God is 
born.  
         That  is  why  the  words  that  are  to  be  found  most  often  in  The   Social  Contract  
are  the  words  absolute,  sacred,  inviolable .     The  body  politic  thus  defined,  whose 
laws  are  sacred  commandments,  is  only  a  by - product  of  the  mystic  body  of 
temporal   Christianity.     The   Social   Contract ,   moreover,   terminates   with   a 
description   of  a  civil  religion  and  makes  Rousseau  a  harbinger  of  contemporary 
forms of society which exclude not only opposition but even neutrality.    Rousseau 
is,  in  fact,  the  first  man  in  modern  times  to  institute  the  profession  of  civil  faith.    
He  is  also  the  fir st  to  justify  the  death  penalty  in  a  civil  society  and  the  absolute 
submission  of  the  subject  to  the  authority  of  the  sovereign.     “It  is  in  order  not  to 
become  victim  of  an  assassin  that  we  consent  to  die  if  we  become  assassins.”     A 
strange justification,  but one which firmly establishes the fact that you must know 
how  to  die  if  the  sovereign  commands,  and  must,  if  necessary,  concede  that  he  is 
right  and  you  are  wrong.     This  mystic  idea  explains  Saint - Just’s  silence  from  the 
time of his arrest until he goes  to the scaffold.    Suitably developed, it equally well 
  82  

explains the enthusiasm of the defendants in the  Moscow   trials.  
         We are witnessing the dawn of a new religion with its martyrs, its ascetics, and 
its  saints.     To  be  able  t o  estimate  the  influence  achieved  by  this  gospel,  one  must 
have  some  idea  of  the  inspired  tones  of  the  proclamations  of  1789.     Fauchet, 
confronted  with  the  skeletons  discovered  in  the  Bastille,  exclaims:  “The  day  of 
revelation  is  upon  us....  The  very  bones  h ave  risen  at  the  sound  of  the  voice  of 
French  freedom;  they  bear  witness  against  the  centuries  of  oppression  and  death, 
and prophesy the regeneration of human nature and of the life of nations.”    Then he 
predicts: “We have reached the heart of time.    The t yrants are ready to fall.”    It is 
the moment of astonished and generous faith when a remarkably enlightened mob 
overthrows the scaffold and the wheel at  Versailles. [The same idyll takes place in 
Russia,  in  1 905,  where  the  soviet  of  St.  Petersburg   parades  through  the  streets 
carrying  placards  demanding  the  abolition  of  the  death  penalty,  and  again  in 
1917.]     Scaffolds  seemed  to  be  the  very  altars  of  religion  and  injustice.     The  new 
fait h  could  not  tolerate  them.     But  a  moment  comes  when  faith,  if  it  becomes 
dogmatic,  erects  its  own  altars  and  demands  unconditional  adoration.     Then 
scaffolds  reappear  and  despite  the  altars,  the  freedom,  the  oaths,  and  the  feasts  of 
Reason,  the  Masses  of  t he  new  faith  must  now  be  celebrated  with  blood.     In  any 
case,  in  order  that  1789  shall  mark  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  “holy  humanity” 
[Vergniaud]  and  of  “Our  Lord  the  human  race,”  [Anarchasis  Cloots]  the  fallen 
sovereign  must  first  of  all  disappear.    T he  murder  of  the  King - priest  will  sanction 
the new age  –  which endures to this day.  
   
   
         The Execution of the King  
   
         Saint - Just introduced Rousseau’s ideas into the pages of history.    At the King’s 
trial,  the  essential  part  of  his  arguments  co nsisted  in  saying  that  the  King  is  not 
inviolable  and  should  be  judged  by  the  Assembly  and  not  by  a  special  tribunal.    
His  arguments  he  owed  to  Rousseau.     A  tribunal  cannot  be  the  judge  between  the 
king  and  the  sovereign  people.     The  general  will  cannot  be   cited  before  ordinary 
judges.     It  is  above  everything.     The  inviolability  and  the  transcendence  of  the 
general will are thus proclaimed.    We know that the predominant theme of the trial 
was  the  inviolability  of  the  royal  person.     The  struggle  between  grac e  and  justice 
finds  its  most  provocative  illustration  in  1793  when  two  different  conceptions  of 
transcendence  meet  in  mortal  combat.     Moreover,  Saint - Just  is  perfectly  aware  of 
how much is at stake: “The spirit in which the King is judged will be the same  in 
which the spirit of the Republic is established.”  
         Saint - Just’s  famous  speech  has,  therefore,  all  the  earmarks  of  a  theological 
treatise.      “Louis,   the   stranger   in   our   midst,”   is   the   thesis   of   this   youthful 
  83  

prosecutor.     If  a  contract,  either  civil  or  natural,  could  still  bind  the  king  and  his 
people,  there  would  be  a  mutual  obligation;  the  will  of  the  people  could  not  set 
itself  up  as  absolute  judge  to  pronounce  absolute  judgement.     Therefore  it  is 
necessary  to  prove  that  no  agreement  binds  the  peop le  and  the  king.     In  order  to 
prove that the people are themselves the embodiment of eternal truth it is necessary 
to  demonstrate  that  royalty  is  the  embodiment  of  eternal  crime.     Saint - Just, 
therefore,  postulates  that  every  king  is  a  rebel  or  a  usurper.     He  is  a  rebel  against 
the  people  whose  absolute  sovereignty  he  usurps.     Monarchy  is  not  a  king,  “it  is 
crime.”     Not  a   crime,  but  crime  itself,  says  Saint - Just;  in  other  words,  absolute 
profanation.    That is the precise, and at the same time ultimate, meani ng of Saint -
Just’s  remark,  the  import  of  which  has  been  stretched  too  far:  [Or  at  least  the 
significance of which has been anticipated.    When Saint - Just made this remark, he 
did  not  know  that  he  was  already  speaking  for  himself.]  “No  one  can  rule 
innocentl y.”     Every  king  is  guilty,  because  any  man  who  wants  to  be  king  is 
automatically on the side of death.    Saint - Just says exactly the same thing when he 
proceeds  to  demonstrate  that  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  a  “sacred  matter.”    
Citizens are inviolable  and sacred and can be constrained only by the law, which is 
an expression of their common will.    Louis alone does not benefit by this particular 
inviolability  or  by  the  assistance  of  the  law,  for  he  is  placed  outside  the  contract.    
He  is  not  part  of  the  g eneral  will;  on  the  contrary,  by  his  very  existence  he  is  a 
blasphemer against this all - powerful will.    He is not a “citizen,” which is the only 
way of participating in the new divine dispensation.    “What is a king in comparison 
with a Frenchman?”    Therefo re, he should be judged and nothing more.  
         But  who  will  interpret  the  will  of  the  people  and  pronounce  judgement?     The 
Assembly,  which  by  its  origin  has  attained  the  right  to  administer  this  will,  and 
which participates as an inspired council in the  new divinity.    Should the people be 
asked to ratify the judgement?    We know that the efforts of the monarchists in the 
Assembly were finally concentrated on this point.    In this way the life of the King 
could be rescued from the logic of the bourgeois juri sts and at least entrusted to the 
spontaneous  emotions  and  compassion  of  the  people.     But  here  again  Saint - Just 
pushes  his  logic  to  its  extremes  and  makes  use  of  the  conflict,  invented  by 
Rousseau, between the general will and the will of all.    Even though  the will of all 
would  pardon,  the  general  will  cannot  do  so.     Even  the  people  cannot  efface  the 
crime   of   tyranny.      Cannot   the   victims,   according   to   law,   withdraw   their 
complaint?    We are not dealing with law, we are dealing with theology.    The crime 
of th e king is, at the same time, a sin against the ultimate nature of things.    A crime 
is  committed;  then  it  is  pardoned,  punished,  and  forgotten.     But  the  crime  of 
royalty is permanent; it is inextricably bound to the person of the king, to his very 
existence .     Christ  Himself,  though  He  can  forgive  sinners,  cannot  absolve  false 
gods.    They must disappear or conquer.    If the people forgive today, they will find 
  84  

the  crime  intact  tomorrow,  even  though  the  criminal  sleeps  peacefully  in  prison.    
Therefore  there  is  only  one  solution:  “To  avenge  the  murder  of  the  people  by  the 
death of the King.”  
         The  only  purpose  of  Saint - Just’s  speech  is,  once  and  for  all,  to  block  every 
egress for the King except the one leading to the scaffold.    If, in fact, the premises 
of  The  Social  Contract   are  accepted,  this  is  logically  inevitable.     At  last,  after 
Saint - Just, “kings will flee to the desert, and nature will resume her rights.”    It was 
quite pointless of the Convention to vote a reservation and say that it did not intend 
t o  create  a  precedent  if  it  passed  judgement  on  Louis  XVI  or  if  it  pronounced  a 
security  measure.     In  doing  so,  it  refused  to  face  the  consequences  of  its  own 
principles  and  tried  to  camouflage,  with  shocking  hypocrisy,  its  real  purpose, 
which  was  to  found  a  new  form  of  absolutism.     Jacques  Roux,  at  least,  was 
speaking  the  truth  of  the  times  when  he  called  the  King  Louis  the  Last,  thus 
indicating  that  the  real  revolution,  which  had  already  been  accomplished  on  the 
economic level, was then taking place on the  philosophic plane and that it implied 
a twilight of the gods.    Theocracy was attacked in principle in 1789 and killed in its 
incarnation in 1793.    Brissot was right in saying: “The most solid monument to our 
revolution  is  philosophy.”  [The  religious  Wars  of  the  Vendée  showed  him  to  be 
right again.]  
         On January 21, with the murder of the King - priest, was consummated what has 
significantly been called the passion of Louis XVI.    It is certainly a crying scandal 
that the public assassination of a weak bu t good - hearted man has been presented as 
a great moment in French history.    That scaffold marked no climax  –  far from it.    
But the fact remains that, by its consequences, the condemnation of the King is at 
the  crux  of  our  contemporary  history.     It  symboliz es  the  secularization  of  our 
history and the disincarnation of the Christian God.    Up to now God played a part 
in  history  through  the  medium  of  the  kings.     But  His  representative  in  history  has 
been  killed,  for  there  is  no  longer  a  king.     Therefore  there  i s  nothing  but  a 
semblance  of  God,  relegated  to  the  heaven  of  principles.  [This  will  become  the 
God of Kant, Jacobi, and Fichte.]  
         The  revolutionaries  may  well  refer  to  the  Gospel,  but  in  fact  they  dealt  a 
terrible  blow  to  Christianity,  from  which  it  has  not  yet  recovered.     It  really  seems 
as  if  the  execution  of  the  King,  followed,  as  we  know,  by  hysterical  scenes  of 
suicide  and  madness,  took  place  in  complete  awareness  of  what  was  being  done.    
Louis  XVI  seems,  sometimes,  to  have  doubted  his  divine  rig ht,  though  he 
systematically  rejected  any  projected  legislation  which  threatened  his  faith.     But 
from the moment that he suspected or knew his fate, he seemed to identify himself, 
as  his  language  betrayed,  with  the  divine  mission,  so  that  there  would  be  no  
possible  doubt  that  the  attempt  on  his  person  was  aimed  at  the  King - Christ,  the 
incarnation of the divinity, and not at the craven flesh of a mere man.    His bedside 
  85  

book in the  Temple   was the  Imitation .    The calmness and perfection  that this man 
of rather average sensibility displayed during his last moments, his indifference to 
everything of this world, and, finally, his brief display of weakness on the solitary 
scaffold, so far removed from the people whose ears he had wanted to r each, while 
the terrible rolling of the drum drowned his voice, give us the right to imagine that 
it was not Capet who died, but Louis appointed by divine right, and that with him, 
in  a  certain  manner,  died  temporal  Christianity.     To  emphasize  this  sacred  bond, 
his confessor sustained him, in his moment of weakness, by reminding him of his 
“resemblance”  to  the  God  of  Sorrows.     And  Louis  XVI  recovers  himself  and 
speaks  in  the  language  of  this  God:  “I  shall  drink,”  he  says,  “the  cup  to  the  last 
dregs.”     Then  he  commits  himself,  trembling,  into  the  ignoble  hands  of  the 
executioner.  
   
   
         The Religion of Virtue  
   
         A religion that executes its obsolete sovereign must now establish the power of 
its new sovereign; it closes the churches, and this leads t o an endeavour to build a 
temple.     The  blood  of  the  gods,  which  for  a  second  bespatters  the  confessor  of 
Louis XVI, announces a new baptism.    Joseph de Maistre qualified the Revolution 
as satanic.    We can see why and in what sense.    Michelet, however, was  closer to 
the  truth  when  he  called  it  a  purgatory.     An  era  blindly  embarks  down  this  tunnel 
on an attempt to discover a new illumination, a new happiness, and the face of the 
real God.    But what will this new god be?    Let us ask Saint - Just once more.  
          The  year  1789  does  not  yet  affirm  the  divinity  of  man,  but  the  divinity  of  the 
people,  to  the  degree  in  which  the  will  of  the  people  coincides  with  the  will  of 
nature  and  of  reason.     If  the  general  will  is  freely  expressed,  it  can  only  be  the 
universal e xpression of reason.    If the people are free, they are infallible.    Once the 
King is dead, and the chains of the old despotism thrown off, the people are going 
to  express  what,  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  is,  has  been,  and  will  be  the  truth.    
They  are  the  oracle  that  must  be  consulted  to  know  what  the  eternal  order  of  the 
world  demands.     Vox  populi,  vox  naturæ .     Eternal  principles  govern  our  conduct: 
Truth, Justice, finally Reason.    There we have the new God.    The Supreme Being, 
whom  cohorts  of  young  gi rls  come  to  adore  at  the  Feast  of  Reason,  is  only  the 
ancient god disembodied, peremptorily deprived of any connection with the earth, 
and  launched  like  a  balloon  into  a  heaven  empty  of  all  transcendent  principles.    
Deprived  of  all  his  representatives,  of  an  intercessor,  the  god  of  the  lawyers  and 
philosophers only has the value of a demonstration.    He is not very strong, in fact, 
and we can see why Rousseau, who preached tolerance, though that atheists should 
be  condemned  to  death.     To  ensure  the  adoration   of  a  theorem  for  any  length  of 
  86  

time, faith is not enough; a police force is needed as well.    But that will only come 
later.     In  1793  the  new  faith  is  still  intact,  and  it  will  suffice,  to  take  Saint - Just’s 
word, to govern according to the dictates of reas on.    The art of ruling, according to 
him,  has  produced  only  monsters  because,  before  his  time,  no  one  wished  to 
govern  according  to  nature.     The  period  of  monsters  has  come  to  an  end  with  the 
termination  of  the  period  of  violence.     “The  human  heart  advance s  from  nature  to 
violence,  from  violence  to  morality.”     Morality  is,  therefore,  only  nature  finally 
restored  after  centuries  of  alienation.     Man  only  has  to  be  given  law  “in  accord 
with  nature  and  with  his  heart,”  and  he  will  cease  to  be  unhappy  and  corrup t.    
Universal  suffrage,  the  foundation  of  the  new  laws,  must  inevitably  lead  to  a 
universal  morality.    “Our  aim  is  to  create  an  order  of  things  which  establishes  a 
universal tendency of things towards good.”  
         The  religion  of  reason  quite  naturally  es tablishes  the  Republic  of  law  and 
order.    The general will is expressed in laws codified by its representatives.    “The 
people  make  the  revolution,  the  legislator  makes  the  Republic.”     “Immortal, 
impassive” institutions, “sheltered from the temerity of man, ” will govern in their 
turn   the   lives   of   all   men   by   universal   accord   and   without   possibility   of 
contradiction,  since  by  obeying  the  laws  all  will  only  be  obeying  themselves.    
“Outside the law,” says Saint - Just, “everything is sterile and dead.”    It is the  formal 
and legalistic Republic of the Romans.    We know the passion of Saint - Just and his 
contemporaries for ancient  Rome.    The decadent young man who, in  Reims, spent 
hours in a room painted black and decorat ed with white teardrops, with the shutters 
closed,  dreamed  of  the  Spartan   Republic.     The  author  of  Organt ,  a  long  and 
licentious  poem,  was  absolutely  convinced  of  the  necessity  for  frugality  and 
virtue.     In  t he  institutions  that  he  invented,  Saint - Just  refused  to  allow  children  to 
eat  meat  until  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  he  dreamed  of  a  nation  that  was  both 
vegetarian  and  revolutionary.     “The  world  has  been  empty  since  the  Romans,”  he 
exclaimed.     But  heroic  time s  were  at  hand.     Cato,  Brutus,  Scævola,  had  become 
possible  once  more.     The  rhetoric  of  the  Latin  moralists  flourished  once  again.    
Vice,  virtue,  corruption ,  were  terms  that  constantly  recurred  in  the  oratory  of  the 
times,  and  even  more  in  the  speeches  of  Saint - Just,  of  which  they  were  the 
perpetual   burden.      The   reason   for   this   is   simple.      This   perfect   edifice,   as 
Montesquieu  had  already  seen,  could  not  exist  without  virtue.     The  French 
Revolution,  by  claiming  to  build  history  on  the  principle  of  absolute  p urity, 
inaugurates modern times simultaneously with the era of formal morality.  
         What,  in  fact,  is  virtue?     For  the  bourgeois  philosopher  of  the  period  it  is 
conformity with nature [But nature itself, as we encounter it in the works Bernadin 
de  Saint - Pierre,  conforms  to  a  pre - established  virtue.     Nature  is  also  an  abstract 
principle.]  and,  in  politics,  conformity  with  the  law,  which  expresses  the  general 
will.     “Morality,”  says  Saint - Just,  “is  stronger  than  tyrants.”     It  has,  in  fact,  just 
  87  

killed Loui s XVI.    Every form of disobedience to law therefore comes, not from an 
imperfection  of  the  law,  which  is  presumed  to  be  impossible,  but  from  a  lack  of 
virtue in the refractory citizen.    That is why the Republic not only is an assembly, 
as Saint - Just forcib ly says, but is also virtue itself.    Every form of moral corruption 
is  at  the  same  time  political  corruption,  and  vice  versa.     A  principle  of  infinite 
repression,  derived  from  this  very  doctrine,  is  then  established.     Undoubtedly 
Saint - Just  was  sincere  in  his  desire  for  a  universal  idyll.     He  really  dreamed  of  a 
republic of ascetics, of humanity reconciled and dedicated to the chaste pursuits of 
the  age  of  innocence,  under  the  watchful  eye  of  those  wise  old  men  whom  he 
decked  out  in  advance  with  a  tricolour   scarf  and  a  white  plume.     We  also  know 
that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  Saint - Just  declared  himself,  at  the  same 
time as Robespierre, against the death penalty.    He only demanded that murderers 
should be dressed in black for the rest of their liv es.    He wanted to establish a form 
of justice which did not attempt “to find the culprit guilty, but to find him weak”  –  
an admirable ambition.    He also dreamed of a republic of forgiveness which would 
recognize  that  though  the  fruits  of  crime  are  bitter,  its  roots  are  nevertheless 
tender.     One  of  his  outbursts,  at  least,  came  from  the  heart  and  is  not  easily 
forgotten: “it is a frightful thing to torment the people.”    Yes indeed, it is a frightful 
thing.     But  a  man  can  realize  this  and  yet  submit  to  princi ples  that  imply,  in  the 
final analysis, the torment of the people.  
         Morality,  when  it  is  formal,  devours.     To  paraphrase  Saint - Just,  no  one  is 
virtuous  innocently.     From  the  moment  that  laws  fail  to  make  harmony  reign,  or 
when  the  unity  which  should  be  created  by  adherence  to  principles  is  destroyed, 
who is to blame?    Factions.    Who compose the factions?    Those who deny by their 
very  actions  the  necessity  of  unity.     Factions  divide  the  sovereign;  therefore  they 
are blasphemous and criminal.    They, and  they alone, must be combated.    But what 
if  there  are  many  factions?     All  shall  be  fought  to  the  death.     Saint - Just  exclaims: 
“Either  the  virtues  or  the  Terror.”     Freedom  must  be  guaranteed,  and  the  draft 
constitution  presented  to  the  Convention  already  me ntions  the  death  penalty.    
Absolute   virtue   is   impossible,   and   the   republic   of   forgiveness   leads,   with 
implacable  logic,  to  the  republic  of  the  guillotine.     Montesquieu  had  already 
denounced this logic as one of the causes of the decadence of societies, say ing that 
the  abuse  of  power  is  greatest  when  laws  do  not  anticipate  it.     The  pure  law  of 
Saint - Just did not take into account the truth, which is as old as history itself, that 
law, in its essence, is bound to be transgressed.  
   
   
         The Terror  
   
          Saint - Just,  the  contemporary  of  Sade,  finally  arrives  at  the  justification  of 
  88  

crime, though he starts from very different principles.    Saint - Just is, of course. The 
anti - Sade.     If  Sade’s  formula  were  “Open  the  prisons  or  prove  your  virtue,”  the 
Saint - Jus t’s would be: “Prove your virtue or go to prison.”    Both, however, justify 
terrorism  –  the libertine justifies individual terrorism, t he high priest of  virtue   State  
terrorism.    Absolute good and absolute evil , if the necessary logic is applied, both 
demand the same degree of passion.    Of course, there is a certain ambiguity in the 
case  of  Saint - Just.     The  letter  which  he  wrote  to  Vilain  d’Aubigny  in  1792  has 
something  really  insane  about  it.     It  is  a  professio n  of  faith  by  a  persecuted 
persecutor which ends with a hysterical avowal: “If Brutus does not kill others, he 
will kill himself.”    A personality so obstinately serious, so voluntarily cold, logical, 
and  imperturbable,  leads  one  to  imagine  every  kind  of  ab erration  and  disorder. 
  Saint - Just invented the kind of seriousness which makes the history of the last two 
centuries  so  tedious  and  depressing.     “He  who  makes  jokes  at  the  head  of  a 
government,” he said, “has a tendency to tyranny.”    An astonishing maxim,  above 
all  if  one  thinks  of  the  penalty  for  the  mere  accusation  of  tyranny,  one  which,  in 
any  case,  prepared  the  way  for  the  pedant  Cæsars.     Saint - Just  sets  the  example; 
even   his   tone   is   definitive.      That   cascade   of   peremptory   affirmatives,   that 
axiomatic  and   sententious   style,   portrays   him   better   than   the   most   faithful 
painting.     His  sentences  drone  on;  his  definitions  follow  one  another  with  the 
coldness  and  precision  of  commandments.     “Principles  should  be  moderate,  laws 
implacable, principles without re dress.”    It is the style of the guillotine.  
         Such  pertinacity  in  logic,  however,  implies  a  profound  passion.     Here,  as 
elsewhere, we again find the passion for unity.    Every rebellion implies some kind 
of unity.    The rebellion of 1789 demands the uni ty of the whole country.    Saint - Just 
dreams  of  an  ideal  city  where  manners  and  customs,  in  final  agreement  with  the 
law, will proclaim the innocence of man and the identity of his nature with reason.    
And if factions arise to interrupt this dream, passion  will exaggerate its logic.    No 
one will dare to image that, since factions exist, the principles are perhaps wrong.    
Factions  will  be  condemned  as  criminal  because  principles  remain  intangible.     “It 
is  time  that  everyone  returned  to  morality  and  the  aristo cracy  of  the  Terror.”     But 
the  aristocratic  factions  are  not  the  only  ones  to  be  reckoned  with;  there  are  the 
republicans, too, and anyone else who criticizes the actions of the legislature and of 
the  Convention.     They,  too,  are  guilty,  since  they  threaten   unity.     Saint - Just,  then, 
proclaims the major principle of twentieth - century tyrannies.    “A patriot is he who 
supports  the  Republic  in  general;  whoever  opposes  it  in  detail  is  a  traitor.”    
Whoever  criticizes  it  is  a  traitor,  whoever  fails  to  give  open  sup port  is  a  suspect.    
When  neither  reason  nor  the  free  expression  of  individual  opinion  succeeds  in 
systematically establishing unity, it must be decided to suppress all alien elements.    
Thus the guillotine becomes a logician whose function is refutation.    “ A rogue who 
has  been  condemned  to  death  by  the  tribunal  says  he  wants  to  resist  oppression 
  89  

simply because he wants to resist the scaffold.!”    Saint - Just’s indignation is hard to 
understand in that, until his time, the scaffold was precisely nothing else bu t one of 
the most obvious symbols of oppression.    But at the heart of this logical delirium, 
at the logical conclusion of this morality of virtue, the scaffold represents freedom.    
It assures rational unity, and harmony is the ideal city.    It purifies (the  word is apt) 
the  Republic  and  eliminates  malpractices  that  arise  to  contradict  the  general  will 
and universal reason.    “They question my right to the title of philanthropist,” Marat 
exclaims,  in  quite  a  different  style.     “Ah,  what  injustice!     Who  cannot  s ee  that  I 
want to cut off a few heads to save a great number?”    A few  –  a faction?    Naturally 
–   and  all  historic  actions  are  performed  at  this  price.     But  Marat,  making  his  final 
calculations,  claimed  two  hundred  and  seventy - three  thousand  heads.     But  he 
c ompromised  the  therapeutic  aspect  of  the  operation  by  screaming  during  the 
massacre:  “Brand  them  with  hot  irons,  cut  off  their  thumbs,  tear  out  their 
tongues.”     This  philanthropist  wrote  day  and  night,  in  the  most  monotonous 
vocabulary  imaginable,  of  the  n ecessity  of  killing  in  order  to  create.     He  wrote 
again,  by  candlelight  deep  down  in  his  cellar,  during  the  September  nights  while 
his henchmen were installing spectators benches in prison courtyards  –  men on the 
right,   women   on   the   left  –    to   display   to   th em,   as   a   gracious   example   of 
philanthropy, the spectacle of the aristocrats having their heads cut off.  
         Do  not  let  us  confuse,  even  for  a  moment,  the  imposing  figure  of  Saint - Just 
with  the  sad  spectacle  of  Marat  –   Rousseau’s  monkey,  as  Michelet  righ tly  calls 
him.     But  the  drama  of  Saint - Just  lies  in  having  at  moments  joined  forces,  for 
superior  and  much  deeper  reasons,  with  Marat.     Factions  join  with  factions,  and 
minorities  with  minorities,  and  in  the  end  it  is  not  even  sure  that  the  scaffold 
functi ons in the service of the will of all.    But at least Saint - Just will affirm, to the 
bitter  end,  that  it  functions  in  the  service  of  the  general  will,  since  it  functions  in 
the service of virtue.    “A revolution such as ours is not a trial, but a clap of thu nder 
for the wicked.”    Good strikes like a thunderbolt, innocence is a flash of lightning  –  
a  flash  of  lightning  that  brings  justice.     Even  the  pleasure - seekers  –   in  fact,  they 
above  all  –   are  counterrevolutionaries.     Saint - Just,  who  said  that  the  idea  of 
happiness was new to  Europe   (actually it was mainly new for Saint - Just, for whom 
history  stopped  at  Brutus),  remarks  that  some  people  have  an  “appalling  idea  of 
what  happiness  is  and  confuse  it  with  pleasure.”     They,  too,  must  be  de alt  with 
firmly.     Finally,  it  is  no  longer  a  question  of  majority  or  minority.     Paradise,  lost 
and  always  coveted  by  universal  innocence,  disappears  into  the  distance;  on  the 
unhappy earth, racked with the cries of civil and national wars, Saint - Just decre es, 
against  his  nature  and  against  his  principles,  that  when  the  whole  country  suffers, 
then all are guilty.    The series of reports on the factions abroad, the law of the 22 
Prairial, the speech of  April 15, 1794   on the necessity of  the police, mark the stages 
of  this  conversion.     The  man  who  with  such  nobility  held  that  it  was  infamous  to 
  90  

lay  down  one’s  arms  while  there  remained,  somewhere  in  the  world,  one  master 
and  one  slave,  is  the  same  man  who  had  to  agree  to  suspend  the  Consti tution  of 
1793 and to adopt arbitrary rule.    In the speech that he made to defend Robespierre, 
he rejects fame and posterity and only refers himself to an abstract providence.    At 
the same time, he recognized that virtue, of which he made a religion, has n o other 
reward but history and the present, and that it must, at all costs, lay the foundations 
of  its  own  reign.     He  did  not  like  power  which  he  called  “cruel  and  wicked’  and 
which, he said, “advanced toward repression, without any guiding principle.”    Bu t 
the  guiding  principle  was  virtue  and  was  derived  from  the  people.     When  the 
people  failed,  the  guiding  principle  became  obscured  and  oppression  increased.    
Therefore it was the people who were guilty and not power, which must remain, in 
principle,  innoce nt.     Such  an  extreme  and  outrageous  contradiction  could  only  be 
resolved  by  an  even  more  extreme  logic  and  by  the  final  acceptance  of  principles 
in  silence  and  in  death.     Saint - Just  at  least  remained  equal  to  this  demand,  and  in 
this  way  was  at  last  to  fin d  his  greatness  and  that  independent  life  in  time  and 
space of which he spoke with such emotion.  
         For  a  long  time  he  had,  in  fact,  had  a  presentiment  that  the  demands  he  made 
implied a total and unreserved sacrifice on his part and had said himself t hat those 
who make revolutions in this world  –  “those who do good”  –  can sleep only in the 
tomb.     Convinced  that  his  principles,  in  order  to  triumph,  must  culminate  in  the 
virtue  and  happiness  of  his  people,  aware,  perhaps,  that  he  was  asking  the 
impossibl e,  he  cut  off  his  own  retreat  in  advance  by  declaring  that  he  would  stab 
himself  in  public  on  the  day  when  he  despaired  of  the  people.     Nonetheless,  he 
despairs,  since  he  has  doubts  about  the  Terror.     “The  revolution  is  frozen,  every 
principle has been att enuated; all that remains are red caps worn by intriguers.    The 
exercise of terror has blunted crime as strong drink blunts the palate.”    Every virtue 
“unites  with  crime  in  times  of  anarchy.”     He  said  that  all  crime  sprang  from 
tyranny,  which  was  the  great est  crime  of  all,  and  yet,  confronted  with  the 
unflagging  obstinacy  of  crime,  the  Revolution  itself  resorted  to  tyranny  and 
became  criminal.     Thus  crime  cannot  be  obliterated,  nor  can  factions,  nor  the 
despicable desire for enjoyment; the people must be de spaired of and subjugated.    
But  neither  is  it  possible  to  govern  innocently.     Thus,  evil  must  be  either  suffered 
or  served,  principles  must  be  declared  wrong  or  the  people  and  mankind  must  be 
recognized as guilty.    Then Saint - Just averts his mysterious and  handsome face: “It 
would  be  leaving  very  little  to  leave  a  life  in  which  one  must  be  either  the 
accomplice or the silent witness of evil.”    Brutus, who must kill himself if he does 
not kill others, begins by killing others.    But the others are too many; t hey cannot 
all  be  killed.     In  that  case  he  must  die  and  demonstrate,  yet  again,  that  rebellion, 
when it gets out of hand, swings from the annihilation of others to the destruction 
of the self.    This task, at any rate, is easy; once again it suffices to fol low logic to 
  91  

the  bitter  end.     In  his  speech  in  defence  of  Robespierre,  shortly  before  his  death, 
Saint - Just  reaffirms  the  guiding  principle  of  his  actions,  which  is  the  very  same 
principle  which  leads  to  his  condemnation:  “I  belong  to  no  faction,  I  shall  f ight 
against  them  all.”     He  accepted  then,  and  in  advance,  the  decision  of  the  general 
will  –   in  other  words,  of  the  Assembly.     He  agreed  to  go  to  his  death  for  love  of 
principle  and  despite  all  the  realities  of  the  situation,  since  the  opinion  of  the 
Asse mbly  could  only  really  be  swayed  by  the  eloquence  and  fanaticism  of  a 
faction.    But that is beside the point!    When principles fail, men have only one way 
to  save  them  and  to  preserve  their  faith,  which  is  to  die  for  them.     In  the  stifling 
heat  of  Paris   in  July,  Saint - Just,  ostensibly  rejecting  reality  and  the  world, 
confesses that he stakes his life on the decision of principles.    When this has been 
said,  he  seems  to  have  a  fleeting  perception  of  another  truth,  and  ends  with  a 
restr ained  denunciation  of  his  colleagues  Billaud - Varennes  and  Collot  d’Herbois.    
“I want them to justify themselves and I want us to become wiser.”    The style and 
the guillotine are here suspended for a moment.    But virtue, in that it has too much 
pride, is no t wisdom.    The guillotine is going to fall again on that head as cold and 
beautiful  as  morality  itself.     From  the  moment  that  the  Assembly  condemns  him 
until  the  moment  when  he  stretches  his  neck  to  the  knife,  Saint - Just  keeps  silent.    
This  long  silence  is   more  important  than  his  death.     He  complained  that  silence 
reigned around thrones and that is why he wanted to speak so much and so well.    
But in the end, contemptuous of the tyranny and the enigma of a people who do not 
conform to pure reason, he resorts  to silence himself.    His principles do not allow 
him  to  accept  things  as  they  are;  and,  things  not  being  what  they  should  be,  his 
principles are therefore fixed, silent, and alone.    To abandon oneself to principles is 
really  to  die  –   and  to  die  for  an  imp ossible  love  which  is  the  contrary  of  love.    
Saint - Just dies, and, with him, all hope of a new religion.  
   
        “ All the stones are cut to build the structure of freedom,” said Saint - Just; “you 
can  build  a  palace  or  a  tomb  of  the  same  stones.”     The  very  principles  of  The 
Social Contract  presided at the erection of the tomb that Napoleon Bonaparte came 
to  seal.     Rousseau,  who  was  not  wanting  in  common  sense,  understood  very  well 
that the society envisioned by  The Social Contract  was suitable only for gods.    His 
successors took him at his word and tried to establish the divinity of man.    The red 
flag  -   a  symbol  of  martial  law  and  therefore  of  the  executive  under  the  ancient 
regime   –   became  the  revolutionary  symbol  on  August  10,  1792.     A  significant 
transfer about which Jaurès comments as follows: “It is we the people who are the 
law.... We are not rebels.    The rebels are in the Tuileries.”    But it is not so easy as 
that  to  become  God.     Even  the  ancient  gods  did  not  die  at  the  first  blow,   and  the 
revolutions of the nineteenth century were intended to achieve the final liquidation 
of  the  principle  of  divinity.     Paris   rose  to  place  the  King  under  the  rule  of  the 
  92  

people  and  to  prevent  him  from  restoring  an  authority  of   principle.     The  corpse 
which the rebels of 1830 dragged through the rooms of the Tuileries and installed 
on  the  throne  in  order  to  pay  it  derisory  homage  has  no  other  significance.     The 
king  could  still  be,  at  that  period,  a  respected  minister,  but  his  au thority  is  now 
derived  from  the  nation,  and  his  guiding  principle  is  the  Charter.     He  is  no  longer 
Majesty.     Now  that  the  ancient  regime   had  definitely  disappeared  in  France,  the 
new regime must again, after 1848, reaffirm itself, and the history of the ni neteenth 
century up to 1914 is the history of the restoration of popular sovereignties against 
ancient regime  monarchies; in other words, the history of the principle of nations.    
This  principle  finally  triumphs  in  1919,  which  witnesses  the  disappearance  o f  all 
absolutist  monarchies  in  Europe.     [With  the  exception  of  the  Spanish  monarchy.    
But the German Empire collapsed, of which Wilhelm II said that it was “the proof 
that we Hohenzollerns derive our crown from heaven alone and that  it is to heaven 
alone  that  we  must  give  an  accounting.”]     Everywhere,  the  sovereignty  of  the 
nation is substituted, in law and in fact, for the sovereign king.    Only then can the 
consequences  of  the  principles  of  1789  be  seen.     We  survivors  are  the  first  to  be 
able to judge them clearly.  
         The Jacobins reinforced the eternal moral principles to the extent to which they 
suppressed  the  things  which,  up  to  then,  had  supported  these  principles.     As 
preachers  of  a  gospel,  they  wanted  to  base  fraternity  on  the  abstract  law  of  the 
Romans.     They  substituted  the  law  for  divine  commandments  on  the  supposition 
that it must be recognized by all because it was the expression of the general will.    
The  law  found  its  justification  in  natural  virtue  and  then  proceeded  to  justify 
natural  virtue.     But  immediately  a  single  faction  manifests  itself,  this  reasoning 
collapses  and  we  perceive  that  virtue  has  need  of  justification  in  order  not  to  be 
abstract.     In  the  same  way,  the  bourgeois  jurists  of  the  eighteenth  century,  by  
burying  under  the  weight  of  their  principles  the  just  and  vital  conquests  of  their 
people,  prepared  the  way  for  the  two  contemporary  forms  of  nihilism:  individual 
nihilism and State nihilism.  
         Law can reign, in fact, insofar as it is the law of univ ersal reason.    [Hegel saw 
clearly  that  the  philosophy  of  enlightenment  wanted  to  deliver  man  from  the 
irrational.     Reason  reunites  mankind  while  the  irrational  destroys  unity.]     But  it 
never  is,  and  it  loses  its  justification  if  man  is  not  naturally  good.     A  day  comes 
when  ideology  conflicts  with  psychology.     Then  there  is  no  more  legitimate 
power.    Thus the law evolves to the point of becoming confused with the legislator 
and  with  a  new  form  of  arbitrariness.     Where  turn  then?     The  law  has  gone 
completely  off  its  course;  and,  losing  its  precision,  it  becomes  more  and  more 
inaccurate,  to  the  point  of  making  everything  a  crime.     The  law  still  reigns 
supreme,  but  it  no  longer  has  any  fixed  limits.     Saint - Just  had  foreseen  that  this 
form  of  tyranny  might  be  exe rcised  in  the  name  of  a  silent  people.     “Ingenious 
  93  

crime  will  be  exalted  into  a  kind  of  religion  and  criminals  will  be  in  the  sacred 
hierarchy.”     But  this  is  inevitable.     If  major  principles  have  no  foundation,  if  the 
law  expresses  nothing  but  a  provisiona l  inclination,  it  is  only  made  in  order  to  be 
broken  or  to  be  imposed.     Sade  or  dictatorship,  individual  terrorism  or  State 
terrorism, both justified by the same absence of justification, are, from the moment 
that rebellion cuts itself off from its roots a nd abstains from any concrete morality, 
one of the alternatives of the twentieth century.  
         The  revolutionary  movement  that  was  born  in  1789  could  not,  however,  stop 
there.     God,  for  the  Jacobins,  is  not  completely  dead,  any  more  than  he  was  dead 
for  the  romantics.     They  still  preserve  the  Supreme  Being.     Reason,  in  a  certain 
way,  is  still  a  mediator.     It  implies  a  pre - existent  order.     But  God  is  at  least 
dematerialized  and  reduced  to  the  theoretical  existence  of  a  moral  principle.     The 
bourgeoisie  suc ceeded  in  reigning  during  the  entire  nineteenth  century  only  be 
referring  itself  to  abstract  principles.     Less  worthy  than  Saint - Just,  it  simply  made 
use  of  this  frame  of  reference  as  an  alibi,  while  employing,  on  all  occasions,  the 
opposite values.    By it s essential corruption and disheartening hypocrisy, it helped 
to  discredit,  for  good  and  all,  the  principles  it  proclaimed.     Its  culpability  in  this 
regard  is  infinite.     From  the  moment  that  eternal  principles  are  put  in  doubt 
simultaneously with formal vi rtue, and when every value is discredited, reason will 
start  to  act  without  reference  to  anything  but  its  own  successes.     It  would  like  to 
rule, denying everything that has been and affirming all that is to come.    One day it 
will conquer.    Russian Communis m, by its violent criticism of every kind of formal 
virtue,  puts  the  finishing  touches  to  the  revolutionary  work  of  the  nineteenth 
century by denying any superior principle.    The regicides of the nineteenth century 
are  succeeded  by  the  deicides  of  the  twen tieth  century,  who  drawn  the  ultimate 
conclusions  from  the  logic  of  rebellion  and  want  to  make  the  earth  a  kingdom 
where man is God.    The reign of history begins and, identifying himself only with 
his history, man, unfaithful to his real rebellion, will he nceforth devote himself to 
the nihilistic revolution of the twentieth century, which denies all forms of morality 
and  desperately  attempts  to  achieve  the  unity  of  the  human  race  by  means  of  a 
ruinous series of crimes and wars.    The Jacobin Revolution, whic h tried to institute 
the  religion  of  virtue  in  order  to  establish  unity  upon  it,  will  be  followed  by  the 
cynical revolutions, which can be either of the right or of the left and which will try 
to  achieve  the  unity  of  the  world  so  as  to  found,  at  last,  the  religion  of  man.     All 
that was God’s will henceforth be rendered to Cæsar.  
   
   
   
  94  

The Deicides  
   
*  
   
         Justice,  reason,  truth  still  shone  in  the  Jacobin  heaven,  performing  the 
function  of  fixed  stars,  which  could,  at  least,  serve  as  guides.     German 
nin eteenth - century  thinkers,  particularly  Hegel,  wanted  to  continue  the  work 
of   the   French   Revolution   [And   of   the   Reformation  –    “the   Germans’ 
Revolution,” according to Hegel.] while suppressing the causes of its failure.    
Hegel  thought  that  he  discerned  the  s eeds  of  the  Terror  contained  in  the 
abstract  principles  of  the  Jacobins.     According  to  him,  absolute  and  abstract 
freedom must inevitably lead to terrorism; the rule of abstract law is identical 
with  the  rule  of  oppression.     For  example,  Hegel  remarks  that   the  period 
between  the  time  of  Augustus  and  Alexander  Severus  (A.D.     235)  is  the 
period of the greatest legal proficiency but also the period of the most ruthless 
tyranny.     To  avoid  this  contradiction,  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  wish  to 
construct  a  con crete  society,  invigorated  by  a  principle  that  was  not  formal 
and in which freedom could be reconciled with necessity.    German philosophy 
therefore  finished  by  substituting,  for  the  universal  but  abstract  reason  of 
Saint - Just  and  Rousseau,  a  less  artificia l  but  more  ambiguous  idea:  concrete 
universal  reason.     Up  to  this  point,  reason  had  soared  above  the  phenomena 
which  were  related  to  it.     Now  reason  is,  henceforth,  incorporated  in  the 
stream of historical events, which it explains while deriving its subst ance from 
them.  
         It can certainly be said that Hegel rationalized to the point of being irrational.    
But, at the same time, he gave reason an unreasonable shock by endowing it with a 
lack  of  moderation,  the  results  of  which  are  now  before  our  eyes.     Into  the  fixed 
ideas  of  this  period,  German  thought  suddenly  introduced  an  irresistible  urge  to 
movement.     Truth,  reason,  and  justice  were  abruptly  incarnated  in  the  progress  of 
the  world.     But  by  committing  them  to  perpetual  acceleration,  German  ideology 
confused  their  existence  with  their  impulse  and  fixed  the  conclusion  of  this 
existence at the final stage of the historical future  –  if there was to be one.    These 
values  have  ceased  to  be  guides  in  order  to  become  goals.     As  for  the  means  of 
attaining  the se  goals,  specifically  life  and  history,  no  pre - existent  value  can  point 
the  way.     On  the  contrary,  a  large  part  of  Hegelian  demonstration  is  devoted  to 
proving  that  moral  conscience,  by  being  so  banal  as  to  obey  justice  and  truth,  as 
though  these  values  e xisted  independently  of  the  world,  jeopardizes,  precisely  for 
this reason, the advent of these values.    The rule of action has thus become action 
itself  –  which must be performed in darkness while awaiting the final illumination.    
  95  

Reason,  annexed  by  this  f orm  of  romanticism,  is  nothing  more  than  an  inflexible 
passion.  
         The  ends  have  remained  the  same,  only  ambition  has  increased;  thought  has 
become dynamic, reason has embraced the future and aspired to conquest.    Action 
is  no  more  than  a  calculation  b ased  on  results,  not  on  principles.     Consequently  it 
confounds itself with perpetual movement.    In the same way, all the disciplines that 
characterize eighteenth - century thought as rigid and addicted to classification were 
abandoned  in  the  nineteenth  centu ry.     Just  as  Darwin   replaced  Linnæus,  the 
philosophers  who  supported  the  doctrine  of  an  incessant  dialectic  replaced  the 
harmonious  and  strict  constructors  of  reason.     From  this  moment  dates  the  idea 
(hostile to every concept of anc ient thought, which, on the contrary, reappeared to 
a  certain  extent  in  the  mind  of  revolutionary  France)  that  man  has  not  been 
endowed  with  a  definitive  human  nature,  that  he  is  not  a  finished  creation  but  an 
experiment,  of  which  h e  can  be  partly  the  creator.     With  Napoleon  and  the 
Napoleonic  philosopher  Hegel,  the  period  of  efficacy  begins.     Before  Napoleon, 
men  had  discovered  space  and  the  universe;  with  Napoleon,  they  discovered  time 
and the future in terms of this world; and by  this discover the spirit of rebellion is 
going to be profoundly transformed.  
         In  any  case,  it  is  strange  to  find  Hegel’s  philosophy  at  this  new  stage  in  the 
development of the spirit of rebellion.    Actually, in one sense, his work exudes an 
absolute  horror  of  dissidence:  he  wanted  to  be  the  very  essence  of  reconciliation.    
But  this  is  only  one  aspect  of  a  system  which,  by  its  very  method,  is  the  most 
ambiguous in all philosophic literature.    To the extent that, for him, what is real is 
rational,  he  ju stifies  every  ideological  encroachment  upon  reality.     What  has  been 
called  Hegel’s  panlogism  is  a  justification  of  the  condition  of  fact.     But  his 
philosophy  also  exalts  destruction  for  its  own  sake.     Everything  is  reconciled,  of 
course, in the dialectic,  and one extreme cannot be stated without the other arising; 
there exists in Hegel, as in all great thinkers, the material for contradicting Hegel.    
Philosophers, however, are rarely read with the head alone, but often with the heart 
and all its passions, w hich can accept no kind of reconciliation.  
         Nevertheless, the revolutionaries of the twentieth century have borrowed from 
Hegel the weapons with which they definitively destroyed the formal principles of 
virtue.    All that they have preserved is the v ision of a history without any kind of 
transcendence,  dedicated  to  perpetual  strife  and  to  the  struggle  of  wills  bent  on 
seizing  power.     In  its  critical  aspect,  the  revolutionary  movement  of  our  times  is 
primarily  a  violent  denunciation  of  the  formal  hypoc risy  that  provides  over 
bourgeois  society.     The  partially  justified  pretension  of  modern  Communism,  like 
the  more  frivolous  claims  of  Fascism,  is  to  denounce  the  mystification  that 
underlines  the  principles  and  virtues  of  the  bourgeois  type  of  democracy.     Divine 
transcendence, up to 1789, served to justify the arbitrary actions of the king.    After 
  96  

the  French  Revolution,  the  transcendence  of  the  formal  principles  of  reason  or 
justice   serves   to   justify   a   rule   that   is   neither   just   nor   reasonable.      This 
transce ndence is therefore a mask that must be torn off.    God is dead, but as Stirner 
predicted, the morality of principles in which the memory of God is still preserved 
must also be killed.    The hatred of formal virtue  –  degraded witness to divinity and 
false wi tness in the service of injustice  –  has remained one of the principal themes 
of  history  today.     Nothing  is  pure:  that  is  the  cry  which  convulses  our  period.    
Impurity, the equivalent of history, is going to become the rule, and the abandoned 
earth will be  delivered to naked force, which will decide whether or not is divine.    
Thus lies and violence are adopted in the same spirit in which a religion is adopted 
and on the same heartrending impulse.  
         But  the  first  fundamental  criticism  of  the  good  conscie nce  –   the  denunciation 
of the beautiful soul and of ineffectual attitudes  –  we owe to Hegel, for whom the 
ideology of the good, the true, and the beautiful is the religion of those possessed 
of  none  of  them.     While  the  mere  existence  of  factions  surprises  Saint - Just  and 
contravenes  the  ideal  order  that  he  affirms,  Hegel  not  only  is  not  surprised,  but 
even  affirms  that  faction  is  the  prelude  to  thought.     For  the  Jacobin,  everyone  is 
virtuous.    The movement which starts with Hegel, and which is triumphant tod ay, 
presumes, on the contrary, that no one is virtuous, but that everyone will be.    At the 
beginning,  everything,  according  to  Saint - Just,  is  an  idyll;  according  to  Hegel, 
everything is a tragedy.    But in the end that amounts to the same thing.    Those who 
destroy the idyll must be destroyed or destruction must be embarked on in order to 
create  the  idyll.     Violence,  in  both  cases,  is  the  victor.     The  repudiation  of  the 
Terror, undertaken by Hegel, only leads to an extension of the Terror.  
         That  is  not  all.     Apparently  the  world  today  can  no  longer  be  anything  other 
than a world of masters and slaves because contemporary ideologies, those that are 
changing  the  face  of  the  earth,  have  learned  from  Hegel  to  conceive  of  history  in 
terms  of  the  dialectic  of  master  and  slave.     If,  on  the  first  morning  of  the  world, 
under  the  empty  sky,  there  is  only  a  master  and  a  slave;  even  if  there  is  only  the 
bond of master and slave between a transcendent god and mankind, then there can 
be  no  other  law  in  this  world  than  the  law  of  force.     Only  a  god,  or  a  principle 
above the master and the salve, could intervene and make men’s history something 
more than a mere chronicle of their victories and defeats.    First Hegel and then the 
Hegelians  have  tried,  on  the  contrary,  to  de stroy,  more  and  more  thoroughly,  all 
idea  of  transcendence  and  any  nostalgia  for  transcendence.     Although  there  was 
infinitely   more   to   Hegel   than   in   the   left - wing   Hegelians   who   finally   have 
triumphed  over  him,  he  nevertheless  furnished,  on  the  level  of  the   dialectic  of 
master  and  slave,  the  decisive  justification  of  the  spirit  of  power  in  the  twentieth 
century.     The  conqueror  is  always  right;  that  is  one  of  the  lessons  which  can  be 
learned  from  the  most  important  German  philosophical  system  of  the  nineteent h 
  97  

century.     Of  course,  there  is  to  be  found,  in  the  prodigious  Hegelian  edifice,  a 
means of partially contradicting those ideas.    But twentieth - century ideology is not 
connected  with  what  is  improperly  called  the  idealism  of  the  master  of  Jena.    
Hegel’s  face,  which  reappears  in  Russian  Communism,  has  been  successively 
remodelled  by  David  Strauss,  Bruno  Bauer,  Feuerbach,  Marx,  and  the  entire 
Hegelian  left - wing.     We  are  only  interested  in  him  here  because  he  alone  has  any 
real  bearing  on  the  history  of  our  time.     If  Nietzsche  and  Hegel  serve  as  alibis  to 
the masters of Dachau and Karaganda [They found less philosophic models in the 
Prussian, Napoleonic, and Czarist police and in the British concentration camps in 
South Africa.], that do es not condemn their entire philosophy.    But it does lead to 
the  suspicion  that  one  aspect  of  their  thought,  or  of  their  logic,  can  lead  to  these 
appalling conclusions.  
   
         Nietzschean nihilism is methodical.     The Phenomenology of the Mind  also has 
a  didactic  aspect.     At  the  meeting - point  of  two  centuries,  it  depicts,  in  its 
successive stages, the education of the mind as it pursues its way toward absolute 
truth.     It  is  a  metaphysical  Émile.   [In  one  sense  there  is  a  ground  of  comparison 
between Hegel a nd Rousseau.    The fortune of the  Phenomenology  has been, in its 
consequences,  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  Social  Contract .     It  shaped  the 
political thought of its time.    Rousseau’s theory of the general will, besides, recurs 
in the Hegelian system.]    E ach stage is an error and is, moreover, accompanied by 
historic  sanctions  which  are  almost  always  fatal,  either  to  the  mind  or  to  the 
civilization in which it is reflected.    Hegel proposes to demonstrate the necessity of 
these painful stages.    The  Phenomen ology  is, in one aspect, a meditation of despair 
and  death.     The  mission  of  despair  is,  simply,  to  be  methodical  in  that  it  must  be 
transfigured, at the end of history, into absolute satisfaction and absolute wisdom.    
The book has the defect, however, of o nly imagining highly intelligent pupils and 
it has been taken literally, while, literally, it only wanted to proclaim the spirit.    It 
is the same with the celebrated analysis of mastery and slavery.  
         Animals,  according  to  Hegel,  have  an  immediate  kno wledge  of  the  exterior 
world, a perception of the self, but not the knowledge of self, which distinguishes 
man.     The  latter  is  only  really  born  at  the  moment  when  he  becomes  aware  of 
himself   as   a   rational   being.      Therefore   his   essential   characteristic   is   s elf -
consciousness.    Consciousness of self, to be affirmed, must distinguish itself from 
what  it  is  not.     Man  is  a  creature  who,  to  affirm  his  existence  and  his  difference, 
denies.     What  distinguishes  consciousness  of  self  from  the  world  of  nature  is  not 
th e simple act of contemplation by which it identifies itself with the exterior world 
and finds oblivion, but the desire it can feel with regard to the world.    This desire 
re - establishes its identity when it demonstrates that the exterior world is something 
apart.     In  its  desire,  the  exterior  world  consists  of  what  it  does  not  possess,  but 
  98  

which  nevertheless  exists,  and  of  what  it  would  like  to  exist  but  which  no  longer 
does.    Consciousness of self is therefore, of necessity, desire.    But in order to exist 
it  must be satisfied, and it can only be satisfied by the gratification of its desire.    It 
therefore acts in order to gratify itself and, in so doing, it denies and suppresses its 
means of gratification.    It is the epitome of negation.    To act is to destroy  in order 
to  give  birth  to  the  spiritual  reality  of  consciousness.     But  to  destroy  an  object 
unconsciously,  as  meat  is  destroyed,  for  example,  in  the  act  of  eating,  is  a  purely 
animal activity.    To consume is not yet to be conscious.    Desire for consciousne ss 
must be directed toward something other than unconscious nature.    The only thing 
in the world that is distinct from nature is, precisely, self - consciousness.    Therefore 
desire  must  be  centred  upon  another  form  of  desire;  self - consciousness  must  be 
grati fied  by  another  form  of  self - consciousness.     In  simple  words,  man  is  not 
recognized  –   and  does  not  recognize  himself  –   as  a  man  as  long  as  he  limits 
himself to subsisting like an animal.    He must be acknowledged by other men.    All 
consciousness is, basical ly, the desire to be recognized and proclaimed as such by 
other  consciousnesses.     It  is  others  who  beget  us.     Only  in  association  do  we 
receive a human value, as distinct from an animal value.  
         In   that   the   supreme   value   for   the   animal   is   the   preserva tion   of   life, 
consciousness should raise itself above the level of that instinct in order to achieve 
human value.    It should be capable of risking its life.    To be recognized by another 
consciousness,  man  should  be  ready  to  risk  his  life  and  to  accept  the  chance  of 
death.    Fundamental human relations are thus relations of pure prestige, a perpetual 
struggle, to the death, for recognition of one human being by another.  
         At  the  first  stage  of  his  dialectic,  Hegel  affirms  that  insofar  as  death  is  the 
com mon ground of man and animal, it is by accepting death and even by inviting it 
that the former differentiates himself from the latter.    At the heart of this primordial 
struggle  for  recognition,  man  is  thus  identified  with  violent  death.  The  mystic 
slogan  “ Die  and  become  what  you  are”  is  taken  up  once  more  by  Hegel.     But 
“become  what  you  are”  gives  place  to  “Become  what  you  so  far  are  not.”     This 
primitive and passionate desire for recognition, which is confused with the will to 
exist,  can  be  satisfied  only  by  a  recognition  gradually  extended  until  it  embraces 
everyone.    In that everyone wants equally much to be recognized by everyone, the 
fight for life will cease only with the recognition of all by all, which will mark the 
termination of history.    The exist ence that Hegelian consciousness seeks to obtain 
is  born  in  the  hard - won  glory  of  collective  approval.     It  is  not  beside  the  point  to 
note that, in the thought which will inspire our revolutions, the supreme good does 
not,  in  reality,  coincide  with  existen ce,  but  with  an  arbitrary  facsimile.  The  entire 
history  of  mankind  is,  in  any  case,  nothing  but  a  prolonged  fight  to  the  death  for 
the  conquest  of  universal  prestige  and  absolute  power.     It  is,  in  its  essence, 
imperialist.    We are far from the gentle savag e of the eighteenth century and from 
  99  

the  Social Contract .    In the sound and fury of the passing centuries, each separate 
consciousness,  to  ensure  its  own  existence,  must  henceforth  desire  the  death  of 
others.     Moreover,  this  relentless  tragedy  is  absurd,  s ince,  in  the  event  of  one 
consciousness  being  destroyed,  the  victorious  consciousness  is  not  recognized  as 
such, in that it cannot be victorious in the eyes of something that no longer exists.    
In fact, it is here the philosophy of appearances reaches its  limits.  
         No  human  reality  would  therefore  have  been  engendered  if,  thanks  to  a 
propensity  that  can  be  considered  fortunate  for  Hegel’s  system,  there  had  not 
existed, from the beginning of time, two kinds of consciousness, one of which has 
not the cou rage to renounce life and is therefore willing to recognize the other kind 
of consciousness without being recognized itself in return.    Its consents, in short, to 
being  considered  as  an  object.     This  type  of  consciousness,  which,  to  preserve  its 
animal exi stence, renounces independent life, is the consciousness of a slave.    The 
type of consciousness which by being recognized achieves independence is that of 
the  master.     They  are  distinguished  one  from  the  other  at  the  moment  when  they 
clash  and  when  one  sub mits  to  the  other.     The  dilemma  at  this  stage  is  not  to  be 
free or to die, but to kill or to enslave.    This dilemma will resound throughout the 
course of history, though at this moment its absurdity has not yet been resolved.  
         Undoubtedly  the  master  enjoys  total  freedom  first  as  regards  the  slave,  since 
the latter recognizes him totally, and then as regards the natural world, since by his 
work the slave transforms it into objects of enjoyment which the master consumes 
in  a  perpetual  affirmation  of  his   own  identity.     However,  this  autonomy  is  not 
absolute.     The  master,  to  his  misfortune,  is  recognized  in  his  autonomy  by  a 
consciousness  that  he  himself  does  not  recognize  as  autonomous.     Therefore  he 
cannot  be  satisfied  and  his  autonomy  is  only  negative.     Mastery  is  a  blind  alley.    
Since, moreover, he cannot renounce mastery and become a slave again, the eternal 
destiny of masters is to live unsatisfied or to be killed.    The master serves no other 
purpose   in   history   than   to   arouse   servile   consciousness,   th e   only   form   of 
consciousness  that  really  creates  history.     The  slave,  in  fact,  is  not  bound  to  his 
condition, but wants to change it.    Thus, unlike his master, he can improve himself, 
and what is called history is nothing but the effects of his long effort s to obtain real 
freedom.     Already,  by  work,  by  his  transformation  of  the  natural  world  into  a 
technical world, he manages to escape from the nature which was the basis of his 
slavery in that he did not know how to raise himself above it by accepting death .    
[Actually,  the  ambiguity  is  profound,  for  the  nature  in  question  is  not  the  same.    
Does  the  advent  of  the  technical  world  suppress  death  or  the  fear  of  death  in  the 
natural  world?     That  is  the  real  question,  which  Hegel  leaves  in  suspense.]     The 
very  ag ony  of  death  experienced  in  the  humiliation  of  the  entire  being  lifts  the 
slave to the level of human totality.    He knows, henceforth, that his totality exists; 
now it only remains for him to conquer it through a long series of struggles against 
  100  

nature and  against the masters.    History identifies itself, therefore, with the history 
of  endeavour  and  rebellion.     It  is  hardly  astonishing  that  Marxism - Leninism 
derived from this dialectic the contemporary ideal of the soldier worker.  
         We  shall  leave  aside  the  description  of  the  various  attitudes  of  the  servile 
consciousness  (stoicism,  scepticism,  guilty  conscience)  which  then  follows  in  the 
Phenomenology .     But,  thanks  to  its  consequences,  another  aspect  of  this  dialectic 
cannot  be  neglected:  namely,  the  ass imilation  of  the  master - slave  relationship  to 
the  relationship  between  man  and  God.     One  of  Hegel’s  commentators  [Jean 
Hyppolite]  remarks  that  if  the  master  really  existed,  he  would  be  God.     Hegel 
himself calls the master of the Master of the world the rea l God.    In his description 
of guilty conscience he shows how the Christian slave, wishing to deny everything 
that oppresses him, takes refuge in the world beyond and by doing so gives himself 
a new master in the person of God.    Elsewhere Hegel identifies t he supreme master 
with absolute death.    And so the struggle begins again, on a higher level, between 
man  in  chains  and  the  cruel  God  of  Abraham.     The  solution  to  this  new  conflict 
between the universal God and the human entity will be furnished by Christ,  who 
reconciles  in  Himself  the  universal  and  the  unique.     But,  in  one  sense,  Christ  is  a 
part of the palpable world.    He is visible, He lived and died.    He is therefore only a 
stage  on  the  road  to  the  universal;  He  too  must  be  denied  dialectically.     It  is  o nly 
necessary to recognize Him as the man - God to obtain a higher synthesis.    Skipping 
the intermediary stages, it suffices to say that this synthesis, after being incarnated 
in  the  Church  and  in  Reason,  culminates  in  the  absolute  State,  founded  by  the 
sold ier workers, where the spirit of the world will be finally reflected in the mutual 
recognition of each by all and in the universal reconciliation of everything that has 
ever existed under the sun.    At this moment, “when the eyes of the spirit coincide 
with   the  eyes  of  the  body,”  each  individual  consciousness  will  be  nothing  more 
than  a  mirror  reflecting  another  mirror,  itself  reflected  to  infinity  in  infinitely 
recurring  images.     The  City  of  God   will  coincide  with  the  city  of  humanit y;  and 
universal history, sitting in judgement on the world, will pass its sentence by which 
good  and  evil  will  be  justified.     The  State  will  play  the  part  of  Destiny  and  will 
proclaim its approval of every aspect of reality on “the sacred day of the Prese nce.”  
   
         This  sums  up  the  essential  ideas  which  in  spite,  or  because,  of  the  extreme 
ambiguity  of  their  interpretation,  have  literally  driven  the  revolutionary  mind  in 
apparently contradictory directions and which we are now learning to rediscover in  
the  ideology  of  our  times.     Amorality,  scientific  materialism,  and  atheism  have 
definitely  replaced  the  anti - theism  of  the  rebels  of  former  times  and  have  made 
common   cause,   under   Hegel’s   paradoxical   influence,   with   a   revolutionary 
movement  which,  until  h is  time,  was  never  really  separated  from  its  moral, 
evangelical,  and  idealistic  origins.     These  tendencies,  if  they  are  sometimes  very 
  101  

far  from  really  originating  with  Hegel,  found  their  source  in  the  ambiguity  of  his 
thought and in his critique of transce ndence.    Hegel’s undeniable originality lies in 
his   definitive   destruction   of   all   vertical   transcendence  –    particularly   the 
transcendence  of  principles.     There  is  no  doubt  that  he  restores  the  immanence  of 
the  spirit  to  the  evolution  of  the  world.     But  thi s  immanence  is  not  precisely 
defined and has nothing in common with the pantheism of the ancients.    The spirit 
is and is not part of the world; it creates itself and will finally prevail.    Values are 
thus only to be found at the end of history.    Until then  there is no suitable criterion 
on  which  to  base  a  judgement  of  value.     One  must  act  and  live  in  terms  of  the 
future.    All morality becomes provisional.    The nineteenth and twentieth centuries, 
in their most profound manifestations, are centuries that have  tried to live without 
transcendence.  
         One of Hegel’s commentators, Alexandre Kojève, of left - wing tendencies it is 
true, but orthodox in his opinion on this particular point, notes Hegel’s hostility to 
the  moralists  and  remarks  that  his  only  axiom  i s  to  live  according  to  the  manners 
and  customs  of  one’s  nation.     A  maxim  of  social  conformity  of  which  Hegel,  in 
fact,  gave  the  most  cynical  proofs.     Kojève  adds,  however,  that  this  conformity  is 
legitimate only to the extent that the customs of the nation  correspond to the spirit 
of the times  –  in other words, to the extent that they are solidly established and can 
resist  revolutionary  criticism  and  attacks.     But  who  will  determine  their  solidity 
and who will judge their validity?    For a hundred years the  capitalist regimes of the 
West  have  withstood  violent  assaults.     Should  they  for  that  reason  be  considered 
legitimate?     Inversely,  should  those  who  were  faithful  to  the  Weimar   Republic  
have  abandoned  it  and  p ledged  themselves  to  Hitler  in  1933  because  the  former 
collapsed  when  attacked  by  the  latter?     Should  the  Spanish   Republic   have  been 
betrayed at the exact moment when General Franco’s forces triumphed?    These  are 
conclusions that traditional reactionary thought would have justified within its own 
perspectives.    The novelty, of which the consequences are incalculable, lies in the 
fact  that  revolutionary  thought  has  assimilated  them.    The  suppression  of  every 
mo ral value and of all principles and their replacement by fact, as provisional but 
actual king, could only lead, as we have plainly seen, to political cynicism, whether 
it be fact as envisioned by the individual or, more serious still, as envisioned by the 
State.     The  political  movements,  or  ideologies,  inspired  by  Hegel  are  all  united  in 
the ostensibly abandonment of virtue.  
         Hegel  could  not,  in  fact,  prevent  those  who  had  read  him,  with  feelings  of 
anguish which were far from methodical in a Europe t hat was already torn asunder 
by  injustice,  from  finding  themselves  precipitated  into  a  world  without  innocence 
and without principles  –  into the very world of which Hegel says that it is in itself a 
sin, since it is separated from the spirit.    Hegel, of co urse, permits the forgiveness 
of sins at the end of history.    Until then, however, every human activity is sinful.    
  102  

“Therefore only the absence of activity is innocent, the existence of a stone and not 
even  the  existence  of  a  child.”    Thus  even  the  innocen ce  of  stones  is  unknown  to 
us.     Without  innocence  there  are  no  human  relations  and  no  reason.     Without 
reason,  there  is  nothing  but  naked  force,  the  master  and  slave  waiting  for  reason 
one  day  to  prevail.     Between  master  and  slave,  even  suffering  is  solita ry,  joy  is 
without foundation, and both are underserved.    Then how can one live, how endure 
life  when  friendship  is  reserved  for  the  end  of  time?     The  only  escape  is  to  create 
order  with  the  use  of  weapons.     “Kill  or  enslave!”  –   those  who  have  read  Hegel 
w ith this single and terrible purpose have really considered only the first part of the 
dilemma.     From  it  they  have  derived  a  philosophy  of  scorn  and  despair  and  have 
deemed  themselves  slaves  and  nothing  but  slaves,  bound  by  death  to  the  absolute 
Master  and   by  the  whip  to  their  terrestrial  masters.     This  philosophy  of  the  guilty 
conscience  has  merely  taught  them  that  every  slave  is  enslaved  only  by  his  own 
consent, and can be liberated only by an act of protest which coincides with death.    
Answering  the  chal lenge,  the  most  courageous  among  them  have  completely 
identified  themselves  with  this  act  of  protest  and  have  dedicated  themselves  to 
death.    After all, to say that negation is in itself a positive act justified in advance 
every  kind  of  negation  and  predic ted  the  cry  of  Bakunin  and  Nechaiev:  “Our 
mission  is  to  destroy,  not  to  construct.”     A  nihilist  for  Hegel  was  only  a  sceptic 
who had no other escape but contradiction or philosophic suicide.    But he himself 
gave  birth  to  another  type  of  nihilist,  who,  maki ng  boredom  into  a  principle  of 
action, identified suicide with philosophic murder.    [This form of nihilism, despite 
appearances,  is  still  nihilism  in  the  Nietzschean  sense,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  a 
calumny of the present life to the advantage of a histor ical future in which one tries 
to believe.]    It was at this point that the terrorists were born who decided that it was 
necessary  to  kill  and  die  in  order  to  exist,  because  mankind  and  history  could 
achieve their creation only by sacrifice and murder.    The  magnificent idea that all 
idealism is chimerical if it is not paid for by risking one’s life was to be developed 
to  the  fullest  possible  extent  by  young  men  who  were  not  engaged  in  expounding 
the concept from the safe distance of a university chair before  dying in their beds, 
but among the tumult of falling bombs and even on the gallows.    By doing this and 
even  by  their  errors  they  corrected  their  master  and  demonstrated,  contrary  to  his 
teaching, that one kind of aristocracy, at least, is superior to the  hideous aristocracy 
of success exalted by Hegel: the aristocracy of sacrifice.  
         Another  sort  of  follower,  who  read  Hegel  more  seriously,  chose  the  second 
term  of  the  dilemma  and  made  the  pronouncement  that  the  slave  could  only  free 
himself by enslavi ng in his turn.    Post - Hegelian doctrines, unmindful of the mystic 
aspect  of  certain  of  the  master’s  tendencies,  have  led  his  followers  to  absolute 
atheism  and  to  scientific  materialism.     But  this  evolution  is  inconceivable  without 
the  absolute  disappearanc e  of  every  principle  of  transcendent  explanation,  and 
  103  

without  the  complete  destruction  of  the  Jacobin  ideal.     Immanence,  of  course,  is 
not  atheism.     But  immanence  in  the  process  of  development  is,  if  one  can  say  so, 
provisional atheism.    [In any event, the  criticism of Kierkegaard is valid.    To base 
divinity  on  history  is,  paradoxically,  to  base  an  absolute  value  on  approximate 
knowledge.     Something  “eternally  historic”  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.]     The 
indefinite face of God which, with Hegel, is still re flected in the spirit of the world 
will  not  be  difficult  to  efface.     Hegel’s  successors  will  draw  decisive  conclusions 
from  his  ambiguous  formula:  “God  without  man  is  no  more  than  man  without 
God.”    David Strauss in his  Life of Jesus  isolates the theory of  Christ considered as 
the  God - man.     Bruno  Bauer  ( The  Critique  of  Evangelist  History )  institutes  a  kind 
of  materialist  Christianity  by  insisting  on  the  humanity  of  Jesus.     Finally,  Ludwig 
Feuerbach (whom Marx considered as a great mind and of whom he acknow ledges 
himself  the  critical  disciple),  in  his  Essence  of  Christianity ,  replaces  all  theology 
by  a  religion  of  man  and  the  species,  which  has  converted  a  large  part  of 
contemporary  thought.     His  task  is  to  demonstrate  that  the  distinction  between 
human  and  divine  is  illusory,  that  it  is  nothing  but  the  distinction  between  the 
essence  of  humanity  –   in  other  words,  human  nature  –   and  the  individual.     “The 
mystery of God is only the mystery of the love of man for himself.”    The accents 
of  a  strange  new  prophecy   ring  out:  “Individuality  has  replaced  faith,  reason  the 
Bible, politics religion and the Church, the earth heaven, work prayer, poverty hell, 
and man Christ.”    Thus there is only one hell and it is on this earth: and it is against 
this  that  the  struggle  m ust  be  waged.     Politics  is  religion,  and  transcendent 
Christianity  –  that of the hereafter  –  establishes the masters of the earth by means 
of the slave’s renunciation and creates one master more beneath the heavens.    That 
is  why  atheism  and  the  revolutiona ry  spirit  are  only  two  aspects  of  the  same 
movement of liberation.    That is the answer to the question which is always being 
asked:  why  has  the  revolutionary  movement  identified  itself  with  materialism 
rather than with idealism?    Because to conquer God, to  make Him a slave, amounts 
to  abolishing  the  transcendence  that  kept  the  former  masters  in  power  and  to 
preparing,  with  the  ascendancy  of  the  new  tyrants,  the  advent  of  the  man - king.    
When  poverty  is  abolished,  when  the  contradictions  of  history  are  resolv ed,  “the 
real  god,  the  human  god,  will  be  the  State.”     Then  homo  homini  lupus   becomes 
homo  homini  deus .     This  concept  is  at  the  root  of  the  contemporary  world.     With 
Feuerbach, we assist at the birth of a terrible form of optimism which we can still 
observ e  at  work  today  and  which  seems  to  be  the  very  antithesis  of  nihilist 
despair.     But  that  is  only  in  appearance.     We  must  know  Feuerbach’s  final 
conclusion  in  this  Theogony   to  perceive  the  profoundly  nihilist  derivation  of  his 
inflamed imagination.    In effe ct, Feuerbach affirms, in the face of Hegel, that man 
is only what he eats, and thus recapitulates his ideas and predicts the future in the 
following phrase: “The true philosophy is the negation of philosophy.    No religion 
  104  

is my religion.    No philosophy is  my philosophy.”  
         Cynicism,  the  deification  of  history  and  of  matter,  individual  terror  and  State 
crime,  these  are  the  inordinate  consequences  that  will  now  spring,  armed  to  the 
teeth,  from  the  equivocal  conception  of  a  world  that  entrusts  to  history   alone  the 
task  of  producing  both  values  and  truth.     If  nothing  can  be  clearly  understood 
before  truth  has  been  brought  to  light,  at  the  end  of  time,  then  every  action  is 
arbitrary,  and  force  will  finally  rule  supreme.     “If  reality  is  inconceivable,”  Hegel  
exclaims, “then we must contrive inconceivable concepts.”    A concept that cannot 
be conceived must, perforce, like error, be contrived.    But to be accepted it cannot 
rely  on  the  persuasion  innate  in  order  and  truth,  but  must  finally  be  imposed. 
  Hegel’s a ttitude consists of saying: “This is truth, which appears to us, however, to 
be error, but which is true precisely because it happens to be error.    As for proof, it 
is  not  I,  but  history,  at  its  conclusion,  that  will  furnish  it.”     Such  pretensions  can 
only    entail   two   attitudes:   either   the   suspension   of   all   affirmation   until   the 
production  of  proof,  or  the  affirmation  of  everything,  in  history,  which  seems 
dedicated  to  success  –   force  in  particular.     And  both  attitudes  imply  nihilism.    
Moreover, it is imposs ible to understand twentieth - century revolutionary thought if 
we overlook the fact that unfortunately it derived a large part of its inspiration from 
a philosophy of conformity and opportunism.    True rebellion is not jeopardized on 
account of the distortio n of these particular ideas.  
         Nevertheless,  the  basis  of  Hegel’s  claims  is  what  renders  them  intellectually 
and forever suspect.    He believed that history in 1807, with the advent of Napoleon 
and of himself, had come to an end, and that affirmation w as possible and nihilism 
conquered.     The  Phenomenology ,  the  Bible  that  was  to  have  prophesied  only  the 
past,  put  a  limit  on  time.     In  1807  all  sins  were  forgiven,  and  time  had  stopped.    
But history has continued.    Other sins, since then, have been hurled i n the face of 
the  world  and  have  revived  the  scandal  of  the  former  crimes,  which  the  German 
philosopher  had  already  forgiven  forever.     The  deification  of  Hegel  by  himself, 
after the deification of Napoleon, who would henceforth be innocent since he had 
suc ceeded   in   stabilizing   history,   lasted   only   seven   years.      Instead   of   total 
affirmation,  nihilism  once  more  covered  the  face  of  the  earth.     Philosophy,  even 
servile philosophy, has its Waterloos.  
         But nothing can discourage the appetite for divinity in  the heart of man.    Others 
have come and are still to come who, forgetting  Waterloo, still claim to terminate 
history.    The divinity of man is still on the march, and will be worthy of adoration 
only  at  the  end  of  time.     This  apocal ypse  must  be  promoted  and,  despite  the  fact 
that there is no God, at least a Church must be built.    After all, history, which has 
not  yet  come  to  an  end,  allows  us  a  glimpse  of  a  perspective  that  might  even  be 
that  of  the  Hegelian  system  but  for  the  simple   reason  that  it  is  provisionally 
dragged along, if not led, by the spiritual heirs of Hegel.    When cholera carries off 
  105  

the  philosopher  of  the  Battle  of  Jena  at  the  height  of  his  glory,  everything  is,  in 
fact, in order for what is to follow.    The sky is emp ty, the earth delivered into the 
hands of power without principles.    Those who have chosen to kill and those who 
have chosen to enslave will successively occupy the front of the stage, in the name 
of a form of rebellion which has been diverted from the pat h of truth.  
   
   
   
Individual Terrorism  
   
*  
   
         Pisarev,  the  theoretician  of  Russian  nihilism,  declares  that  the  greatest 
fanatics  are  children  and  adolescents.  That  is  also  true  of  nations.     Russia,  at 
this  period,  is  an  adoles cent  nation,  delivered  with  forceps,  barely  a  century 
ago, by a Czar who was still ingenuous enough to cut off the heads of rebels 
himself.    It is not astounding that she should have pushed Germanic ideology 
to  extremes  of  sacrifice  and  destruction  which  G erman  professors  had  only 
been  capable  of  theorizing  about.     Stendhal  noticed  an  essential  difference 
between  Germans  and  other  people  in  the  fact  that  they  are  excited  by 
meditation  rather  than  soothed.     That  is  true,  but  it  is  even  more  true  of 
Russia.     In  that  immature  country,  completely  without  philosophic  tradition, 
[Pisarev  remarks  that  civilization,  in  its  ideological  aspects,  has  always  been 
imported into Russia.] some very young people, akin to Lautréamont’s tragic 
fellow  s tudents,  enthusiastically  embraced  the  concepts  of  German  thought 
and  incarnated  the  consequences  in  blood.     A  “proletariat  of  undergraduates” 
[Dostoievsky]   then   took   the   lead   in   the   great   movement   of   human 
emancipation  and  gave  it  its  most  violent  aspect.     Until  the  end  of  the 
nineteenth  century  these  undergraduates  never  numbered  more  than  a  few 
thousand.     Entirely  on  their  own,  however,  and  in  defiance  of  the  most 
integrated  absolutism  of  the  time,  they  aspired  to  liberate  and  provisionally 
did  contribut e  to  the  liberation  of  forty  million  muzhiks.     Almost  all  of  them 
paid  for  this  liberation  by  suicide,  execution,  prison,  or  madness.     The  entire 
history of Russian terrorism can be summed up in the struggle of a handful of 
intellectuals  to  abolish  tyranny ,  against  a  background  of  a  silent  populace.    
Their debilitated victory was finally betrayed.    But by their sacrifice and even 
by  their  most  extreme  negations  they  gave  substance  to  a  new  standard  of 
values, a new virtue, which even today has not ceased to  oppose tyranny and 
to give aid to the cause of true liberation.  
  106  

         The   Germanization   of   nineteenth - century  Russia   is   not   an   isolated 
phenomenon.       The    influence    of    German    ideology    at    that    moment    was 
preponderant,  and  we  are  well   aware,  for  example,  that  the  nineteenth  century  in 
France,  with  Michelet  and  Quinet,  is  the  century  of  Germanic  thought.     But  in 
Russia   this  ideology  did  not  encounter  an  already  established  system,  while  in  
France   it  had  to  contend  and  compromise  with  libertarian  socialism.     In  Russia   it 
was  on  conquered  territory.     The  first  Russian  university,  the  University   of 
Moscow,  founded  in  1750,  is  German.     The  slow  colonization  of  Russia   by 
German  teachers,  bureaucrats,  and  soldiers,  which  began  under  Peter  the  Great, 
was transformed at the instance of Nicholas I into systematic Germanization.    The  
intelligentsia  developed  a  passion  for  Schelling  (simultaneously  with  the  passion 
for French writers) in the 1830’s, for Hegel in the 1840’s, and in the second half of 
the century for German socialism derived from Hegel.    [ Das Kapital  was translated 
in  18 72.]     Russian  youth  then  proceeded  to  pour  into  these  abstract  thoughts  the 
inordinate  violence  of  its  passions  and  authentically  experienced  these  already 
moribund  ideas.     The  religion  of  man  already  formulated  by  its  German  pastors 
was still missing its  apostles and martyrs.    Russian Christians, led astray from their 
original vocation, played this role.    For this reason they had to accept life without 
transcendence and without virtue.  
   
   
         The Renunciation of Virtue  
   
         In  the  1820’s  among  the  first  Russian  revolutionaries,  the  Decembrists,  virtue 
still  existed.     Jacobin  idealism  had  not  yet  been  uprooted  from  the  hearts  of  these 
gentlemen.    They even practised conscious virtue: “Our fathers were sybarites, we 
are Catos,” said one of them, Peter  Viazemsky.    To this is only added the opinion, 
which will still be found in Bakunin and the revolutionary socialists of 1905, that 
suffering regenerates.    The Decembrists remind us of the French nobles who allied 
themselves with the third estate and renou nced their privileges.    Patrician idealists, 
they  deliberately  chose  to  sacrifice  themselves  for  the  liberation  of  the  people.    
Despite  the  fact  that  their  leader,  Pestel,  was  a  political  and  social  theorist,  their 
abortive conspiracy had no fixed programm e; it is not even sure that they believed 
in  the  possibility  of  success.     “Yes,  we  shall  die,”  one  of  them  said  on  the  eve  of 
the  insurrection,  “but  it  will  be  a  fine  death.”     It  was,  in  fact,  a  fine  death.     In 
December 1825 the rebels, arranged in formati on, were mown down by cannon fire 
in the square in front of the Senate at  St. Petersburg.    The survivors were deported, 
but not before five had been hanged, and so clumsily that it had to be done twice.    
It  is  easy  to  understand  why   these  ostensibly  inefficacious  victims  have  been 
venerated,  with  feelings  of  exaltation  and  horror,  by  all  of  revolutionary  Russia.    
  107  

They  were  exemplary,  if  not  efficacious.     They  indicated,  at  the  beginning  of  this 
chapter  of  revo lutionary  history,  the  ambitions  and  the  greatness  of  what  Hegel 
ironically called the beautiful soul in relation to which Russian revolutionary ideas 
were, nevertheless, to be defined.  
         In  this  atmosphere  of  exaltation,  German  thought  came  to  combat   French 
influence and impose its prestige on minds torn between their desire for vengeance 
and  justice  and  the  realization  of  their  own  impotent  isolation.     It  was  first 
received,  extolled,  and  commented  upon  as  though  it  were  revelation  itself.     The 
best  minds were inflamed with a passion for philosophy.    They even went so far as 
to  put  Hegel’s  Logic   into  verse.     For  the  most  part,  Russian  intellectuals  at  first 
inferred,  from  the  Hegelian  system,  the  justification  of  a  form  of  social  quietism.    
To be awar e of the rationality of the world sufficed; the Spirit would realize itself, 
in  any  case,  at  the  end  of  time.     That  is  the  first  reaction  of  Stankevich,  [“The 
world is ordered by the spirit of reason, this reassures me about everything else.”] 
Bakunin,  and   Bielinsky,  for  example.  Then  the  Russian  mind  recoiled  at  this 
factual, if not intentional, complicity with absolutism and, immediately, jumped to 
the opposite extreme.  
         Nothing is more revealing, in this respect, than the evolution of Bielinsky, on e 
of  the  most  remarkable  and  influential  minds  of  the  1830’s  and  40’s.     Beginning 
with   a   background   of   rather   vague   libertarian   idealism,   Bielinsky   suddenly 
discovers Hegel.    In his room, at  midnight, under the shock of revelation,  he bursts 
into  tears  like  Pascal  and  suddenly  becomes  a  new  man.     “Neither  chance  nor  the 
absolute exists, I have made my adieux to the French.”    At the same time he is still 
a conservative and a partisan of social quietism.    He writes to that effect witho ut a 
single  hesitation  and  defends  his  position,  as  he  perceives  it,  courageously.     But 
this  essentially  kind - hearted  man  then  sees  himself  allied  with  what  is  most 
detestable  in  this  world:  injustice.     If  everything  is  logical,  then  everything  is 
justifie d.     One  must  consent  to  the  whip,  to  serfdom,  to  Siberia.     To  accept  the 
world  and  its  sufferings  seemed  to  him,  at  one  moment,  the  noble  thing  to  do 
because  he  imagined  that  he  would  only  have  to  bear  his  own  sufferings  and  his 
own   contradictions.     But  if  it  also  implied  consent  to  the  sufferings  of  others,  he 
suddenly discovered that he had not the heart to continue.    He set out again in the 
opposite direction.    If one cannot accept the suffering of others, then something in 
the wo rld cannot be justified, and history, at one point at least, no longer coincides 
with  reason.     But  history  must  be  completely  reasonable  or  it  is  not  reasonable  at 
all.     This  man’s  solitary  protest,  quieted  for  a  moment  by  the  idea  that  everything 
can  be  j ustified,  bursts  forth  again  in  vehement  terms.     Bielinsky  addresses  Hegel 
himself: “With all the esteem due to your philistine philosophy, I have the honour 
to inform you that even if I had the opportunity of climbing to the very top of the 
ladder of evol ution, I should still ask you to account for all the victims of life and 
  108  

history.     I  do  not  want  happiness,  even  gratuitous  happiness,  if  my  mind  is  not  at 
rest concerning all my blood brothers.”  
         Bielinsky  understood  that  what  he  wanted  was  not  the  absolute  of  reason  but 
the  fullness  of  life.     He  refuses  to  identify  them.     He  wants  the  immortality  of  the 
entire  man,  clothed  in  his  living  body,  not  the  abstract  immortality  of  the  species 
become  Spirit.     He  argues  with  equal  passion  against  new  adversa ries,  and  draws, 
from  this  fierce  interior  debate,  conclusions  that  he  owes  to  Hegel,  but  which  he 
turns against him.  
         These  are  the  conclusions  of  individualism  in  revolt.     The  individual  cannot 
accept history as it is.    He must destroy reality, not  collaborate with it, in order to 
affirm  his  own  existence.     “Negation  is  my  god,  as  reality  formerly  was.     My 
heroes  are  the  destroyers  of  the  past:  Luther,  Voltaire,  the  Encyclopedists,  the 
Terrorists,  Byron  in  Cain .”     Thus  we  rediscover  here,  simultaneo usly,  all  the 
themes of metaphysical rebellion.    Certainly, the French tradition of individualistic 
socialism  always  remained  alive  in  Russia.     Saint - Simon  and  Fourier,  who  were 
read  in  the  1830’s,  and  Proudhon,  who  was  imported  in  the  forties,  inspired  the 
great  concepts  of  Herzen,  and,  very  much  later,  those  of  Pierre  Lavrov.     But  this 
system,    which    remained    attached    to    ethical    values,    finally    succumbed, 
provisionally at any rate, during its great debate with cynical thought.    On t he other 
hand,  Bielinsky  rediscovers  both  with  and  against  Hegel  the  same  tendencies  to 
social   individualism,   but   under   the   aspect   of   negation,   in   the   rejection   of 
transcendental  values.     When  he  dies,  in  1848,  his  thought  will  moreover  be  very 
close to th at of Herzen.    But when he confronts Hegel, he defines, with precision, 
an attitude that will be adopted by the nihilists, and at least in part by the terrorists.    
Thus  he  furnishes  a  type  of  transition  between  the  idealist  aristocrats  of  1825  and 
the “not hingist” students of 1860.  
   
   
         Three of the Possessed  
   
         When  Herzen,  in  making  his  apology  for  the  nihilist  movement  –   only  to  the 
extent,  it  is  true,  that  he  sees  in  it  a  still  greater  emancipation  from  ready - made 
ideas  –  writes: “The annihi lation of the past is the procreation of the future,” he is 
using  the  language  of  Bielinsky.     Koteiarevsky,  speaking  of  the  so - called  radicals 
of  the  period,  defends  them  as  apostles  “who  thought  that  the  past  must  be 
completely  renounced  and  the  human  per sonality  must  be  constructed  to  quite 
another plan.”    Stirner’s claim reappears with the total rejection of history and the 
determination to construct the future, no longer with regard to the historical spirit, 
but so as to coincide with the man - king.    But  the man - king cannot raise himself to 
power  unaided.     He  has  need  of  others  and  therefore  enters  into  a  nihilist 
  109  

contradiction which Pisarev, Bakunin, and Nechaiev will try to resolve by slightly 
extending the area of destruction and negation, to the point  where terrorism finally 
kills the contradiction itself, in a simultaneous act of sacrifice and murder.  
         The  nihilism  of  the  1860’s  began,  apparently,  with  the  most  radical  negation 
imaginable: the rejection of any action that was not purely egoistic .    We know that 
the  very  term  nihilism   was  invented  by  Turgeniev  in  his  novel  Fathers  and  Sons , 
whose hero, Bazarov, was an exact portrayal of this type of man.    Pisarev, when he 
wrote a criticism of this book, proclaimed that the nihilists recognized Baza rov as 
their  model.     “We  have  nothing,”  said  Bazarov,  “to  boast  about  but  the  sterile 
knowledge of understanding, up to a certain point, the sterility of what exists.”    “Is 
that,”  he  was  asked,  “what  is  called  nihilism?”     “Yes,  that  is  what  is  called 
nihil ism.”     Pisarev  praises  Bazarov’s  attitude,  which  for  the  sake  of  clarity  he 
defines thus: “I am a stranger to the order of existing things, I have nothing to do 
with it.”    Thus the only value resides in rational egoism.  
         In  denying  everything  that  is   not  satisfaction  of  the  self,  Pisarev  declares  war 
on philosophy, on art, which he considers absurd, on erroneous ethics, on religion, 
and even on customs and on good manners.    He constructs a theory of intellectual 
terrorism  which  makes  one  think  of  the  present - day  surrealists.     Provocation  is 
made  into  a  doctrine,  but  on  a  level  of  which  Raskolnikov  provides  the  perfect 
example.     At  the  height  of  this  fine  transport,  Pisarev  asks  himself,  without  even 
laughing, whether he is justified in killing his own  mother and answers: “And why 
not, if I want to do so, and if I find it useful?”  
         From that point on, it is surprising not to find the nihilists engaged in making a 
fortune  or  acquiring  a  title  or  in  cynically  taking  advantage  of  every  opportunity 
tha t  offers  itself.     It  is  true  that  there  were  nihilists  to  be  found  in  advantageous 
positions  on  all  levels  of  society.     But  they  did  not  construct  a  theory  from  their 
cynicism  and  preferred  on  all  occasions  to  pay  visible  and  quite  inconsequential 
homage t o virtue.    As for those we are discussing, they contradicted themselves by 
the defiance they hurled in the face of society, which in itself was the affirmation 
of a value.    They called themselves materialists; their bedside book was Buchner’s 
Force and Mat ter .    But one of them confessed: “Every one of us was ready to go to 
the scaffold and to give his head for Moleschott and Darwin,” thus putting doctrine 
well ahead of matter.    Doctrine, taken seriously in this degree, has an air of religion 
and  fanaticism.     For  Pisarev,  Lamarck  was  a  traitor  because  Darwin   was  right.    
Whoever in this intellectual sphere began talking about the immortality of the soul 
was  immediately  excommunicated.     Vladimir  Veidle  is  therefore  right  when  he 
defines  nihilism as rationalist obscurantism.    Reason among the nihilists, strangely 
enough,  annexed  the  prejudices  of  faith;  choosing  the  most  popularized  forms  of 
science - worship for their prototype of reason was not the least of the contradictions 
accepted by t hese individualists.    They denied everything but the most debatable of 
  110  

values, the values of Flaubert’s Monsieur Homais.  
         However, it was by choosing to make reason, in its most limited aspect, into an 
act of faith that the nihilists provided their s uccessors with a model.    They believed 
in  nothing  but  reason  and  self - interest.     But  instead  of  scepticism,  they  chose  to 
propagate a doctrine and became socialists.    Therein lies their basic contradiction.    
Like  all  adolescent  minds  they  simultaneously  ex perienced  doubt  and  the  need  to 
believe.     Their  personal  solution  consists  in  endowing  their  negation  with  the 
intransigence  and  passion  of  faith.     What,  after  all,  is  astonishing  about  that?    
Veidle quotes the scornful phrase used by Soloviev, the philoso pher, in denouncing 
this  contradiction:  “Man  is  descended  from  monkeys,  therefore  let  us  love  one 
another.”     Pisarev’s  truth,  however,  is  to  be  found  in  this  dilemma.     If  man  is  the 
image  of  God,  then  it  does  not  matter  that  he  is  deprived  of  human  love;  t he  day 
will come when he will be satiated with it.    But if he is a blind creature, wandering 
in  the  darkness  of  a  cruel  and  circumscribed  condition,  he  has  need  of  his  equals 
and of their ephemeral love.    Where can charity take refuge, after all, if not in  the 
world without God?    In the other, grace provides for all, even for the rich.    Those 
who deny everything at least understand that negation is a calamity.    They can then 
open their hearts to the misery of others and finally deny themselves.    Pisarev did  
not shrink from the idea of murdering his mother, and yet he managed to find the 
exact  words  to  describe  injustice.     He  wanted  to  enjoy  life  egotistically,  but  he 
suffered  imprisonment  and  finally  went  mad.     Such  an  ostentatious  display  of 
cynicism  finall y  led  him  to  an  understanding  of  love,  to  be  exiled  from  it  and  to 
suffer  from  it  to  the  point  of  suicide,  thus  revealing,  in  place  of  the  man - god  he 
wanted  to  create,  the  unhappy,  suffering  old  man  whose  greatness  illuminates  the 
pages of history.  
         Bakunin  embodies,  but  in  a  manner  spectacular  in  a  different  way,  the  very 
same contradictions.    He died on the eve of the terrorist epic, in 1876.    Moreover, 
he  rejected  in  advance  individual  outrages  and  denounced  “the  Brutuses  of  the 
period.”     He  had  a  certain  respect  for  them,  however,  since  he  reproached  Herzen 
for  having  openly  criticized  Karakosov  for  his  abortive  attempt  to  assassinate 
Alexander II in 1866.    This feeling of respect had its reasons.    Bakunin influenced 
the course of events in the sam e manner as Bielinsky and the nihilists and directed 
them  into  the  channel  of  individual  revolt.     But  he  contributed  something  more:  a 
germ of political cynicism, which will congeal, with Nechaiev, into a doctrine and 
will drive the revolutionary movement  to extremes.  
         Bakunin had hardly emerged from adolescence when he was overwhelmed and 
uprooted  by  Hegelian  philosophy,  as  if  by  a  gigantic  earthquake.     He  buries 
himself  in  it  day  and  night  “to  the  point  of  madness,”  he  says,  and  adds:  “I  saw 
absolut ely nothing but Hegel’s categories.”    When he emerges from this initiation, 
it is with the exaltation of a neophyte.    “My personal self is dead forever, my life is 
  111  

the  true  life.”     He  required  very  little  time  to  see  the  dangers  of  that  comfortable 
positio n.    He who has understood reality does not rebel against it, but rejoices in it; 
in   other   words,   he   becomes   a   conformist.      Nothing   in   Bakunin’s   character 
predestined him to that watchdog philosophy.    It is possible, also, that his travels in 
Germany,  and  the  unfortunate  opinion  he  formed  of  the  Germans,  may  have  ill -
prepared  him  to  agree  with  the  aged  Hegel  that  the  Prussian   State   was  the 
privileged  depository  of  the  final  fruits  of  the   mind.     More  Russian  than  the  Czar 
himself,  despite  his  dreams  of  universality,  he  could  in  no  event  subscribe  to  the 
apology  of  Prussia  when  it  was  founded  on  a  logic  brash  enough  to  assert:  “The 
will  of  other  peoples  has  no  rights,  for  it  is  the  people  w ho  represent  the  will  [of 
the Spirit] who dominate the world.”    In the 1840’s, moreover, Bakunin discovered 
French  socialism  and  anarchism,  from  which  he  appropriated  a  few  tendencies.    
Bakunin  rejects,  with  a  magnificent  gesture,  any  part  of  German  ideolo gy.     He 
approached  the  absolute  in  the  same  way  as  he  approached  total  destruction,  with 
the  same  passionate  emotion,  and  with  the  blind  enthusiasm  for  the  “All  or 
Nothing” which we again find in him in its purest form.  
         After  having  extolled  absolut e  Unity,  Bakunin  enthusiastically  embraces  the 
most elementary form of Manichæism.    What he wants, of course, is once and for 
all  “the  universal  and  authentically  democratic  Church   of  Freedom.”     That  is  his 
r eligion; he belongs to his times.    It is not sure, however, that his faith on this point 
has  been  perfect.     In  his  Confession   to  Czar  Nicholas  I,  he  seems  to  be  sincere 
when he says that he has never been able to believe in the final revolution “except 
wit h  a  supernatural  and  painful  effort  to  stifle  forcibly  the  interior  voice  which 
whispered  to  me  that  my  hopes  were  absurd.”     His  theory  of  immorality,  on  the 
other hand, is much more firmly based and he is often to be seen plunging about in 
it  with  the  eas e  and  pleasure  of  a  mettlesome  horse.     History  is  governed  by  only 
two  principles:  the  State  and  social  revolution,  revolution  and  counterrevolution, 
which  can  never  be  reconciled,  and  which  are  engaged  in  a  death  struggle.     The 
State is the incarnation of  crime.    “The smallest and most inoffensive State is still 
criminal  in  its  dreams.”     Therefore  revolution  is  the  incarnation  of  good.     This 
struggle,  which  surpasses  politics,  is  also  the  struggle  of  Luciferian  principles 
against the divine principles.    Ba kunin explicitly reintroduces into rebellious action 
one of the themes of romantic rebellion.    Proudhon had already decreed that God is 
Evil  and  exclaimed:  “Come,  Satan,  victim  of  the  calumnies  of  kings  and  of  the 
petty - minded!”     Bakunin  also  gives  a  glimp se  of  the  broader  implications  of  an 
apparently  political  rebellion:  “Evil  is  satanic  rebellion  against  divine  authority,  a 
rebellion  in  which  we  see,  nevertheless,  the  fruitful  seed  of  every  form  of  human 
emancipation.”     Like  the  Fraticelli  of  fourteenth - century  Bohemia,  revolutionary 
socialists today use this phrase as a password: “In the name of him to whom a great 
wrong has been done.”  
  112  

         The  struggle  against  creation  will  therefore  be  without  mercy  and  without 
ethics, and th e only salvation lies in extermination.    “The passion for destruction is 
a  creative  passion.”     Bakunin’s  burning  words  on  the  subject  of  the  revolution  of 
1848 in his  Confession  vehemently proclaim this pleasure in destruction.    “A feast 
without  beginning  and  without  end,”  he  says.     In  fact,  for  him  as  for  all  who  are 
oppressed, the revolution is a feast, in the religious sense of the word.    Here we are 
reminded  of  the  French  anarchist  Cœurderoy,  who,  in  his  book  Hurrah,  or  the 
Cossack  Revolution ,  summoned  the  hordes  of  the  north  to  lay  waste  to  the  whole 
world.     He  also  wanted  to  “apply  the  torch  to  my  father’s  house”  and  proclaimed 
that  the  only  hope  lay  in  the  human  deluge  and  in  chaos.     Rebellion  is  grasped, 
throughout  these  manifestations,  in  its  pure  s tate,  in  its  biological  truth.     That  is 
why  Bakunin  with  exceptional  perspicacity  was  the  only  one  of  his  period  to 
declare war on science, the idol of his contemporaries.    Against every abstract idea 
he   pleaded   the   cause   of   the   complete   man,   completely   id entified   with   his 
rebellion.     If  he  glorifies  the  brigand  leader  of  the  peasant  rising,  if  he  chooses  to 
model  himself  on  Stenka  Razin  and  Pugachev,  it  is  because  these  men  fought, 
without  either  doctrine  or  principle,  for  an  ideal  of  pure  freedom.     Bakuni n 
introduces  into  the  midst  of  revolution  the  naked  principle  of  rebellion.     “The 
tempest   and   life,   that   is   what   we   need.      A   new   world,   without   laws,   and 
consequently free.”  
         But is a world without laws a free world?    That is the question posed by ev ery 
rebellion.    If the question were to be asked of Bakunin, the answer would not be in 
doubt.     Despite  the  fact  that  he  was  opposed  in  all  circumstances,  and  with  the 
most  extreme  lucidity,  to  authoritarian  socialism,  yet  from  the  moment  when  he 
himself b egins to define the society of the future, he does so  –  without being at all 
concerned  with  the  contradiction  –   in  terms  of  a  dictatorship.     The  statutes  of  the 
International  Fraternity  (1864 - 7),  which  he  edited  himself,  already  establish  the 
absolute subo rdination of the individual to the central committee, during the period 
of action.    It is the same for the period that will follow the revolution.    He hopes to 
see  in  liberated  Russia  “ a  strong  dictatorial  power  ...  a  power  supported  by 
partisans,  enlightened  by  their  advice,  justified  by  their  free  collaboration,  but 
which would be limited to nothing and by no one.”    Bakunin contributed as much 
as  his  enemy  Marx  to  Leninist  doctrine.     The  dream  of  the  revolutionary  Slav 
empire, moreov er, as Bakunin conjures it up before the Czar, is exactly the same, 
down  to  the  last  detail  of  its  frontiers,  as  that  realized  by  Stalin.     Coming  from  a 
man who was wise enough to say that the essential driving - force of Czarist Russia 
was   fear   and   who   reje cted   the   Marxist   theory   of   party   dictatorship,   these 
conceptions may seem contradictory.    But this contradiction demonstrates that the 
origins of authoritarian doctrines are partially nihilistic.    Pisarev justifies Bakunin.    
Certainly,  the  latter  wanted  to tal  freedom;  but  he  hoped  to  realize  it  through  total 
  113  

destruction.     To  destroy  everything  is  to  pledge  oneself  to  building  without 
foundations, and then to holding up the walls with one’s hands.    He who rejects the 
entire past, without keeping any part of  it which could serve to breathe life into the 
revolution, condemns himself to finding justification only in the future and, in the 
meantime,  to  entrusting  the  police  with  the  task  of  justifying  the  provisional  state 
of  affairs.     Bakunin  proclaims  dictators hip,  not  despite  his  desire  for  destruction, 
but in accordance with it.    Nothing, in fact, could turn him from this path since his 
ethical  values  had  also  been  dissolved  in  the  crucible  of  total  negation.     In  his 
openly  obsequious  Confession   to  the  Czar,  w hich  he  wrote  in  order  to  gain  his 
freedom,  he  spectacularly  introduces  the  double  game  into  revolutionary  politics.    
With his  Catechism of a Revolutionary , which he probably drafted in Switzerland, 
with  the  help  of  Nechaiev,  he  voices,  even  though  he  deni es  it  later,  the  political 
cynicism that will never cease to weigh on the revolutionary movement and which 
Nechaiev himself has so provocatively illustrated.  
         A  less  well - known  figure  than  Bakunin,  still  more  mysterious,  but  more 
significant  for  our  purpose,  Nechaiev  pushed  nihilism  to  the  farthest  coherent 
point.    His thought presents practically no contradiction.    He appeared, about 1866, 
in  revolutionary  intellectual  circles,  and  died  obscurely,  in  January  1882.     In  this 
short  space  of  time  he  neve r  ceased  to  suborn  the  students  around  him,  Bakunin 
himself,  the  revolutionary  refugees,  and  finally  the  guard  in  his  prison,  whom  he 
succeeded in persuading to take part in a crazy conspiracy.    When he first appears, 
he is already quite sure of what he th inks.    If Bakunin was fascinated by him to the 
point  of  consenting  to  entrust  him  with  imaginary  authority,  it  is  because  he 
recognized in that implacable figure the type of human being that he recommended 
and what he himself, in a certain manner, would ha ve been if he had been able to 
silence  his  heart.     Nechaiev  was  not  content  with  saying  that  one  must  unite  with 
“the  savage  world  of  bandits,  the  true  and  unique  revolutionary  environment  of 
Russia,” nor with writing once more, lik e Bakunin, that henceforth politics would 
be  religion  and  religion  politics.     He  made  himself  the  cruel  high  priest  of  a 
desperate revolution; his most recurrent dream was to found a homicidal order that 
would permit him to propagate and finally enthrone t he sinister divinity that he had 
decided to serve.  
         He  not  only  gave  dissertations  on  universal  destruction;  his  originality  lay  in 
coldly   claiming,   for   those   who   dedicate   themselves   to   the   revolution,   an 
“Everything  is  permitted”  and  in  actually  per mitting  himself  everything,  “The 
revolutionary  man  is  condemned  in  advance.     He  must  have  neither  romantic 
relationships  nor  objects  to  engage  his  feelings.     He  should  even  cast  off  his  own 
name.     Every  part  of  him  should  be  concentrated  in  one  single  pass ion:  the 
revolution.”    If history is, in fact, independent of all principles and composed only 
of a struggle between revolution and counterrevolution, there is no way out but to 
  114  

espouse wholeheartedly one of the two and either die or be resurrected.    Necha iev 
pursues this logic to the bitter end.    With him, for the first time, revolution is going 
to be explicitly separated from love and friendship.  
         The consequences of arbitrary psychology set in motion by Hegel’s method can 
be  seen,  for  the  first  tim e,  in  Nechaiev.     Hegel  had  allowed  that  the  mutual 
recognition  of  minds  could  be  accomplished  in  love.  [It  could  also  be  brought 
about  by  the  kind  of  admiration  in  which  the  word  master   assumes  its  fullest 
meaning:  he  who  creates  without  destroying.]     He  w ould  not,  however,  give  a 
place in the foreground of his analysis to this “phenomenon,” which, according to 
him,  he  found  “had  not  the  strength,  the  patience,  nor  the  application  of  the 
negative.”     He  had  chosen  to  demonstrate  human  minds  in  blind  combat,  dimly 
groping  on  the  sands,  like  crabs  that  finally  come  to  grips  in  a  fight  to  the  death, 
and voluntarily abandoned the equally legitimate image of beams of light painfully 
searching  for  one  another  in  the  night  and  finally  focusing  together  in  a  blaze  of  
illumination.     Those  who  love,  friends  or  lovers,  know  that  love  is  not  only  a 
blinding  flash,  but  also  a  long  and  painful  struggle  in  the  darkness  for  the 
realization  of  definitive  recognition  and  reconciliation.    After  all,  if  virtue  in  the 
course  of  hi story  is  recognized  by  the  extent  to  which  it  gives  proof  of  patience, 
real  love  is  as  patient  as  hatred.     Moreover,  the  demand  for  justice  is  not  the  only 
justification throughout the centuries for revolutionary passion, which is sustained 
by a painful in sistence on universal friendship, even  –  and above all  –  in defiance 
of an inimical heaven.    Those who die for justice, throughout history, have always 
been  called  “brothers.”     Violence,  for  every  one  of  them,  is  directed  only  against 
the enemy, in the ser vice of the community of the oppressed.    But if the revolution 
is the only positive value, it has a right to claim everything  –  even the denunciation 
and  therefore  the  sacrifice  of  the  friend.     Henceforth,  violence  will  be  directed 
against  one  and  all,  in  the  service  of  an  abstract  idea.     The  accession  to  power  of 
the  possessed  had  to  take  place  so  that  it  could  be  said,  once  and  for  all,  that  the 
revolution, in itself, was more important than the people it wanted to save, and that 
friendship,  which  until  t hen  had  transformed  defeats  into  the  semblance  of 
victories, must be sacrificed and postponed until the still invisible day of victory.  
         Nechaiev’s  originality  thus  lies  in  justifying  the  violence  done  to  one’s 
brothers.    He decided, with Bakunin, on  the terms of the  Catcheism .    But once the 
latter,  in  a  fit  of  mental  aberration,  had  given  him  the  mission  of  representing  in 
Russia   a  European  Revolutionary  Union,  which  existed  only  in  his  imagination, 
Nechaiev  in  effect  came  to  Russia,  founded  his  Society  of  the  Ax,  and  himself 
defined   its   regulations.      There   we   find   again   the   secret   central   committee, 
necessary  no  doubt  to  any  military  or  political  action,  to  whom  everyone  must 
swear absolute allegiance.    But Nechaiev does more than militarize the revolution 
from  the  moment  when  he  admits  that  the  leaders,  in  order  to  govern  their 
  115  

subordinates,  have  the  right  to  employ  violence  and  lies.     Nechaiev  lies,  to  begin 
with,  when  he  claims  to  be  a  delegate  of  a  c entral  committee  that  is  still 
nonexistent  and  when,  to  enlist  certain  sceptics  in  the  action  that  he  proposes  to 
undertake,  he  describes  the  committee  as  disposing  of  unlimited  resources.     He 
goes  still  farther  by  distinguishing  between  categories  of  revo lutionaries,  with 
those  of  the  first  category  (by  which  he  means  the  leaders)  reserving  the  right  to 
consider  the  rest  as  “expendable  capital.”     All  the  leaders  in  history  may  have 
thought  in  these  terms,  but  they  never  said  so.     Until  Nechaiev,  at  any  rat e,  no 
revolutionary  leader  had  dared  to  make  this  the  guiding  principle  of  his  conduct.    
Up to his time no revolution had put at the head of its table of laws the concept that 
man could be a chattel.    Traditionally, recruiting relied on its appeal to coura ge and 
to the spirit of self - sacrifice.    Nechaiev decided that the sceptics could be terrorized 
or blackmailed and the believers deceived.    Even pseudo - revolutionaries could still 
be  used,  if  they  were  urged  on  systematically  to  perform  the  most  dangerous 
deeds.     As  for  the  oppressed,  since  they  were  going  to  be  saved  once  and  for  all, 
they  could  be  oppressed  still  more.     What  they  would  lose,  the  oppressed  of  the 
future would gain.    Nechaiev states, in principle, that governments must be driven 
to  take  rep ressive  measures,  that  the  official  representatives  most  hated  by  the 
population must never be touched, and that finally the secret society must employ 
all its resources to increase the suffering and misery of the masses.  
         Although  these  beautiful  th oughts  have  realized  their  full  meaning  today, 
Nechaiev did not live to see the triumph of his principles.    He tried to apply them, 
at  all  events,  at  the  time  of  the  student  Ivanov’s  murder,  which  so  struck  the 
popular imagination of the time that Dostoiev sky made it one of the themes of  The 
Possessed .    Ivanov, whose only fault seems to have been that he had doubts about 
the central committee of which Nechaiev claimed to be a delegate, was considered 
an enemy of the revolution because he was opposed to the  man who was identified 
with the revolution.    Therefore he must die.    “What right have we to take a man’s 
life?” asks Uspensky, one of Nechaiev’s comrades.  –  “It is not a question of right, 
but  of  our  duty  to  eliminate  everything  that  may  harm  our  cause.”     When 
revolution is the sole value, there are, in fact, no more rights, there are only duties.    
But  by  an  immediate  inversion,  every  right  is  assumed  in  the  name  of  duty.     For 
the sake of the cause, Nechaiev, who has never made an attempt on the life of any  
tyrant, ambushes and kills Ivanov.    Then he leaves  Russia   and returns to Bakunin, 
who  turns  his  back  on  him  and  condemns  his  “repugnant  tactics.”     “He  has 
gradually come,” writes Bakunin, “to the conclusion that to found an indestr uctible 
society  it  must  be  based  on  the  politics  of  Machiavelli  and  the  methods  of  the 
Jesuits:  for  the  body,  only  violence;  for  the  soul,  deception.”     That  is  well  said.    
But in the name of what value is it possible to decide that this tactic is repugnant  if 
the  revolution,  as  Bakunin  believed,  is  the  only  good?     Nechaiev  is  really  in  the 
  116  

service  of  the  revolution;  it  is  not  his  own  ends  that  he  serves,  but  the  cause.    
Extradited, he yields not an inch to his judges.    Condemned to twenty - five years in 
jail ,  he  still  reigns  over  the  prisoners,  organizers  the  jailers  into  a  secret  society, 
plans the assassination of the Czar, and is again brought up for trial.    Death in the 
dungeon of a fortress, after twelve years’ confinement, brings an end to the life of 
t his rebel who is the first of the contemporary aristocrats of the revolution.  
         At  this  period,  in  the  bosom  of  the  revolution,  everything  is  really  permitted 
and  murder  can  be  elevated  into  a  principle.     It  was  thought,  however,  with  the 
renewal  of  P opulism  in  1870,  that  this  revolutionary  movement,  sprung  from  the 
ethical  and  religious  tendencies  to  be  found  in  the  Decembrists,  and  in  the 
socialism  of  Lavrov  and  Herzen,  would  put  a  check  on  the  evolution  toward 
political  cynicism  that  Nechaiev  had  il lustrated.     This  movement  appealed  to 
“living souls,” prompted them to turn to the people and educate them so that they 
would  march  forward  to  their  own  liberation.     “Repentant  noblemen”  left  their 
families, dressed like the poor, and went into the village s to preach to the peasants.    
But  the  peasants  were  suspicious  and  held  their  peace.     When  they  did  not  hold 
their peace, they denounced the apostle to the police.    This check to the noble souls 
had the result of throwing back the movement on the cynicism  of a Nechaiev or, at 
any  rate,  on  violence.     Insofar  as  the  intelligentsia  was  unable  to  reclaim  the 
allegiance of the people, it felt itself once more alone, face to face with autocracy; 
once  more  the  world  appeared  to  it  in  the  aspect  of  master  and  slave .     The  group 
known as the People’s Will was then to elevate individual terrorism into a principle 
and inaugurate the series of murders which continued until 1905 with the Socialist 
Revolutionary   Party.      This   is   the   point   at   which   the   terrorists   were   born, 
disillusioned with love, united against the crimes of their masters, but alone in their 
despair, and face to face with their contradictions, which they could only resolve in 
the double sacrifice of their innocence and their life.  
   
   
         The Fastidious  Assassins  
   
         In  the  year  1878  Russian  terrorism  was  born.    A  very  young  girl,  Vera 
Zassulich, on the day following the trial of one hundred and eighty - three Populists, 
th the 24  of January, shot down General Trepov, the Governor of St. Petersburg.    At  
her  trial  she  was  acquitted  and  then  succeeded  in  escaping  the  police  of  the  Czar. 
This  revolutionary  unleashed  a  whole  series  of  repressive  actions  and  attempted 
assassinations,  which  kept  pace  with  one  another  and  which,  it  was  already 
evident, could on ly be terminated by mutual exhaustion.  
         The  same  year  a  member  of  the  People’s  Will  Party,  Kravchinsky,  stated  the 
principles of terror in his pamphlet  Death for Death .    Consequences always follow 
  117  

principles.     In  Europe,  attem pts  were  made  on  the  lives  of  the  Emperor  of 
Germany,  the  King  of  Italy,  and  the  King  of  Spain.     Again  in  1878  Alexander  II 
created, in the shape of the Okhrana, the most efficient weapon of State terrorism 
the world has ever seen.    From then on, the ninet eenth century abounds in murders, 
both in  Russia   and in the West.    In 1879 there is a new attack on the King of Spain 
and  an  abortive  attempt  on  the  life  of  the  Czar.     In  1881  the  Czar  is  murdered  by 
terrorist  members  of  the  People’ s  Will.     Sofia  Perovskaia,  Jeliabov,  and  their 
friends  are  hanged.     In  1883  takes  place  the  attempt  on  the  life  of  the  Emperor  of 
Germany,  whose  assailant  is  beheaded  with  an  axe.     In  1887  there  are  the 
executions  of  the  Chicago   mar tyrs  and  the  congress  of  Spanish  anarchists  at 
Valencia,   where   they   issue   the   terrorist   proclamation:   “If   society   does   not 
capitulate,  vice  and  evil  must  perish,  even  if  we  must  all  perish  with  them.”     In 
Fra nce   the  1890s  mark  the  culminating - point  of  what  is  called  propaganda  by 
action.    The exploits of Ravachol, Vaillant, and Henry are the prelude to Carnot’s 
assassination.     In  the  year  1892  alone  there  are  more  than  a  thousand  dynamite 
outrages  in  Europe,  and  in  America   almost  five  hundred.     In  1898  the  Empress 
Elisabeth  of  Austria   is  murdered.     In  1901  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
McKinley, is assassinated .    In  Russia, where the series of attempts against the lives 
of  minor  representatives  of  the  regime  had  not  ceased,  the  Organization  for 
Combat  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionary  Party  comes  into  being  in  1903  and  unites 
the most outsta nding personalities of Russian terrorism.    The murders of Plehve by 
Sazonov   and   of   the   Grand   Duke   Sergei   by   Kaliayev,   in   1905,   mark   the 
culminating - point  of  the  thirty  years’  apostolate  of  blood  and  terminate,  for 
revolutionary religion, the age of martyrs .  
         Nihilism,  intimately  involved  with  a  frustrated  religious  movement,  thus 
culminates  in  terrorism.     In  the  universe  of  total  negation,  these  young  disciples 
try, with bombs and revolvers, and also with the courage with which they walk to 
the gallow s, to escape from contradiction and to create the values they lack.    Until 
their  time,  men  died  for  what  they  knew,  or  for  what  they  thought  they  knew.    
From their time on, it became the rather more difficult habit to sacrifice oneself for 
something  about  which  one  knew  nothing,  except  that  it  was  necessary  to  die  so 
that it might exist.    Until then, those who had to die put themselves in the hand of 
God  in  defiance  of  the  justice  of  man.     But  on  reading  the  declarations  of  the 
condemned victims of that per iod, we are amazed to see that all, without exception, 
entrusted  themselves,  in  defiance  of  their  judges,  to  the  justice  of  other  men  who 
were  not  yet  born.     These  men  of  the  future  remained,  in  the  absence  of  supreme 
values,  their  last  recourse.     The  futu re  is  the  only  transcendental  value  for  men 
without  God.     The  terrorists  no  doubt  wanted  first  of  all  to  destroy  –   to  make 
absolutism  totter  under  the  shock  of  exploding  bombs.     But  by  their  death,  at  any 
rate, they aimed at re - creating a community founded  on love and justice, and thus 
  118  

to resume a mission that the Church had betrayed.    The terrorists’ real mission is to 
create a Church from whence will one day spring the new God.    But is that all?    If 
their voluntary assumption of guilt and death gave rise  to nothing but the promise 
of a value still to come, the history of the world today would justify us in saying, 
for  the  moment  at  any  rate,  that  they  have  died  in  vain  and  that  they  never  have 
ceased to be nihilists.    A value to come is, moreover, a contra diction in terms, since 
it  can  neither  explain  an  action  nor  furnish  a  principle  of  choice  as  long  as  it  has 
not  been  formulated.     But  the  men  of  1905,  tortured  by  contradictions,  really  did 
give  birth,  by  their  very  negation  and  death,  to  a  value  that  wil l  henceforth  be 
imperative,   which   they   brought   to   light   in   the   belief   that   they   were   only 
announcing  its  advent.     They  ostensibly  placed,  above  themselves  and  their 
executioners,  that  supreme  and  painful  good  which  we  have  already  found  at  the 
origins  of  r ebellion.     Let  us  stop  and  consider  this  value,  at  the  moment  when  the 
spirit  of  rebellion  encounters,  for  the  last  time  in  our  history,  the  spirit  of 
compassion.  
        “ How can we speak of terrorist activity without taking part in it?” exclaims the 
stude nt Kaliayev.    His companions, united ever since 1903, in the Organization for 
Combat  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionary  Party,  under  the  direction  of  Aze  and  later 
of Boris Savinkov, all live up to the standard of this admirable statement.    They are 
men of the  highest principles: the last, in the history of rebellion, to refuse no part 
of their condition or their drama.    If their lives were dedicated to the terror, “if they 
had  faith  in  it,”  as  Pokotilov  says,  they  never  ceased  to  be  torn  asunder  by  it.    
Histor y offers few examples of fanatics who have suffered from scruples, even in 
action.    But the men of 1905 were always prey to doubts.    The greatest homage we 
can pay them is to say that we would not be able, in 1950, to ask them one question 
that they themse lves had not already asked and that, in their life or by their death, 
they had not partially answered.  
         They quickly passed into the realms of history, however.    When Kaliayev, for 
example,  in  1903,  decided  to  take  part  with  Savinkov  in  terrorist  act ivity,  he  was 
twenty - six years old.    Two years later the “Poet,” as he was called, was hanged.    It 
was a short career.    But to anyone who examines with a little feeling the history of 
that  period,  Kaliayev,  in  his  breathtaking  career,  displays  the  most  sig nificant 
aspect of terrorism.    Sazonov, Schweitzer, Pokotilov, Voinarovsky, and most of the 
other anarchists likewise burst upon the scene of Russian history and poised there 
for a moment, dedicated to destruction, as the swift and unforgettable witnesses  to 
an increasingly agonized protest.  
         Almost  all  are  atheists:  “I  remember,”  wrote  Boris  Voinarovsky,  who  died  in 
throwing  a  bomb  at  Admiral  Dubassov,  “that  even  before  going  to  high  school  I 
preached atheism to one of my childhood friends.    Only one  question embarrassed 
me.     Where  did  my  ideas  come  from?     For  I  had  not  the  least  conception  of 
  119  

eternity.”    Kaliayev himself believed in God.    A few moments before an attempted 
assassination, which failed, Savinkov saw him in the street, standing in front  of an 
icon,  holding  the  bomb  in  one  hand  and  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  with  the 
other.     But  he  repudiated  religion.     In  his  cell,  before  his  execution,  he  refused  its 
consolations.  
         The  need  for  secrecy  compelled  them  to  live  in  solitude.     They  di d  not  know, 
except perhaps in the abstract, the profound joy experienced by the man of action 
in  contract  with  a  large  section  of  humanity.     But  the  bond  that  united  them 
replaced  every  other  attachment  in  their  minds.     “Chivalry!”  writes  Sazonov,  and 
comm ents  on  it  thus:  “Our  chivalry  was  permeated  with  such  a  degree  of  feeling 
that the word  brother  in no way conveyed with sufficient clarity the essence of our 
relations  with  one  another.”     From  prison  Sazonov  writes  to  his  friends:  “For  my 
part, the indisp ensable condition of happiness is to keep forever the knowledge of 
my  perfect  solidarity  with  you.”     As  for  Voinarovsky,  he  confesses  that  to  a 
woman  he  loved  who  wished  to  detain  him  he  made  the  following  remark,  which 
he recognizes as “slightly comic” bu t which, according to him, proves his state of 
mind: “I should curse you if I arrived late for my comrades.”  
         This  little  group  of  men  and  women,  lost  among  the  Russian  masses,  bound 
only  to  one  another,  chose  the  role  of  executioner,  to  which  they  w ere  in  no  way 
destined.     They  lived  in  the  same  paradox,  combining  in  themselves  respect  for 
human  life  in  general  and  contempt  for  their  own  lives  –   to  the  point  of  nostalgia 
for  the  supreme  sacrifice.     For  Dora  Brilliant,  the  anarchist  programme  was  of  n o 
importance; terrorist action was primarily embellished by the sacrifice it demanded 
from  the  terrorist.     “But,”  says  Savinkov,  “terror  weighed  on  her  like  a  cross.”    
Kaliayev  himself  is  ready  to  sacrifice  his  life  at  any  moment.     “Even  better  than 
that,  he  passionately  desired  to  make  this  sacrifice.”     During  the  preparations  for 
the attempt on Plehve, he stated his intention of throwing himself under the horses’ 
hoofs  and  perishing  with  the  Minister.     With  Voinarovsky  also  the  desire  for 
sacrifice  coinci des  with  the  attraction  of  death.     After  his  arrest  he  writes  to  his 
parents:  “How  many  times  during  my  adolescence  the  idea  came  to  me  to  kill 
myself!...”  
         At this same time, these executioners who risked their own lives so completely, 
made attempts  on the lives of others only after the most scrupulous examination of 
conscience.     The  first  attempt  on  the  Grand  Duke  Sergei  failed  because  Kaliayev, 
with the full approval of his comrades, refused to kill the children who were riding 
in  the  Grand  Duke’s  carriage.     Of  Rachel  Louriée,  another  terrorist,  Savinkov 
writes: “She had faith in terrorist action, she considered it an honour and a duty to 
take  part  in  it,  but  blood  upset  her  no  less  than  it  did  Dora.”     The  same  Savinkov 
was  opposed  to  an  attempt  on  Admiral  Dubassov  in  the  Petersburg - Moscow 
express because “if there were the least mistake, the explosion could take place in 
  120  

the car and kill strangers.”    Later Savinkov, “in the name of terrorist conscience,” 
will deny with indignation having made a chil d of sixteen take part in an attempted 
assassination.     At  the  moment  of  escaping  from  a  Czarist  prison,  he  decides  to 
shoot any officers who might attempt to prevent his flight, but to kill himself rather 
than turn his revolver on an ordinary soldier.    It  is the same with Voinarovsky, who 
does not hesitate to kill men, but who confesses that he has never hunted, “finding 
the   occupation   barbarous,”   and   who   declares   in   his   turn:   “If   Dubassov   is 
accompanied by his wife, I shall not throw the bomb.”  
         Such  a degree of self - abnegation, accompanied by such profound consideration 
for  the  lives  of  others,  allows  the  supposition  that  these  fastidious  assassins  lived 
out  the  rebel  destiny  in  its  most  contradictory  form.     It  is  possible  to  believe  that 
they  too,  w hile  recognizing  the  inevitability  of  violence,  nevertheless  admitted  to 
themselves that it is unjustifiable.    Necessary and inexcusable  –  that is how murder 
appeared to them.    Mediocre minds, confronted with this terrible problem, can take 
refuge by ignor ing one of the terms of the dilemma.    They are content, in the name 
of  formal  principles,  to  find  all  direct  violence  inexcusable  and  then  to  sanction 
that  diffuse  form  of  violence  which  takes  place  on  the  scale  of  world  history.     Or 
they will console them selves, in the name of history, with the thought that violence 
is  necessary,  and  will  add  murder  to  murder,  to  the  point  of  making  of  history 
nothing  but  a  continuous  violation  of  everything  in  man  which  protests  against 
injustice.     This  defines  the  two  as pects  of  contemporary  nihilism,  the  bourgeois 
and the revolutionary.  
         But  the  extremists,  with  whom  we  are  concerned,  forgot  nothing.     From  their 
earliest  days  they  were  incapable  of  justifying  what  they  nevertheless  found 
necessary,  and  conceived  th e  idea  of  offering  themselves  as  a  justification  and  of 
replying by personal sacrifices to the question they asked themselves.    For them, as 
for  all  rebels  before  them,  murder  is  identified  with  suicide.     A  life  is  paid  for  by 
another  life,  and  from  these  two  sacrifices  springs  the  promise  of  a  value.    
Kaliayev,  Voinarovsky,  and  the  others  believe  in  the  equal  value  of  human  lives.    
Therefore  they  do  not  value  any  idea  above  human  life,  though  they  kill  for  the 
sake  of  ideas.     To  be  precise,  they  live  on  th e  plane  of  their  idea.     They  justify  it, 
finally,  by  incarnating  it  to  the  point  of  death.     We  are  again  confronted  with  a 
concept of rebellion which, if not religious, is at least metaphysical.    Other men to 
come,  consumed  with  the  same  devouring  faith  as   these,  will  find  their  methods 
sentimental  and  refuse  to  admit  that  any  one  life  is  the  equivalent  of  any  other.    
They will then put an abstract idea above human life, even if they call it history, to 
which  they  themselves  have  submitted  in  advance  and  to   which  they  will  also 
decide, quite arbitrarily, to submit everyone else.    The problem of rebellion will no 
longer be resolved by arithmetic, but by estimating probabilities.    Confronted with 
the  possibility  that  the  idea  may  be  realized  in  the  future,  hum an  life  can  be 
  121  

everything  or  nothing.     The  greater  the  faith  that  the  estimator  places  in  this  final 
realization,  the  less  the  value  of  human  life.     At  the  ultimate  limit,  it  is  no  longer 
worth anything at all.  
         We  shall  have  occasion  to  examine  this   limit  –   that  is,  the  period  of  State 
terrorism and of the philosophical executioners.    But meanwhile the rebels of 1905, 
at  the  frontier  on  which  they  stand  united,  teach  us,  to  the  sound  of  exploding 
bombs,  that  rebellion  cannot  lead,  without  ceasing  to  be  rebellion,  to  consolation 
and  to  the  comforts  of  dogma.     Their  only  evident  victory  is  to  triumph  at  least 
over  solitude  and  negation.     In  the  midst  of  a  world  which  they  deny  and  which 
rejects them, they try, man after man, like all the great - hearted o nes, to reconstruct 
a  brotherhood  of  man.    The  love  their  bear  for  one  another,  which  brings  them 
happiness  even  in  the  desert  of  a  prison,  which  extends  to  the  great  mass  of  their 
enslaved  and  silent  fellow  men,  gives  the  measure  of  their  distress  and  of  their 
hopes.    To serve this love, they must first kill; to inaugurate the reign of innocence, 
they must accept a certain culpability.    This contradiction will be resolved for them 
only  at  the  very  last  moment.     Solitude  and  chivalry,  renunciation  and  hope  will 
only  be  surmounted  by  the  willing  acceptance  of  death.     Already  Jeliabov,  who 
organized  the  attempt  on  Alexander  II  in  1881  and  was  arrested  forty - eight  hours 
before the murder, had asked to be executed at the same time as the real perpetrator 
of  the  attempt.     “Only  the  cowardice  of  the  government,”  he  said,  “could  account 
for  the  erection  of  one  gallows  instead  of  two.”     Five  were  erected,  one  of  which 
was for the woman he loved.    But Jeliabov died smiling, while Ryssakov, who had 
broken down during h is interrogations, was dragged to the scaffold, half - mad with 
fear.  
         Jeliabov did this because of a sort of guilt which he did not want to accept and 
from  which  he  knew  he  would  suffer,  like  Ryssakov,  if  he  remained  alone  after 
having committed or be en the cause of a murder.    At the foot of the gallows, Sofia 
Perovskaia  kissed  the  man  she  loved  and  her  two  other  friends,  but  turned  away 
from Ryssakov, who died solitary and damned by the new religion.    For Jeliabov, 
death in the midst of his comrades c oincided with his justification.    He who kills is 
guilty  only  if  he  consents  to  go  on  living  or  if,  to  remain  alive,  he  betrays  his 
comrades.     To  die,  on  the  other  hand,  cancels  out  both  the  guilt  and  the  crime 
itself.     Thus  Charlotte  Corday  shouts  at  Fouq uier - Tinville:  “Oh,  the  monster,  he 
takes  me  for  an  assassin!”     It  is  the  agonizing  and  fugitive  discovery  of  a  human 
value  that  stands  halfway  between  innocence  and  guilt,  between  reason  and 
irrationality,  between  history  and  eternity.     At  the  moment  of  t his  discovery,  but 
only  then,  these  desperate  people  experience  a  strange  feeling  of  peace,  the  peace 
of definitive victory.    In his cell, Polivanov says that it would have been “easy and 
sweet” for him to die.    Voinarovsky writes that he has conquered the  fear of death.    
“Without  a  single  muscle  in  my  face  twitching,  without  saying  a  word,  I  shall 
  122  

climb  on  the  scaffold....  And  this  will  not  be  an  act  of  violence  perpetrated  on 
myself, it will be the perfectly natural result of all that I have lived through.”    Very 
much  later  Lieutenant  Schmidt  will  write  before  being  shot:  “My  death  will 
consummate  everything,  and  my  cause,  crowned  by  my  death,  will  emerge 
irreproachable  and  perfect.”     Kaliayev,  condemned  to  the  gallows  after  having 
stood as prosecutor before  the tribunal, declares firmly: “I consider my death as a 
supreme  protest  against  a  world  of  blood  and  tears,”  and  again  writes:  “From  the 
moment when I found myself behind bars, I never for one moment wanted to stay 
alive in any way whatsoever.”    His wish  is granted.    On May 10, at  two o’clock   in 
the morning, he walks toward the only justification he recognizes.    Entirely dressed 
in  black,  without  an  overcoat,  and  wearing  a  felt  hat,  he  climbs  the  scaffold.     To 
Father  Florinsky,  who   offers  him  the  crucifix,  the  condemned  man,  turning  from 
the  figure  of  Christ,  only  answers:  “I  have  already  told  you  that  I  have  finished 
with life and that I am prepared for death.”  
         Yes,  the  ancient  value  lives  once  more,  at  the  culmination  of  ni hilism,  at  the 
very  foot  of  the  gallows.     It  is  the  reflection,  historic  on  this  occasion,  of  the  “we 
are”  which  we  found  at  the  termination  of  our  analysis  of  the  rebel  mind.     It  is 
privation  and  at  the  same  time  enlightened  conviction.     It  is  this  that  s hone  with 
such mortal radiance on the agonized countenance of Dora Brilliant at the thought 
of  him  who  died  for  himself  and  for  tireless  friendship;  it  is  this  that  drives 
Sazonov  to  suicide  in  prison  as  a  protest  and  “to  earn  respect  for  his  comrades”; 
an d  this,  again,  which  exonerates  even  Nechaiev  on  the  day  when  he  is  asked  to 
denounce his comrades by a general, whom he knocks to the ground with a single 
blow.    By means of this, the terrorists, while simultaneously affirming the world of 
men,  places  the mselves  above  this  world,  thus  demonstrating  for  the  last  time  in 
our history that real rebellion is a creator of values.  
         Thanks to them, 1905 marks the highest peak of revolutionary momentum.    But 
from then on, a decline sets in.    Martyrs do not bu ild Churches; they are the mortar, 
or the alibi.    Then come the priests and the bigots.    The revolutionaries who follow 
will not demand an exchange of lives.    They accept the risk of death, but will also 
agree  to  preserve  themselves  as  far  as  they  can  for  the  sake  of  serving  the 
revolution.      Thus   they   will   accept   complete   culpability   for   themselves.    
Acquiescence  in  humiliation  –   that  is  the  true  characteristic  of  twentieth - century 
revolutionaries,   who   place   the   revolution   and   the   Church   of   man   above 
themse lves.     Kaliayev  proves,  on  the  contrary,  that  though  the  revolution  is  a 
necessary means, it is not a sufficient end.    In this way he elevates man instead of 
degrading  him.     It  is  Kaliayev  and  his  Russian  and  German  comrades  who,  in  the 
history of the worl d, really oppose Hegel, [Two different species of men.    One kills 
only  once  and  pays  with  his  life.     The  other  justifies  thousands  of  crimes  and 
consents to be rewarded with honours.] who first recognizes universal recognition 
  123  

as necessary and then as insu fficient.    Appearances did not suffice for him.    When 
the  whole  world  would  have  been  willing  to  recognize  him,  a  doubt  would  still 
have  remained  in  Kaliayev’s  mind:  he  needed  his  own  form  of  acquiescence,  and 
the  approbation  of  the  whole  world  would  not  h ave  sufficed  to  silence  the  doubt 
that  a  hundred  enthusiastic  acclamations  give  rise  to  in  the  mind  of  any  honest 
man.    Kaliayev doubted to the end, but this doubt did not prevent him from acting; 
it is for that reason that he is the purest image of rebell ion.    He who accepts death, 
to pay for a life with a life, no matter what his negations may be, affirms, by doing 
so, a value that surpasses him in his aspects of an individual in the historical sense.    
Kaliayev  dedicates  himself  to  history  until  death  and ,  at  the  moment  of  dying, 
places  himself  above  history.     In  a  certain  way,  it  is  true,  he  prefers  himself  to 
history.     But  what  should  his  preference  be?     Himself,  whom  he  kills  without 
hesitation,  or  the  value  he  incarnates  and  makes  immortal?     The  answer   is  not 
difficult to guess.    Kaliayev and his comrades triumphed over nihilism.  
   
   
         The Path of Chigalev  
   
         But  this  triumph  is  to  be  short - lived:  it  coincides  with  death.     Nihilism, 
provisionally,   survives   its   victors.      In   the   very   bosom   of   t he   Socialist 
Revolutionary Party, political cynicism continues to wend its way to victory.    The 
party  leader  who  sends  Kaliayev  to  his  death,  Azev,  plays  a  double  game  and 
denounces   the   revolutionaries   to   the   Okhrana   while   planning   the   deaths   of 
ministers  and grand dukes.    The concept of provocation reinstates the “Everything 
is  permitted,”  and  again  identifies  history  and  absolute  values.     This  particular 
form  of  nihilism,  after  having  influenced  individualistic  socialism,  goes  on  to 
contaminate  so - called  scientific  socialism,  which  appears  in  Russia   during  the 
1880’s.     [The  first  Social  Democratic  ground,  Plekhanov’s,  began  in  1883.]     The 
joint  legacy  of  Nechaiev  and  Marx  will  give  birth  to  the  totalitarian  revolution  of 
the   twentie th   century.      While   individual   terrorism   hunted   down   the   last 
representatives of divine right, State terrorism was getting ready to destroy divine 
right definitively, at the very root of human society.    The technique of the seizure 
of  power  for  the  realizat ion  of  ultimate  ends  takes  the  first  step  toward  the 
exemplary affirmation of these ends.  
         Lenin,  in  fact,  borrows  from  Tkachev,  a  friend  and  spiritual  brother  of 
Nechaiev,  a  concept  of  the  seizure  of  power  that  he  found  “majestic”  and  that  he 
himsel f  recapitulated  thus:  “absolute  secrecy,  meticulous  care  in  the  choice  of 
members,  creation  of  professional  revolutionaries.”     Tkachev,  who  died  insane, 
makes  the  transition  from  nihilism  to  military  socialism.     He  claimed  to  have 
created  a  Russian  Jacobin ism  and  yet  only  borrowed  from  the  Jacobins  their 
  124  

technique  of  action,  since  he,  too,  denied  every  principle  and  every  virtue.     An 
enemy of art and ethics, he reconciles the rational and the irrational only in tactics.    
His  aim  is  to  achieve  human  equality   by  seizure  of  power  of  the  State.     Secret 
organizations, revolutionary alliances, dictatorial powers of revolutionary leaders  –  
these  were  the  themes  that  defined  the  concept,  if  not  the  realization,  of  “the 
apparatus”  which  was  to  enjoy  so  great  and  effi cacious  a  success.     As  for  the 
method itself, it is possible to form a fair idea of it when one learns that Tkachev 
proposes  to  suppress  and  eliminate  all  Russians  over  the  age  of  twenty - five  as 
incapable  of  assimilating  the  new  ideas.     A  really  inspired  m ethod,  and  one  that 
was  to  prevail  in  the  techniques  of  the  modern  super - State,  where  the  fanatical 
education  of  children  is  carried  on  in  the  midst  of  a  terrorized  adult  population.    
Cæsarian socialism undoubtedly condemns individual terrorism to the exte nt that it 
revives  values  incompatible  with  the  domination  of  historic  reason.     But  it  will 
restore  terror  on  the  level  of  the  State  –   with  the  creation  of  an  ultimately  deified 
humanity as its sole justification.  
         We  have  come  full  circle  here,  and  rebellion,  cut  off  from  its  real  roots, 
unfaithful   to   man   in   having   surrendered   to   history,   now   contemplates   the 
subjection  of  the  entire  universe.     It  is  at  this  point  that  the  era  of  Chigalevism 
begins  –   proclaimed,  in  The  Possessed ,  by  Verkhovensky,  the   nihilist  who  claims 
the  right  to  choose  dishonour.     His  is  an  unhappy  and  implacable  mind  [“He 
represented himself as man after his fashion, and then he gave up the idea.”] and he 
chooses  the  will  to  power,  which,  in  fact,  alone  is  capable  of  reigning  ove r  a 
history that has no other significance but itself.    Chigalev, the philanthropist, is his 
guarantor;  love  of  mankind  will  henceforth  justify  the  enslavement  of  man.    
Possessed by the idea of equality, [“Slander and assassination in extreme cases, but 
es pecially  equality.”]  Chigalev,  after  long  consideration,  arrived  at  the  despairing 
conclusion that only one system is possible even though it is a system of despair.    
“Beginning   with   the   premise   of   unlimited   freedom,   I   arrive   at   unlimited 
despotism.”    Comp lete freedom, which is the negation of everything, can only exist 
and  justify  itself  by  the  creation  of  new  values  identified  with  the  entire  human 
race.     If  the  creation  of  these  values  is  postponed,  humanity  will  tear  itself  to 
pieces.      The   shortest   rout e   to   these   new   standards   passes   by   way   of   total 
dictatorship.     “One  tenth  of  humanity  will  have  the  right  to  individuality  and  will 
exercise  unlimited  authority  over  the  other  nine  tenths.     The  latter  will  lose  their 
individuality   and   will   become   like   a   fl ock   of   sheep;   compelled   to   passive 
obedience,  they  will  be  led  back  to  original  innocence  and,  so  to  speak,  to  the 
primitive paradise, where, nevertheless, they must work.”    It is the government by 
philosophers of which the Utopians dream; philosophers of  this type, quite simply, 
believe  in  nothing.     The  kingdom  has  come,  but  it  negates  real  rebellion,  and  is 
only concerned with the reign of “the Christs of violence,” to use the expression of 
  125  

an  enthusiastic  writer  extolling  the  life  and  death  of  Ravachol.     “The  pope  on 
high,”   says   Verkhovensky   bitterly,   “with   us   around   him,   and   beneath   us 
Chigalevism.”  
         The  totalitarian  theocrats  of  the  twentieth  century  and  State  terrorism  are  thus 
announced.    The new aristocracy and the grand inquisitors reign today , by making 
use  of  the  rebellion  of  the  oppressed,  over  one  part  of  our  history.     Their  reign  is 
cruel,  but  they  excuse  their  cruelty,  like  the  Satan  of  the  romantics,  by  claiming 
that it is hard for them to bear.    “We reserve desire and suffering for ours elves; for 
the slaves there is Chigalevism.”    A new and somewhat hideous race of martyrs is 
now  born.     Their  martyrdom  consists  in  consenting  to  inflict  suffering  on  others; 
they  become  the  slaves  of  their  own  domination.     For  man  to  become  god,  the 
victim   must  abuse  himself  to  the  point  of  becoming  the  executioner.     That  is  why 
both victim and executioner are equally despairing.    Neither slavery nor power will 
any  longer  coincide  with  happiness;  the  masters  will  be  morose  and  the  slaves 
sullen.     Saint - Just   was  right:  it  is  a  terrible  thing  to  torment  the  people.     But  how 
can  one  avoid  tormenting  men  if  one  has  decided  to  make  them  gods?     Just  as 
Kirilov, who kills himself in order to become God, accepts seeing his suicide made 
use  of  by  Verkhovensky’s  “cons piracy,”  so  man’s  deification  by  man  breaks  the 
bounds  which  rebellion,  nevertheless,  reveals,  and  thereby  irrevocably  commits 
itself to the labyrinth of tactics and terror from which history has not yet emerged.  
   
   
   
State Terrorism and Irrational Terror  
   
*  
   
         All modern revolutions have ended in a reinforcement of the power of the 
State.     1789  brings  Napoleon;  1848,  Napoleon  III;  1917,  Stalin;  the  Italian 
disturbances  of  the  twenties,  Mussolini;  the  Weimar   Republic,  Hitler.     These 
revolutions, particularly after the First World War had liquidated the vestiges 
of  divine  right,  still  proposed,  with  increasing  audacity,  to  build  the  city  of 
humanity  and  of  authentic  freedom.     The  growing  omnipotence  of  t he  State 
sanctioned this ambition on each occasion.    It would be erroneous to say that 
this  was  bound  to  happen.     But  it  is  possible  to  examine  how  it  did  happen; 
and perhaps the lesson will follow.  
         Apart from a few explanations that are not the sub ject of this essay, the strange 
and  terrifying  growth  of  the  modern  State  can  be  considered  as  the  logical 
conclusion of inordinate technical and philosophical ambitions, foreign to the true 
  126  

spirit  of  rebellion,  but  which  nevertheless  gave  birth  to  the  rev olutionary  spirit  of 
our time.    The prophetic dream of Marx and the over - inspired predictions of Hegel 
or of Nietzsche ended by conjuring up, after the city of God had been razed to the 
ground,  a  rational  or  irrational  State,  which  in  both  cases,  however,  was  founded 
on terror.  
         In actual fact, the Fascist revolutions of the twentieth century do not merit the 
title of revolution.    They lacked the ambition of universality.    Mussolini and Hitler, 
of course, tried to build an empire, and the National Soc ialist ideologists were bent, 
explicitly,  on  world  domination.     But  the  difference  between  them  and  the  classic 
revolutionary movement is that, of the nihilist inheritance, they chose to deify the 
irrational,  and  the  irrational  alone,  instead  of  deifying  r eason.     In  this  way  they 
renounced their claim to universality.    And yet Mussolini makes use of Hegel, and 
Hitler  of  Nietzsche;  and  both  illustrate,  historically,  some  of  the  prophecies  of 
German  ideology.     In  this  respect  they  belong  to  the  history  of  reb ellion  and  of 
nihilism.    They were the first to construct a State on the concept that everything is 
meaningless and that history is only written in terms of the hazards of force.    The 
consequences were not long in appearing.  
          
         As  early  as  1914 ,  Mussolini  proclaimed  the  “holy  religion  of  anarchy,”  and 
declares  himself  the  enemy  of  every  form  of  Christianity.     As  for  Hitler,  his 
professed  religion  unhesitatingly  juxtaposed  the  God - Providence  and  Valhalla.    
Actually his god  was a political argument and a manner of reaching an impressive 
climax  at  the  end  of  his  speeches.     As  long  as  he  was  successful,  he  chose  to 
believe that he was inspired.    In the hour of defeat, he considered himself betrayed 
by his people.    Between the  two nothing intervened to announce to the world that 
he  would  ever  have  been  capable  of  thinking  himself  guilty  in  relation  to  any 
principle.  The  only  man  of  superior  culture  who  gave  Nazism  an  appearance  of 
being a philosophy, Ernst Junger, even went so f ar as to choose the actual formulas 
of nihilism: “The best answer to the betrayal of life by the spirit is the betrayal of 
the  spirit  by  the  spirit,  and  one  of  the  great  and  cruel  pleasures  of  our  times  is  to 
participate in the work of destruction.”  
         Men of action, when they are without faith, have never believed in anything but 
action.    Hitler’s untenable paradox lay precisely in wanting to found a stable order 
on  perpetual  change  and  no  negation.     Rauschning,  in  his  Revolution  of  Nihilism , 
was   right    in   saying   that   the   Hitlerian   revolution   represented   unadulterated 
dynamism.    In  Germany, shaken to its foundations by a calamitous war, by defeat, 
and  by  economic  distress,  values  no  longer  existed.     Although  one  must  take  into 
acc ount  what  Goethe  called  “the  German  destiny  of  making  everything  difficult,” 
the  epidemic  of  suicides  that  swept  through  the  entire  country  between  the  two 
wars  indicates  a  great  deal  about  the  state  of  mental  confusion.     To  those  who 
  127  

despair  of  everything ,  not  reason  but  only  passion  can  provide  a  faith,  and  in  this 
particular  case  it  must  be  the  same  passion  that  lay  at  the  root  of  the  despair  –  
namely, humiliation and hatred.    These was no longer any standard of values, both 
common to and superior to all  these men, in the name of which it would have been 
possible for them to judge one another.    The  Germany   of 1933 thus agreed to adopt 
the  degraded  values  of  a  mere  handful  of  men  and  tried  to  impose  them  on  an 
entire  civilization.     Deprived  of  the  morality  of  Goethe,  Germany   chose,  and 
submitted to, the ethics of the gang.  
         Gangster morality is an inexhaustible round of triumph and revenge, defeat and 
resentment.    When Mussolini e xtolled “the elemental forces of the individual,” he 
announced  the  exaltation  of  the  dark  powers  of  blood  and  instinct,  the  biological 
justification of all the worst things produced by the instinct of domination.    At the 
Nuremberg   t rials,  Frank  emphasized  “the  hatred  of  form”  which  animated  Hitler.    
It is true that this man was nothing but an elemental force in motion, directed and 
rendered   more   effective   by   calculated   cunning   and   by   a   relentless   tactical 
clairvoyance.     Even  his  phys ical  appearance,  which  was  thoroughly  mediocre  and 
commonplace,  was  no  limitation:  it  established  him  firmly  with  the  masses.    
Action alone kept him alive.    For him, to exist was to act.    That is why Hitler and 
his  regime  could  not  dispense  with  enemies.     They  could  only  define  themselves, 
psychopathic dandies [It is well known that Göring sometimes entertained dressed 
as  Nero  and  with  his  face  make  up.]  that  they  were,  in  relation  to  their  enemies, 
and only assume their final form in the bloody battle that  was to be their downfall.    
The  Jews,  the  Freemasons,  the  plutocrats,  the  Anglo - Saxons,  the  bestial  Slavs 
succeeded one another in their propaganda and their history as a means of propping 
up, each time a little higher, the blind force that was stumbling h eadlong toward its 
end.    Perpetual strife demanded perpetual stimulants.  
         Hitler  was  history  in  its  purest  form.     “Evolution,”  said  Junger,  “is  far  more 
important  than  living.”     Thus  he  preached  complete  identification  with  the  stream 
of life, on the  lowest level and in defiance of all superior reality.    A regime which 
invented  a  biological  foreign  policy  was  obviously  acting  against  its  own  best 
interests.     But  at  least  it  obeyed  its  own  particular  logic.     Rosenberg   speaks 
pom pously of life in the following terms: “Like a column on the march, and it is of 
little  importance  toward  what  destination  and  for  what  ends  this  column  is 
marching.”    Though later the column will strew ruins over the pages of history and 
will devastate it s own country, it will at least have had the gratification of living.    
The real logic of this dynamism was either total defeat or a progress from conquest 
to  conquest  and  from  enemy  to  enemy,  until  the  eventual  establishment  of  the 
empire of blood and acti on.    It is very unlikely that Hitler ever had any conception, 
at least at the beginning, of this empire.    Neither by culture nor even by instinct or 
tactical intelligence was he equal to his destiny.     Germany   collapsed as a result o f 
  128  

having  engaged  in  a  struggle  for  empire  with  the  concepts  of  provincial  politics.    
But  Junger  had  grasped  the  import  of  this  logic  and  had  formulated  it  in  definite 
terms.     He  had  a  vision  of  “a  technological  world  empire,”  of  which  the  faithful 
and the  militants would have themselves been the priests because (and here Junger 
rejoins  Marx),  on  account  of  his  human  form,  the  worker  is  universal.     “The 
statutes  of  a  new  authoritarian  regime  takes  the  place  of  a  change  in  the  social 
contract.     The  worker  is  removed  from  the  sphere  of  negotiation,  from  pity,  and 
from  literature  and  elevated  to  the  sphere  of  action.     Legal  obligations  are 
transformed   into   military   obligations.”      It   can   be   seen   that   the   empire   is 
simultaneously  the  factory  and  the  barracks  of  th e  world,  where  Hegel’s  solider 
worker  reigns  as  a  slave.     Hitler  was  halted  relatively  soon  on  the  way  to  the 
realization  of  this  empire.     But  even  if  he  had  gone  still  farther,  we  should  only 
have   witnessed   the   more   and   more   extensive   deployment   of   an   irr esistible 
dynamism  and  the  increasingly  violent  enforcement  of  cynical  principles  which 
alone would be capable of serving this dynamism.  
         Speaking  of  such  a  revolution,  Rauschning  says  that  it  has  nothing  to  do  with 
liberation,  justice,  and  inspirati on:  it  is  “the  death  of  freedom,  the  triumph  of 
violence,  and  the  enslavement  of  the  mind.”     Fascism  is  an  act  of  contempt,  in 
fact.     Inversely,  every  form  of  contempt,  if  it  intervenes  in  politics,  prepares  the 
way for, or establishes, Fascism.    It must b e added that Fascism cannot be anything 
else  but  an  expression  of  contempt  without  denying  itself.     Junger  drew  the 
conclusion,  from  his  own  principles,  that  it  was  better  to  be  criminal  than 
bourgeois.    Hitler, who was endowed with less literary talent bu t, on this occasion, 
with  more  coherence,  knew  that  to  be  either  one  or  the  other  was  a  matter  of 
complete indifference, from the moment that one ceased to believe in anything but 
success.    Thus he authorized himself to be both at the same time.    “Fact is  all,” said 
Mussolini.     And  Hitler  added:  “When  the  race  is  in  danger  of  being  oppressed  ... 
the  question  of  legality  plays  only  a  secondary  role.”     Moreover,  in  that  the  race 
must always be menaced in order to exist, there is never any legality.    “I am ready  
to sign anything, to agree to anything.... As far as I am concerned, I am capable, in 
complete  good  faith,  of  signing  treaties  today  and  of  dispassionately  tearing  them 
up  tomorrow  if  the  future  of  the  German  people  is  at  stake.”     Before  he  declared 
war, mo reover, Hitler made the statement to his generals that no one was going to 
ask the victor if he had told the truth or not.    The leitmotiv of Göring’s defence at 
the  Nuremberg   trials returned time and again to this theme: “The victor  will always 
be the judge, and the vanquished will always be the accused.”    That is a point that 
can certainly be argued.    But then it is hard to understand  Rosenberg   when he said 
during the  Nuremberg   trials  that he had not foreseen that the Nazi myth would lead 
to  murder.     When  the  English  prosecuting  attorney  observes  that  “from  Mein 
Kampf   the  road  led  straight  to  the  gas  chambers  of  Maidenek,”  he  touches  on  the 
  129  

real subject of the trial, that of the histori c responsibilities of Western nihilism and 
the  only  one  which,  nevertheless,  was  not  really  discussed  at  Nuremberg,  for 
reasons  only  too  evident.     A  trial  cannot  be  conducted  by  announcing  the  general 
culpability  of  a  civilization.     Only  the  actual  deeds  which,  at  least,  stank  in  the 
nostrils of the entire world were brought to judgement.  
         Hitler,  in  any  case,  invented  the  perpetual  motion  of  conquest,  without  which 
he would have been nothing at all.    But the perpetual enemy is  perpetual terror, this 
time on the level of the State.    The State is identified with the “apparatus”; that is 
to  say,  with  the  sum  total  of  mechanisms  of  conquest  and  repression.     Conquest 
directed toward the interior of the country is called repression o r propaganda (“the 
first step on the road to hell,” according to Frank.)    Directed toward the exterior, it 
creates  the  army.     All  problems  are  thus  militarized  and  posed  in  terms  of  power 
and efficiency.    The supreme commander determines policy and also de als with all 
the main problems of administration.    This principle, axiomatic as far as strategy is 
concerned, is applied to civil life in general.    One leader, one people, signifies one 
master and millions of slaves.    The political intermediaries who are,  in all societies, 
the  guarantors  of  freedom,  disappear  to  make  way  for  a  booted  and  spurred 
Jehovah who rules over the silent masses or, which comes to the same thing, over 
masses  who  shout  slogans  at  the  top  of  their  lungs.     There  is  no  organ  of 
conciliat ion or mediation interposed between the leader and the people, nothing in 
fact  but  the  apparatus  –   in  other  words,  the  party  –   which  is  the  emanation  of  the 
leader and the tool of his will to oppress.    In this way the first and sole principle of 
this degra ded form of mysticism is born, the  Führerprinzip , which restores idolatry 
and a debased deity to the world of nihilism.  
         Mussolini, the Latin lawyer, contented himself with reasons of State, which he 
transformed, with a great deal of rhetoric, into t he absolute.    “Nothing beyond the 
State,  above  the  State,  against  the  State.     Everything  to  the  State,  for  the  State,  in 
the  State.”     The  Germany  of  Hitler  gave  his  false  reasoning  its  real  expression, 
which was that of a religion.    “Our divine mission,” s ays a Nazi newspaper during 
a  party  congress,  “was  to  lead  everyone  back  to  his  origins,  back  to  the  common 
Mother.     It  was  truly  a  divine  mission.”     These  origins  are  thus  to  be  found  in 
primitive  howls  and  shrieks.     Who  is  the  god  in  question?     An  offici al  party 
declaration answers that: “All of us here below believe in Adolf Hitler, our Führer 
...  and  [we  confess]  that  National  Socialism  is  the  only  faith  which  can  lead  our 
people  to  salvation.”     The  commandments  of  the  leader,  standing  in  the  burning 
bush  of spotlights, on a Sinai of planks and flags, therefore comprise both law and 
virtue.     If  the  superhuman  microphones  give  orders  only  once  for  a  crime  to  be 
committed,  then  the  crime  is  handed  down  from  chief  to  subchief  until  it  reaches 
the slave who re ceives orders without being able to pass them on to anybody.    One 
of the  Dachau   executioners weeps in prison and says: “I only obeyed orders.    The 
  130  

Führer  and  the  Reichsführer  alone  planned  all  this,  and  then  they  ran  away.    
Gluecks  received orders from Kaltenbrunner and, finally, I received orders to carry 
out  the  shootings.     I  have  been  left  holding  the  bag  because  I  was  only  a  little 
Hauptsharführer  and because I couldn’t hand it on any lower down the line.    Now 
they say that I am  the assassin.”    Göring during the trial proclaimed his loyalty to 
the  Führer  and  said  that  “there  was  still  a  code  of  honour  in  that  accursed  life.”    
Honour  lay  in  obedience,  which  was  often  confused  with  crime.     Military  law 
punishes  disobedience  by  death ,  and  its  honour  is  servitude.     When  all  the  world 
has become military, then crime consists in not killing if orders insist on it.  
         Orders,  unfortunately,  seldom  insist  on  good  deeds.     Pure  doctrinal  dynamism 
cannot  be  directed  toward  good,  but  only  toward  efficacy.     As  long  as  enemies 
exist,  terror  will  exist;  and  there  will  be  enemies  as  long  as  dynamism  exists  to 
ensure that: “All the influences liable to undermine the sovereignty of the people, 
as exercised by the Führer with the assistance of the  party ... must be eliminated.”    
Enemies   are   heretics   and   must   be   converted   by   preaching   or   propaganda, 
exterminated  by  inquisition  or  by  the  Gestapo.     The  result  is  that  man,  if  he  is  a 
member of the party, is no more than a tool in the hands of the Führer,  a cog in the 
apparatus,  or,  if  he  is  the  enemy  of  the  Führer,  a  waste  product  of  the  machine.    
The  impetus  toward  irrationality  of  this  movement,  born  of  rebellion,  now  even 
goes  so  far  as  to  propose  suppressing  all  that  makes  man  more  than  a  cog  in  the 
m achine;  in  other  words,  rebellion  itself.     The  romantic  individualism  of  the 
German  revolutions  finally  satiated  in  the  world  of  inanimate  objects.     Irrational 
terror  transforms  men  into  objects,  “planetary  bacilli,”  according  to  Hitler’s 
formula.     It  prop oses  the  destruction,  not  only  of  the  individual,  of  reflection, 
solidarity,  and  the  urge  to  absolute  love.     Propaganda  and  torture  are  the  direct 
means  of  bringing  about  disintegration;  more  destructive  still  are  systematic 
degradation,  identification  wit h  the  cynical  criminal,  and  forced  complicity.    The 
triumph  of  the  man  who  kills  or  tortures  is  marred  by  only  one  shadow:  he  is 
unable to feel that he is innocent.    Thus, he must create guilt in his victim so that, 
in  a  world  that  has  no  direction,  univer sal  guilt  will  authorize  no  other  course  of 
action than the use of force and give its blessing to nothing but success.    When the 
concept of innocence disappears from the mind of the innocent victim himself, the 
value of power establishes a definitive rule  over a world in despair.    That is why an 
unworthy  and  cruel  penitence  reigns  over  this  world  where  only  the  stones  are 
innocent.     The  condemned  are  compelled  to  hang  one  another.     Even  the  innocent 
cry of maternity is stifled, as in the case of the Greek m other who was forced by an 
officer  to  choose  which  of  her  three  sons  was  to  be  shot.     This  is  the  final 
realization  of  freedom:  to  power  to  kill  and  degrade  saves  the  servile  soul  from 
utter  emptiness.     The  hymn  of  German  freedom  is  sung,  to  the  music  of  a  
prisoners’ orchestra, in the camps of death.  
  131  

         The  crimes  of  the  Hitler  regime,  among  them  the  massacre  of  the  Jews,  are 
without  precedent  in  history  because  history  gives  no  other  example  of  a  doctrine 
of  such  total  destruction  being  able  to  seize  t he  levers  of  the  command  of  a 
civilized nation.    But above all, for the first time in history, the rulers of a country 
have used their immense power to establish a  mystique  beyond the bounds of any 
ethical  considerations.     The  first  attempt  to  found  a  Chur ch  on  nihilism  was  paid 
for  by  complete  annihilation.     The  destruction  of  Lidice   demonstrates  clearly  that 
the systematic and scientific aspect of the Nazi movement really hides an irrational 
drive that can only be interpreted as a  drive of despair and arrogance.    Until then, 
there were supposedly only two possible attitudes for a conqueror toward a village 
that  was  considered  rebellious.     Either  calculated  repression  and  cold - blooded 
execution of hostages, or a savage and necessaril y brief sack by enraged soldiers.    
Lidice   was destroyed by both methods simultaneously.    It illustrates the ravages of 
that  irrational  form  of  reason  which  is  the  only  value  that  can  be  found  in  the 
whole  story.     Not  only  were  all  t he  houses  burned  to  the  ground,  the  hundred  and 
seventy - four men of the village shot, the two hundred and three women deported, 
and the three hundred children transferred elsewhere to be educated in the religion 
of  the  Führer,  but  special  teams  spent  month s  at  work  levelling  the  terrain  with 
dynamite,  destroying  the  very  stones,  filling  in  the  village  pond,  and  finally 
diverting the course of the river.    After that,  Lidice   was really nothing more than a 
mere  possibility,  according  to   the  logic  of  the  movement.     To  make  assurance 
doubly  sure,  the  cemetery  was  emptied  of  its  dead,  who  might  have  been  a 
perpetual reminder that once something existed in this place.    [It is striking to note 
that  atrocities  reminiscent  of  these  excesses  wer e  committed  in  colonies  (India, 
1857;  Algeria,  1945;  etc.)  by  European  nations  that  in  reality  obeyed  the  same 
irrational prejudice of racial superiority.]  
         The nihilist revolution, which is expressed historically in the Hitlerian regime, 
thus  only  a roused  an  insensate  passion  for  nothingness,  which  ended  by  turning 
against  itself.     Negation,  this  time  at  any  rate,  and  despite  Hegel,  has  not  been 
creative.     Hitler  presents  the  example,  perhaps  unique  in  history,  of  a  tyrant  who 
left absolutely nothing  to his credit.    For himself, for his people, and for the world, 
he  was  nothing  but  the  epitome  of  suicide  and  murder.     Seven  million  Jews 
assassinated,  seven  million  Europeans  deported  or  killed,  ten  million  war  victims, 
are perhaps not sufficient to allo w history to pass judgement: history is accustomed 
to  murderers.     But  the  very  destruction  of  Hitler’s  final  justification  –   that  is,  the 
German  nation  –   henceforth  makes  this  man,  whose  presence  in  history  for  years 
on end haunted the minds of millions of  men, into an inconsistent and contemptible 
phantom.    Speer’s deposition at the  Nuremberg   trials showed that Hitler, though he 
could  have  stopped  the  war  before  the  point  of  total  disaster,  really  wanted 
universal  suicide  and  the  ma terial  and  political  destruction  of  the  German  nation.    
  132  

The only value for him remained, until the bitter end, success.    Since  Germany   had 
lost  the  war,  she  was  cowardly  and  treacherous  and  she  deserved  to  die.     “If  the 
German  peopl e  are  incapable  of  victory,  they  are  unworthy  to  live.”     Hitler 
therefore decided to drag them with him to the grave and to make their destruction 
an  apotheosis,  when  the  Russian  cannon  were  already  splitting  apart  the  walls  of 
his  palace  in  Berlin.     Hitler,  Göring,  who  wanted  to  see  his  bones  placed  in  a 
marble  tomb,  Goebbels,  Himmler,  Ley,  killed  themselves  in  dugouts  or  in  cells.    
But  their  deaths  were  deaths  for  nothing;  they  were  like  a  bad  dream,  a  puff  of 
smoke  that  vanishes.     Neither  efficacious  nor  exemplary,  they  consecrate  the 
bloodthirsty  vanity  of  nihilism.     “They  thought  they  were  free,”  Frank  cries 
hysterically;  “didn’t  they  known  that  no  one  escapes  from  Hitlerism?”    They  did 
not know; nor did they know that the negati on of everything is in itself a form of 
servitude  and  that  real  freedom  is  an  inner  submission  to  a  value  which  defies 
history and its successes.  
          
         But  the  Fascist  mystics,  even  though  they  aimed  at  gradually  dominating  the 
world, really never  had pretensions to a universal empire.    At the very most, Hitler, 
astonished  at  his  own  victories,  was  diverted  from  the  provincial  origins  of  his 
movement  toward  the  indefinite  dream  of  an  empire  of  the  Germans  that  had 
nothing to do with the universal C ity.    Russian Communism, on the contrary, by its 
very  origins,  openly  aspires  to  world  empire.     That  is  its  strength,  its  deliberate 
significance,  and  its  importance  in  our  history.     Despite  appearances,  the  German 
revolution had no hope of a future.    It w as only a primitive impulse whose ravages 
have  been  greater  than  its  real  ambitions.     Russian  Communism,  on  the  contrary, 
has  appropriated  the  metaphysical  ambition  that  this  book  describes,  the  erection, 
after  the  death  of  God,  of  a  city  of  man  finally  de ified.     The  name  revolution ,  to 
which   Hitler’s   adventure   had   no   claim,   was   once   deserved   by   Russian 
Communism,  and  although  it  apparently  deserves  it  no  longer,  it  claims  that  one 
day  it  will  deserve  it  forever.     For  the  first  time  in  history,  a  doctrine  a nd  a 
movement based on an Empire in arms has as its purpose definitive revolution and 
the  final  unification  of  the  world.     It  remains  for  us  to  examine  this  pretension  in 
detail.    Hitler, at the height of his madness, wanted to fix the course of history fo r a 
thousand years.    He believed himself to be on the point of doing so, and the realist 
philosophers  of  the  conquered  nations  were  preparing  to  acknowledge  this  and  to 
excuse it, when the Battle of Britain and  Stalingrad   threw him  back on the path of 
death  and  set  history  once  more  on  the  march.     But,  as  indefatigable  as  history 
itself,  the  claim  of  the  human  race  to  divinity  is  once  more  brought  to  life,  with 
more  seriousness,  more  efficiency,  and  more  reason,  under  the  auspices  of   the 
rational State as it is to be found in  Russia.  
   
  133  

   
   
State Terrorism and Rational Terror  
   
*  
   
         Marx, in nineteenth - century  England, in the midst of the terrible sufferings 
caused  by  the  transition   from  an  agricultural  economy  to  an  industrial 
economy,  had  plenty  of  material  for  constructing  a  striking  analysis  of 
primitive  capitalism.     As  for  Socialism,  apart  from  the  lessons,  which  for  the 
most  part  contradicted  his  doctrines,  that  he  could  draw  f rom  the  French 
Revolution,  he  was  obliged  to  speak  in  the  future  tense  and  in  the  abstract.    
Thus  it  is  not  astonishing  that  he  could  blend  in  his  doctrine  the  most  valid 
critical  method  with  a  Utopian  Messianism  of  highly  dubious  value.     The 
unfortunate t hing is that his critical method, which, by definition, should have 
been  adjusted  to  reality,  has  found  itself  further  and  further  separated  from 
facts  to  the  exact  extent  that  it  wanted  to  remain  faithful  to  the  prophecy.     It 
was  thought,  and  this  is  alre ady  an  indication  of  the  future,  that  what  was 
conceded  to  truth  could  be  taken  for  Messianism.     This  contradiction  is 
perceptible  in  Marx’s  lifetime.     The  doctrine  of  the  Communist  Manifesto   is 
no  longer  strictly  correct  twenty  years  later,  when  Das  Kapit al   appears.     Das 
Kapital ,  nevertheless,  remained  incomplete,  because  Marx  was  influenced  at 
the end of his life by a new and prodigious mass of social and economic facts 
to  which  the  system  had  to  be  adapted  anew.     These  facts  concerned,  in 
particular,  Russia,  which  he  had  spurned  until  then.     We  now  know  that  the 
Marx - Engels  Institute  in  Moscow   ceased,  in  1935,  the  publication  of  the 
complete  works  of  Marx  while  more  than  thirty  volumes  still  remained 
unpubli shed;  doubtless  the  content  of  these  volumes  was  not  “Marxist” 
enough.  
         Since  Marx’s  death,  in  any  case,  only  a  minority  of  disciples  have  remained 
faithful to his method.    The Marxists who have made history have, on the contrary, 
appropriated  the  pr ophecy  and  the  apocalyptic  aspects  of  his  doctrine  in  order  to 
realize  a  Marxist  revolution,  in  the  exact  circumstances  under  which  Marx  had 
foreseen  that  a  revolution  could  not  take  place.     It  can  be  said  of  Marx  that  the 
greater part of his predictions b egan to become an object of increasing faith.    The 
reason   is   simple:   the   predictions   were   short - term   and   could   be   controlled.    
Prophecy  functions  on  a  very  long - term  basis  and  has  as  one  of  its  properties  a 
characteristic that is the very source of strengt h of all religions: the impossibility of 
proof.    When the predictions failed to come true, the prophecies remained the only 
  134  

hope;  with  the  result  that  they  alone  rule  over  our  history.     Marxism  and  its 
successors will be examined here from the angle of pro phecy.  
   
   
         The Bourgeois Prophecy  
   
         Marx is simultaneously a bourgeois and a revolutionary prophet.    The latter is 
better known than the former.    But the former explains many things in the career of 
the  latter.     A  Messianism  of  Christian  and  bourgeois  origin,  which  was  both 
historical  and  scientific,  influenced  his  revolutionary  Messianism,  which  sprang 
from German ideology and the French rebellions.  
         In contrast to the ancient world, the unity of the Christian and Marxist world is 
aston ishing.     The  two  doctrines  have  in  common  a  vision  of  the  world  which 
completely separates them from the Greek attitude.    Jaspers defines this very well: 
“It  is  a  Christian  way  of  thinking  to  consider  that  the  history  of  man  is  strictly 
unique.”     The  Chris tians  were  the  first  to  consider  human  life  and  the  course  of 
events as a history that is unfolding from a fixed beginning toward a definite end, 
in  the  course  of  which  man  achieves  his  salvation  or  earns  his  punishment.     The 
philosophy  of  history  springs  from  a  Christian  representation,  which  is  surprising 
to  a  Greek  mind.     The  Greek  idea  of  evolution  has  nothing  in  common  with  our 
idea  of  historical  evolution.     The  difference  between  the  two  is  the  difference 
between a circle and a straight line.    The Gre eks imagined the history of the world 
as  cyclical.     Aristotle,  to  give  a  definite  example,  did  not  believe  that  the  time  in 
which he was living was subsequent to the Trojan War.    Christianity was obliged, 
in  order  to  penetrate  the  Mediterranean  world,  to  H ellenize  itself,  and  its  doctrine 
then  became  more  flexible.     But  its  originality  lay  in  introducing  into  the  ancient 
world two ideas that had never before been associated: the idea of history and the 
idea of punishment.    In its concept of mediation, Chris tianity is Greek.    In its idea 
of history, Christianity is Judaic and will be found again in German ideology.  
         It  is  easier  to  understand  this  dissimilarity  by  understanding  the  hostility  of 
historical  methods  of  thought  toward  nature,  which  they  con sidered  as  an  object 
not for contemplation but for transformation.    For the Christian, as for the Marxist, 
nature must be subdued.    The Greeks are of the opinion that it is better to obey it.    
The  love  of  the  ancients  for  the  cosmos  was  completely  unknown  to  the  first 
Christians,  who,  moreover,  awaited  with  impatience  an  imminent  end  of  the 
world.     Hellenism,  in  association  with  Christianity,  then  produces  the  admirable 
efflorescence  of  the  Albigensian  heresy  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  Saint 
Francis.    But with the Inquisition and the destruction of the Albigensian heresy, the 
Church  again  parts  company  with  the  world  and  with  beauty,  and  gives  back  to 
history  its  pre - eminence  over  nature.     Jaspers  is  again  right  in  saying:  “It  is  the 
  135  

Christian  attitud e  that  gradually  empties  the  world  of  its  substance  ...  since  the 
substance  resided  in  a  conglomeration  of  symbols.”     These  symbols  are  those  of 
the  drama  of  the  divinity,  which  unfolds  throughout  time.     Nature  is  only  the 
setting  for  this  drama.     The  delica te  equilibrium  between  humanity  and  nature, 
man’s  consent  to  the  world,  which  gives  ancient  thought  it  distinction  and  its 
refulgence, was first shattered for the benefit of history by Christianity.    The entry 
into this history of the Nordic peoples, who h ave no tradition of friendship with the 
world,  precipitated  this  trend.     From  the  moment  that  the  divinity  of  Christ  is 
denied,  or  that,  thanks  to  the  efforts  of  German  ideology,  He  only  symbolizes  the 
man - god,  the  concept  of  mediation  disappears  and  a  Jud aic  world  reappears.     The 
implacable  god  of  war  rules  again;  all  beauty  if  insulated  as  the  source  of  idle 
pleasures, nature itself is enslaved.    Marx, from this point of view, is the Jeremiah 
of the god of history and the  Saint Aug ustine   of the revolution.    That this explains 
the  really  revolutionary  aspects  of  his  doctrine  can  be  demonstrated  by  a  simple 
comparison with his one contemporary who was an intelligent theorist of reaction.  
         Joseph  de  Maistre  refutes  Jacobinism  and   Calvinism,  two  doctrines  which 
summed up for him “everything bad that has been thought for three centuries,” in 
the name of a Christian philosophy of history.    To counter schisms and heresies, he 
wanted to re - create “the robe without a seam” of a really c atholic Church.    His aim 
–   and  this  can  be  seen  at  the  period  of  his  Masonic  adventures  –   is  the  universal 
Christian city.    Maistre dreams of the protoplastic Adam, or the Universal Man, of 
Fabre d’Olivet, who will be the rallying - point of individual souls , and of the Adam 
Kadmon of the cabalists, who preceded the Fall and who must now be brought to 
life again.    When the Church has reclaimed the world, she will endow this first and 
last Adam with a body.    In the  Soirées in St. Petersburg  there is a mass of  formulas 
on  this  subject  which  bear  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  Messianic  formulas  of 
Hegel  and  Marx.     In  both  the  terrestrial  and  the  celestial  Jerusalem   that  Maistre 
imagines, “all the inhabitants pervaded by the same spirit wil l pervade one another 
and  will  reflect  one  another’s  happiness.”     Maistre  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  deny 
personal survival after death; he only dreams of a mysterious unity reconquered in 
which,  “evil  having  been  annihilated,  there  will  be  no  more  passion  n or  self -
interest,” and where “man will be reunited with himself when his double standard 
will be obliterated and his two centres unified.”  
         In the city of absolute knowledge, where the eyes of the mind and the eyes of 
the  body  became  as  one,  Hegel  al so  reconciled  contradictions.     But  Maistre’s 
vision  again  coincides  with  that  of  Marx,  who  proclaims  “the  end  of  the  quarrel 
between essence and existence, between freedom and necessity.”    Evil, for Maistre, 
is nothing but the destruction of unity.    But hu manity must rediscover its unity on 
earth  and  in  heaven.     By  what  means?     Maistre,  who  is  an  ancient  regime  
reactionary, is less explicit on this point than Marx.    Meanwhile he was waiting for 
  136  

a  great  religious  revolution  of  which  1789  was  only  the  “appall ing  preface.”     He 
quotes  Saint John, who asks that we  make  truth, which is exactly the programme of 
the  modern  revolutionary  mind,  and  Saint  Paul,  who  announces  that  “the  last 
enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is   death.”     Humanity  marches,  by  way  of  crimes, 
violence,   and   death,   toward   this   final   consummation,   which   will   justify 
everything.     The  earth  for  Maistre  is  nothing  but  “an  immense  altar  on  which  all 
the  living  must  be  sacrificed,  without  end,  without  limit ,  without  respite,  until  the 
end  of  time,  until  the  extinction  of  evil,  until  the  death  of  death.”     His  fatalism, 
however,  is  active  as  well  as  passive.     “Man  must  act  as  if  he  were  capable  of  all 
things and resign himself as if he were capable of nothing. ”    We find in Marx the 
same sort of creative fatalism.    Maistre undoubtedly justifies the established order.    
But  Marx  justifies  the  order  that  is  established  in  his  time.     The  most  eloquent 
eulogy of capitalism was made by its greatest enemy.    Marx is onl y anti - capitalist 
insofar as capitalism is out of date.    Another order must be established which will 
demand, in the name of history, a new conformity.    As for the means, they are the 
same  for  Marx  as  for  Maistre:  political  realism,  discipline,  force.     Whe n  Maistre 
adopts  Bossuet’s  bold  idea  that  “the  heretic  is  who  has  personal  ideas”  –   in  other 
words,  ideas  that  have  no  reference  to  either  a  social  or  a  religious  tradition  –   he 
provides  the  formula  for  the  most  ancient  and  the  most  modern  of  conformities.    
The  attorney  general,  pessimistic  choirmaster  of  the  executioner,  announces  our 
diplomatic prosecutors.  
         It goes without saying that these resemblances do not make Maistre a Marxist, 
nor Marx a traditional Christian.    Marxist atheism is absolute.     But nevertheless it 
does  reinstate  the  supreme  being  on  the  level  of  humanity.     “Criticism  of  religion 
leads  to  this  doctrine  that  man  is  for  man  the  supreme  being.     From  this  angle, 
socialism  is  therefore  an  enterprise  for  the  deification  of  man  and  has  a ssumed 
some  of  the  characteristics  of  traditional  religions.  [Saint  Simon,  who  influences 
Marx,   is,   moreover,   influenced   himself   by   Maistre   and   Bonald.]      This 
reconciliation,  in  any  case,  is  instructive  as  concerns  the  Christian  origins  of  all 
types of his toric Messianism, even revolutionary Messianism.    The only difference 
lies in a change of symbols.    With Maistre, as with Marx, the end of time realizes 
Vigny’s  ambitious  dream,  the  reconciliation  of  the  wolf  and  the  lamb,  the 
procession of criminal and vi ctim to the same altar, the reopening or opening of a 
terrestrial  paradise.     For  Marx,  the  laws  of  history  reflect  material  reality;  for 
Maistre, they reflect divine reality.    But for the former, matter is the substance; for 
the latter, the substance of hi s god is incarnate here below.    Eternity separates them 
at  the  beginning,  but  the  doctrines  of  history  end  by  reuniting  them  in  a  realistic 
conclusion.  
         Maistre hated  Greece   (it also irked Marx, who found any form of beauty un der 
the  sun  completely  alien),  of  which  he  said  that  it  had  corrupted  Europe   by 
  137  

bequeathing  it  its  spirit  of  division.     It  would  have  been  more  appropriate  to  say 
that Greek thought was the spirit of unity, precisely because it coul d not do without 
intermediaries, and because it was, on the contrary, quite unaware of the historical 
spirit  of  totality,  which  was  invented  by  Christianity  and  which,  cut  off  from  its 
religious  origins,  threatens  the  life  of  Europe  today.     “Is  there  a  fab le,  a  form  of 
madness, a vice which has not a Greek name, a Greek emblem, or a Greek mask?”    
We  can  ignore  the  outraged  Puritanism.     This  passionate  denunciation  expresses 
the  spirit  of  modernity  at  variance  with  the  ancient  world  and  in  direct  continuity 
with  authoritarian  socialism,  which  is  about  to  deconsecrate  Christianity  and 
incorporate it in a Church bent on conquest.  
   
         Marx’s scientific Messianism is itself of bourgeois origin.    Progress, the future 
of science, the cult of technology and of  production, are bourgeois myths, which in 
the  nineteenth  century  became  dogma.     We  note  that  the  Communist  Manifesto  
appeared in the same year as Renan’s  Future of Science .    This profession of faith, 
which   would   cause   considerable   consternation   to   a   contem porary   reader, 
nevertheless gives the most accurate idea of the almost mystic hopes aroused in the 
nineteenth  century  by  the  expansion  of  industry  and  the  surprising  progress  made 
by science.    This hope is the hope of bourgeois society itself  –  the final b eneficiary 
of technical progress.  
         The  idea  of  progress  is  contemporary  with  the  age  of  enlightenment  and  with 
the bourgeois revolution.    Of course, certain sources of its inspiration can be found 
in  the  seventeenth  century;  the  quarrel  between  the  A ncients  and  the  Moderns 
already  introduced  into  European  ideology  the  perfectly  absurd  conception  of  an 
artistic  form  of  progress.     In  a  more  serious  fashion,  the  idea  of  a  science  that 
steadily  increases  its  conquests  can  also  be  derived  from  Cartesian  ph ilosophy.    
But Turgot, in 1750, is the first person the give a clear definition of the new faith.    
His  treatise  on  the  progress  of  the  human  mind  basically  recapitulates  Bossuet’s 
universal  history.     The  idea  of  progress  alone  is  substituted  for  the  divine   will.    
“The total mass of the human race, by alternating stages of calm and agitation, of 
good and evil, always marches, though with dragging footsteps, toward greater and 
greater  perfection.”     This  optimistic  statement  will  furnish  the  basic  ingredient  o f 
the rhetorical observations of Condorcet, the official theorist of progress, which he 
linked with the progress of the State and of which he was also the official victim in 
that  the  enlightened  State  forced  him  to  poison  himself.     Sorel   [ Les  Illusions  du 
progress ]  was  perfectly  correct  in  saying  that  the  philosophy  of  progress  was 
exactly  the  philosophy  to  suit  a  society  eager  to  enjoy  the  material  prosperity 
derived  from  technical  progress.     When  we  are  assured  that  tomorrow,  in  th e 
natural order of events, will be better than today, we can enjoy ourselves in peace.    
Progress,  paradoxically,  can  be  used  to  justify  conservatism.     A  draft  drawn  on 
  138  

confidence in the future, it allows the master to have a clear conscience.    The slave 
an d  those  whose  present  life  is  miserable  and  who  can  find  no  consolation  in  the 
heavens are assured that at least the future belongs to them.    The future is the only 
kind of property that the masters willingly concede to the slaves.  
         These  reflections   are  not,  as  we  can  see,  out  of  date.     But  they  are  not  out  of 
date  because  the  revolutionary  spirit  has  resumed  the  ambiguous  and  convenient 
theme  of  progress.     Of  course,  it  is  not  the  same  kind  of  progress;  Marx  cannot 
pour  enough  scorn  on  bourgeois  rat ional  optimism.     His  concept  of  reason,  as  we 
shall  see,  is  different.     But  arduous  progress  toward  a  future  of  reconciliation 
nevertheless  defines  Marx’s  thought.     Hegel  and  Marxism  destroyed  the  formal 
values  that  lighted  for  the  Jacobins  the  straight  ro ad  of  this  optimistic  version  of 
history.    In this way they preserved the idea of the forward march of history, which 
was simply confounded by them with social progress and declared necessary. Thus 
they  continued  on  the  path  of  nineteenth - century  bourgeois   thought.     Tocqueville, 
enthusiastically  succeeded  by  Pecqueur  (who  influenced  Marx),  had  solemnly 
proclaimed that: “The gradual and progressive development of equality is both the 
past and the future of the history of man.”    To obtain Marxism, substitute  the term 
level of production  for equality and imagine that in the final stage of production a 
transformation takes place and a reconciled society is achieved.  
         As for the necessity of evolution, Auguste Comte, with the law of three stages 
of  man,  whi ch  he  formulates  in  1822,  gives  the  most  systematic  definition  of  it.    
Comte’s   conclusions   are   curiously   like   those   finally   accepted   by   scientific 
socialism.    [The last volume of  Cours de philosophie positive  appeared in the same 
year   as   Feuerbach’s  Essenc e   of   Christianity .]      Positivism   demonstrates   with 
considerable   clarity   the   repercussions   of   the   ideological   revolution   of   the 
nineteenth  century,  of  which  Marx  is  one  of  the  representatives,  and  which 
consisted in relegating to the end of history the Garde n of Eden and the Revelation, 
which tradition had always placed at the beginning.    The positivist era, which was 
bound  to  follow  the  metaphysical  era  and  the  theological  era,  was  to  mark  the 
advent  of  a  religion  of  humanity.     Henri  Gouhier  gives  an  exact  d efinition  of 
Comte’s  enterprise  when  he  says  that  his  concern  was  to  discover  a  man  without 
any traces of God.    Comte’s primary aim, which was to substitute everywhere the 
relative for the absolute, was quickly transformed, by force of circumstances, into 
the  deification  of  the  relative  and  into  preaching  a  religion  that  is  both  universal 
and   without   transcendence.      Comte   saw   in   the   Jacobin   cult   of   Reason   an 
anticipation of positivism and considered himself, with perfect justification, as the 
real successor  of the revolutionaries of 1789.    He continued and enlarged the scope 
of   this   revolution   by   suppressing   the   transcendence   of   principles   and   by 
systematically founding the religion of the species.    His formula: “Set aside God in 
the  name  of  religion,”  meant   nothing  else  but  this.     Inaugurating  a  mania  that  has 
  139  

since enjoyed a great vogue, he wanted to be the  Saint Paul   of this new religion and 
replace  the  Catholicism  of  Rome  by  the  Catholicism  of  Paris.     We  know  that  he 
wanted  to  see  in  all  the  cathedrals  “the  statue  of  deified  humanity  on  the  former 
altar of God.”    He calculated with considerable accuracy that positivism would be 
preached in Notre - Dame before 1860.    This calculation was not so ridiculous as it 
seems.     Notre - Dame,  in  a   state  of  siege,  still  resists:  but  the  religion  of  humanity 
was  effectively  preached  toward  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  Marx, 
despite  the  fact  that  he  had  not  read  Comte,  was  one  of  its  prophets.     Marx  only 
understood that a religion which did  not embrace transcendence should properly be 
called  politics.     Comte  knew  it  too,  after  all,  or  at  least  he  understood  that  his 
religion was primarily a form of social idolatry and that it implied political realism, 
[“Everything  that  develops  spontaneously   is  necessarily  legitimate,  for  a  certain 
time.”]  the  negation  of  individual  rights,  and  the  establishment  of  despotism.     A 
society  whose  experts  would  be  priests,  two  thousand  bankers  and  technicians 
ruling over a Europe of one hundred and twenty million  inhabitants where private 
life  would  be  absolutely  identified  with  public  life,  where  absolute  obedience  “of 
action,  of  thought,  and  of  feeling”  would  be  given  to  the  high  priest  who  would 
reign over everything, such was Comte’s Utopia, which announces wha t might be 
called  the  horizontal  religions  of  our  times.     It  is  true  that  it  is  Utopian  because, 
convinced of the enlightening powers of science, Comte forgot to provide a police 
force.    Others will be more practical; the religions of humanity will be effe ctively 
founded on the blood and suffering of humanity.  
         Finally,  if  we  add  to  these  observations  the  remark  that  Marx  owes  to  the 
bourgeois economists the idea which he claims exclusively as his own, of the part 
played  by  industrial  production  in  th e  development  of  humanity,  and  that  he  took 
the  essentials  of  his  theory  of  work - value  from  Ricardo,  an  economist  of  the 
bourgeois  industrial  revolution,  our  right  to  say  that  his  prophecy  is  bourgeois  in 
content  will  doubtless  be  recognized.     These  compar isons  only  aim  to  show  that 
Marx,  instead  of  being,  as  the  fanatical  Marxists  of  our  day  would  have  it,  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  the  prophecy,  [According  to  Zhdanov,  Marxism  is  “a 
philosophy  that  is  qualitatively  different  from  any  previous  system.”     This  means, 
for  example,  either  that  Marxism  is  not  Cartesianism,  which  no  one  would  dream 
of  denying,  or  that  Marxism  owes  essentially  nothing  to  Cartesianism,  which  is 
absurd.]  participates  on  the  contrary  in  human  nature:  he  is  an   heir  before  he  is  a 
pioneer.     His  doctrine,  which  he  wanted  to  be  a  realist  doctrine,  actually  was 
realistic during the period of the religion of science, of Darwinian evolutionism, of 
the   steam   engine   and   the   textile   industry.      A   hundred   years   later,   sci ence 
encounters relativity, uncertainty, and chance; the economy must take into account 
electricity,  metallurgy,  and  atomic  production.     The  inability  of  pure  Marxism  to 
assimilate  these  successive  discoveries  was  shared  by  the  bourgeois  optimism  of 
  140  

Marx’s  time.    It renders ridiculous the Marxist pretension of maintaining that truths 
one hundred years old are unalterable without ceasing to be scientific.    Nineteenth -
century  Messianism,  whether  it  is  revolutionary  or  bourgeois,  has  not  restated  the 
successiv e developments of this science and this history, which to different degrees 
they have deified.  
   
   
         The Revolutionary Prophecy  
   
         Marx’s  prophecy  is  also  revolutionary  in  principle.     In  that  all  human  reality 
has  its  origins  in  the  fruits  of  pr oduction,  historical  evolution  is  revolutionary 
because  the  economy  is  revolutionary.     At  each  level  of  production  the  economy 
arouses the antagonisms that destroy, to the profit of a superior level of production, 
the  corresponding  society.     Capitalism  is  the  last  of  these  stages  of  production 
because it produces the conditions in which every antagonism will be resolved and 
where  there  will  be  no  more  economy.     On  that  day  our  history  will  become  pre -
history.     This  representation  is  the  same  as  Hegel’s,  but   in  another  perspective.    
The dialectic is considered from the angle of production and work instead of from 
the  angle  of  the  spirit.     Marx,  of  course,  never  spoke  himself  about  dialectical 
materialism.    He left to his heirs the task of extolling this logic al monstrosity.    But 
he says, at the same time, that reality is dialectic and that it is economic.    Reality is 
a  perpetual  process  of  evolution,  propelled  by  the  fertile  impact  of  antagonisms 
which  are  resolved  each  time  into  a  superior  synthesis  which,  it self,  creates  its 
opposite  and  again  causes  history  to  advance.     What  Hegel  affirmed  concerning 
reality  advancing  toward  the  spirit,  Marx  affirms  concerning  economy  on  the 
march  toward  the  classless  society;  everything  is  both  itself  and  its  opposite,  and 
this  contradiction  compels  it  to  become  something  else.     Capitalism,  because  it  is 
bourgeois, reveals itself as revolutionary and prepares the way for communism.  
         Marx’s originality lies in affirming that history is simultaneously dialectic and 
econo mic.     Hegel,  more  extreme,  affirmed  that  it  was  both  matter  and  spirit.    
Moreover,  it  could  only  be  matter  to  the  extent  that  it  was  spirit  and  vice  versa.    
Marx   denies   the   spirit   as   the   definitive   substance   and   affirms   historical 
materialism.    We can imme diately remark, with Berdyaev, on the impossibility of 
reconciling  the  dialectic  with  materialism.     There  can  be  a  dialectic  only  of  the 
mind.    But even materialism itself is an ambiguous idea.    Only to form this word, it 
must be admitted that there is som ething more in the world than matter alone.    For 
even  stronger  reasons,  this  criticism  applies  to  historical  materialism.     History  is 
distinguished  from  nature  precisely  by  the  fact  that  it  transforms  science  and 
passion  by  means  of  will.     Marx,  then,  is  n ot  a  pure  materialist,  for  the  obvious 
reason  that  there  is  neither  a  pure  nor  an  absolute  materialism.     So  far  is  it  from 
  141  

being pure or absolute that it recognizes that if weapons can secure the triumph of 
theory,  theory  can  equally  well  give  birth  to  wea pons.     Marx’s  position  would  be 
more  properly  called  historical  determinism.     He  does  not  deny  thought;  he 
imagines  it  absolutely  determined  by  exterior  reality.     “For  me,  the  process  of 
thought is only the reflection of the process of reality transported  and transposed to 
the mind of man.”    This particularly clumsy definition has no meaning.    How and 
by  what  means  can  an  exterior  process  by  “transported  to  the  mind,”  and  this 
difficulty is as nothing compared to that of then defining “the transposition” of  this 
process.    But Marx used the abbreviated philosophy of his time.    What he wishes to 
say can be defined on other planes.  
         For  him,  man  is  only  history,  and  in  particular  the  history  of  the  means  of 
production.     Marx,  in  fact,  remarks  that  man  dif fers  from  animals  in  that  he 
produces  his  own  means  of  subsistence.     If  he  does  not  first  eat,  if  he  does  not 
clothe  himself  or  take  shelter,  he  does  not  exist.     This  primum  vivere   is  his  first 
determination.    The little that he thinks at this moment is in  direct relation to these 
inevitable   necessities.      Marx   then   demonstrates   that   his   dependence   is   both 
invariable  and  inevitable.     “The  history  of  industry  is  the  open  book  of  man’s 
essential  faculties.”     His  personal  generalization  consists  in  inferring  fr om  this 
affirmation, which is on the whole acceptable, that economic dependence is unique 
and suffices to explain everything, a concept that still remains to be demonstrated.    
We  can  admit  that  economic  determination  plays  a  highly  important  role  in  the 
ge nesis  of  human  thoughts  and  actions  without  drawing  the  conclusion,  as  Marx 
does, that the German rebellion against Napoleon is explained only by the lack of 
sugar and coffee.    Moreover, pure determination is absurd in itself.    If it were not, 
then   one   sin gle   affirmation   would   suffice   to   lead,   from   consequence   to 
consequence, to the entire truth.    If this is not so, then either we have never made a 
single  true  affirmation  –   not  even  the  one  stated  by  determinism  –   or  we  simply 
happen   occasionally   to   say   the    truth,   but   without   any   consequences,   and 
determinism  is  then  false.     Marx  had  his  reasons,  however,  which  are  foreign  to 
pure logic, for resorting to so arbitrary a simplification.  
         To put economic determinism at the root of all human action is to s um man up 
in terms of his social relations.    There is no such thing as a solitary man; that is the 
indisputable discovery of the nineteenth century.    An arbitrary deduction then leads 
to  the  statement  that  man  only  feels  solitary  in  society  for  social  reas ons.     If,  in 
fact,  the  solitary  mind  must  be  explained  by  something  outside  man,  then  man  is 
on  the  road  to  some  form  of  transcendence.     On  the  other  hand,  society  has  only 
man  as  its  source  of  origin;  if,  in  addition,  it  can  be  affirmed  that  society  is  th e 
creator of man, it would seem as though one had achieved the total explanation that 
would allow the final banishment of transcendence.    Man would then be, as Marx 
wanted,  “author  and  actor  of  his  own  history.”     Marx’s  prophecy  is  revolutionary 
  142  

because  he   completes  the  movement  of  negation  begun  by  the  philosophy  of 
illumination.     The  Jacobins  destroyed  the  transcendence  of  a  personal  god,  but 
replaced  it  by  the  transcendence  of  principles.     Marx  institutes  contemporary 
atheism  by  also  destroying  the  trans cendence  of  principles.     Faith  is  replaced  in 
1789 by reason.    But this reason itself, in its fixity, is transcendent.    Marx destroys, 
even  more  radically  than  Hegel,  the  transcendence  of  reason  and  hurls  it  into  the 
stream of history.    Even before their t ime, history was a regulating principle; now 
it is triumphant.    Marx goes farther than Hegel and pretends to consider him as an 
idealist (which he is not, at least no more than Marx is a materialist) to the precise 
extent that the reign of the mind restore s in a certain way a supra - historical value.    
Das  Kapital   returns  to  the  dialect  of  mystery  and  servitude,  but  replaces  a 
consciousness  of  self  by  economic  autonomy  and  the  final  reign  of  the  absolute 
Spirit through the advent of communism.    “Atheism is hu manism mediated by the 
suppression  of  religion,  communism  is  humanism  mediated  by  the  suppression  of 
private   property.”      Religious   alienation   has   the   same   origin   as   economic 
alienation.     Religion  can  be  disposed  of  only  by  achieving  the  absolute  liberty  of  
man  in  regard  to  his  material  determinations.     The  revolution  is  identified  with 
atheism and with the reign of man.  
         That is why Marx is brought to the point of putting the emphasis on economic 
and  social  determination.     His  most  profitable  undertak ing  has  been  to  reveal  the 
reality  that  is  hidden  behind  the  formal  values  of  which  the  bourgeois  of  his  time 
made  a  great  show.     His  theory  of  mystification  is  still  valid,  because  it  is  in  fact 
universally  true,  and  is  equally  applicable  to  revolutionary   mystifications.     The 
freedom   of   which   Monsieur   Thiers   dreamed   was   the   freedom   of   privilege 
consolidated  by  the  police;  the  family,  extolled  by  the  conservative  newspapers, 
was supported by social conditions in which men and women were sent down into 
the  m ines,  half - naked,  attached  to  a  communal  rope;  morality  prospered  on  the 
prostitution of the working classes.    That the demands of honesty and intelligence 
were put to egoistic ends by the hypocrisy of a mediocre and grasping society was 
a   misfortune   that  Marx,   the   incomparable   eye - opener,   denounced   with   a 
vehemence quite unknown before him.    This indignant denunciation brought other 
excesses  in  its  train  which  require  quite  another  denunciation.     But,  above  all,  we 
must  recognize  and  state  that  the  denunci ation  was  born  in  the  blood  of  the 
abortive  Lyon   rebellion  of  1834  and  in  the  despicable  cruelty  of  the  Versailles  
moralists  in  1871.     “The  man  who  has  nothing  is  nothing.”     If  this  affirmation  is 
actually  fa lse,  it  was  very  nearly  true  in  the  optimist  society  of  the  nineteenth 
century.    The extreme decadence brought about by the economy of prosperity was 
to  compel  Marx  to  give  first  place  to  social  and  economic  relationships  and  to 
magnify still more his prop hecy of the reign of man.  
         It  is  now  easier  to  understand  the  purely  economic  explanation  of  history 
  143  

offered by Marx.    If principles are deceptive, only the reality of poverty and work 
is true.    If it is then possible to demonstrate that this suffice s to explain the past and 
the future of mankind, then principles will be destroyed forever and with them the 
society that profits by them.    This in fact is Marx’s ambition.  
   
         Man  is  born  into  a  world  of  production  and  social  relations.     The  unequal 
opportunities of different lands, the more or less rapid improvements in the means 
of production, and the struggle for life have rapidly created social inequalities that 
have  been  crystallized  into  antagonisms  between  production  and  distribution;  and 
conse quently into class struggles.    These struggles and antagonisms are the motive 
power  of  history.     Slavery  in  ancient  times  and  feudal  bondage  were  stages  on  a 
long  road  that  led  to  the  artisanship  of  the  classical  centuries  when  the  producer 
was master of t he means of production.    At this moment the opening of world trade 
routes  and  the  discovery  of  new  outlets  demanded  a  less  provincial  form  of 
production.     The  contradiction  between  the  method  of  production  and  the  new 
demands  of  distribution  already  announ ces  the  end  of  the  regime  of  small - scale 
agricultural  and  industrial  production.     The  industrial  revolution,  the  invention  of 
steam appliances, and competition for outlets inevitably led to the expropriation of 
the  small  proprietor  and  to  the  introduction  of  large - scale  production.     The  means 
of production are then concentrated in the hands of those who are able to buy them; 
the  real  producers,  the  workers,  now  only  dispose  of  the  strength  of  their  arms, 
which  can  be  sold  to  the  “man  with  the  money.”     Thus  bourgeois  capitalism  is 
defined by the separation of the producer from the means of production.    From this 
conflict a series of inevitable consequences are going to spring which allow Marx 
to predicate the end of social antagonisms.  
         At  first  sight  t here  is  no  reason  why  the  firmly  established  principle  of  a 
dialectical  class  struggle  should  suddenly  cease  to  be  true.     It  is  always  true  or  it 
has never been true.    Marx says plainly that there will be no more classes after the 
revolution  than  there  wer e  Estates  after  1789.     But  Estates  disappeared  without 
classes disappearing, and there is nothing to prove that classes will not give way to 
some other form of social antagonism.    The essential point of the Marxist prophecy 
lies, nevertheless, in this affi rmation.  
         We  know  the  Marxist  scheme.     Marx,  following  in  the  footsteps  of  Adam 
Smith and Ricardo, defines the value of all commodities in terms of the amount of 
work necessary to produce them.    The amount of work is itself a commodity, sold 
by the p roletarian to the capitalist, of which the value is defined by the quantity of 
work  that  produces  it;  in  other  words,  by  the  value  of  the  consumer’s  goods 
necessary  for  his  subsistence.     The  capitalist,  in  buying  this  commodity,  thereby 
undertakes  to  pay  f or  it  adequately  so  that  he  who  sells  it,  the  worker,  may  feed 
and  perpetuate  himself.     But  at  the  same  time  he  acquires  the  right  to  make  the 
  144  

latter work as long as he can.    He can work for a long time, very much longer than 
is  necessary  to  pay  for  his  su bsistence.     In  a  twelve - hour  day,  if  half  the  time 
suffices  to  produce  a  value  equivalent  to  the  value  of  the  products  of  subsistence, 
the  other  six  hours  are  hours  not  paid  for,  a  plus - value,  which  constitutes  the 
capitalist’s  own  profit.     Thus  the  capita list’s  interest  lies  in  prolonging  to  the 
maximum  the  hours  of  work  or,  when  he  can  do  so  no  longer,  of  increasing  the 
worker’s  output  to  the  maximum.     The  first  type  of  coercion  is  a  matter  of 
oppression and cruelty.    The second is a question of the organ ization of labour.    It 
leads  first  to  the  division  of  labour,  and  then  to  the  utilization  of  the  machine, 
which  dehumanizes  the  worker.     Moreover,  competition  for  foreign  markets  and 
the   necessity   for   larger   and   larger   investments   in   raw   materials,   produce  
phenomena   of   concentration   and   accumulation.      First,   small   capitalists   are 
absorbed by big capitalists who can maintain, for example, unprofitable prices for 
a  longer  period.     A  larger  and  larger  part  of  the  profits  is  finally  invested  in  new 
machines  and   accumulated  in  the  fixed  assets  of  capital.     This  double  movement 
first  of  all  hastens  the  ruin  of  the  middle  classes,  who  are  absorbed  into  the 
proletariat,  and  then  proceeds  to  concentrate,  in  an  increasingly  small  number  of 
hands,  the  riches  produced  u niquely  by  the  proletariat.     Thus  the  proletariat 
increases in size in proportion to its increasing ruin.    Capital is now concentrated in 
the hands of only a very few masters, whose growing power is based on robbery.    
Moreover,  these  masters  are  shaken  to  their  foundations  by  successive  crises, 
overwhelmed  by  the  contradictions  of  the  system,  and  can  no  longer  assure  even 
mere  subsistence  to  their  slaves,  who  then  come  to  depend  on  private  or  public 
charity.     A  day  comes,  inevitably,  when  a  huge  army  of  opp ressed  slaves  find 
themselves face to face with a handful of despicable masters.    That day is the day 
of  revolution.     “The  ruin  of  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  victory  of  the  proletariat  are 
equally inevitable.”  
         This henceforth famous description does no t yet give an account of the end of 
all antagonisms.    After the victory of the proletariat, the struggle for life might well 
give  birth  to  new  antagonisms.     Two  ideas  then  intervene,  one  of  which  is 
economic,  the  identity  of  the  development  of  production  a nd  the  development  of 
society, and the other, purely systematic, the mission of the proletariat.    These two 
ideas reunite in what might be called Marx’s activist fatalism.  
         The  same  economic  evolution  which  in  effect  concentrates  capital  in  a  very 
fe w  hands,  makes  the  antagonism  both  more  violent  and,  to  a  certain  extent, 
unreal.    It seems that, at the highest point of development of the productive forces, 
the slightest stimulus would lead to the proletariat finding itself alone in possession 
of the m eans of production, already snatched from the grasp of private ownership 
and  concentrated  in  one  enormous  mass  which,  henceforth,  would  be  held  in 
common.    When private property is concentrated in the hands of one single owner, 
  145  

it is only separated from co llective ownership by the existence of one single man.    
The inevitable result of private capitalism is a kind of State capitalism which will 
then only have to be put to the service of the community to give birth to a society 
where  capital  and  labour,  hence forth  indistinguishable,  will  produce,  in  one 
identical   advance   toward   progress,   both   justice   and   abundance.      It   is   in 
consideration  of  this  happy  outcome  that  Marx  always  extolled  the  revolutionary 
role played, unconsciously it is true, by the bourgeoisie .    He spoke of the “historic 
rights” of capitalism, which he called a source both of progress and of misery.    The 
historical mission and the justification of capitalism are, in his eyes, to prepare the 
conditions  for  a  superior  mode  of  production.  This  mod e  of  production  is  not  in 
itself  revolutionary;  it  will  only  be  the  consummation  of  the  revolution.     Only  the 
fundamental  principles  of  bourgeois  production  are  revolutionary.     When  Marx 
affirms  that  humanity  only  sets  itself  problems  it  can  solve,  he  is  s imultaneously 
demonstrating  that  the  germ  of  the  solution  of  the  revolutionary  problem  is  to  be 
found  in  the  capitalist  system  itself.     Therefore  he  recommends  tolerating  the 
bourgeois  State,  and  even  helping  to  build  it,  rather  than  returning  to  a  less 
in dustrialized  form  of  production.     The  proletariat  “can  and  must  accept  the 
bourgeois revolution as a condition of the working - class revolution.”  
         Thus Marx is the prophet of production and we are justified in thinking that on 
this precise point, and  on no other, he ignored reality in favour of the system.    He 
never  ceased  defending  Ricardo,  the  economist  of  production  in  the  manner  of 
Manchester, against those who accused him of wanting production for production’s 
sake.     (“He  w as  absolutely  right!”  Marx  exclaims)  and  of  wanting  it  without  any 
consideration  for  mankind.     “That  is  precisely  his  merit,”  Marx  replies,  with  the 
same airy indifference as Hegel.    What in fact does the sacrifice of individual men 
matter as long as it co ntributes to the salvation of all mankind!    Progress resembles 
“that  horrible  pagan  god  who  wished  to  drink  nectar  from  the  skulls  of  his  fallen 
enemies.”     But  at  least  it  is  progress,  and  it  will  cease  to  inflict  torture  after  the 
industrial apocalypse wh en the day of reconciliation comes.  
         But  if  the  proletariat  cannot  avoid  this  revolution  nor  avoid  being  put  in 
possession of the means of production, will it at least know how to use them for the 
benefit  of  all?     Where  is  the  guarantee  that,  in  the  very  bosom  of  the  revolution, 
Estates, classes, and antagonisms will not arise?    The guarantee lies in Hegel.    The 
proletariat  is  forced  to  use  its  wealth  for  the  universal  good.     It  is  not  the 
proletariat,  it  is  the  universal  in  opposition  to  the  particul ar  –   in  other  words,  to 
capitalism.    The antagonism between capital and the proletariat is the last phase of 
the  struggle  between  the  particular  and  the  universal,  the  same  struggle  that 
animated  the  historical  tragedy  of  master  and  slave.     At  the  end  of  t he  visionary 
design constructed by Marx, the proletariat will unite all classes and discard only a 
handful of masters, perpetrators of “notorious crime,” who will be justly destroyed 
  146  

by the revolution.    What is more, capitalism, by driving the proletariat  to the final 
point of degradation, gradually delivers it from every decision that might separate 
it  from  other  men.     It  has  nothing,  neither  property  nor  morality  nor  country.    
Therefore  it  clings  to  nothing  but  the  species  of  which  it  is  henceforth  the  na ked 
and   implacable   representative.      In   affirming   itself   it   affirms   everything   and 
everyone.    Not because members of the proletariat are gods, but precisely because 
they  have  been  reduced  to  the  most  abjectly  inhuman  condition.     “Only  the 
proletariat,  total ly  excluded  from  this  affirmation  of  their  personality,  are  capable 
of realizing the complete affirmation of self.”  
         That  is  the  mission  of  the  proletariat:  to  bring  forth  supreme  dignity  from 
supreme humiliation.    Through its suffering and its strug gles, it is Christ in human 
form  redeeming  the  collective  sin  of  alienation.     It  is,  first  of  all,  the  multiform 
bearer of total negation and then the herald of definitive affirmation.    “Philosophy 
cannot  realize  itself  without  the  disappearance  of  the  pro letariat,  the  proletariat 
cannot  liberate  itself  without  the  realization  of  philosophy,”  and  again:  “The 
proletariat  can  exist  only  on  the  basis  of  world  history....  Communist  action  can 
exist  only  as  historical  reality  on  the  planetary  scale.”     But  this  Chr ist  is,  at  the 
same time, an avenger.    According to Marx, he carries out the sentence that private 
property  passes  on  itself.     “All  the  houses,  in  our  times,  are  marked  with  a 
mysterious red cross. The judge is history, the executioner is the proletariat.”    Thus 
the  fulfilment  is  inevitable.     Crisis  will  succeed  crisis,  [Every  ten  or  eleven  years, 
Marx  predicted.     But  the  period  between  the  recurrence  of  the  cycles  “will 
gradually shorten.”] the degradation of the proletariat will become more and more 
profo und, it will increase in numbers until the time of the universal crisis when the 
world  of  change  will  vanish  and  when  history,  by  a  supreme  act  of  violence,  will 
cease to be violent any longer.    The kingdom of ends will have come.  
         We  can  see  that  th is  fatalism  could  be  driven  (as  happened  to  Hegelian 
thought) to a sort of political quietism by Marxists, like Kautsky, for whom it was 
as  little  within  the  power  of  the  proletariat  to  create  the  revolution  as  within  the 
power  of  the  bourgeois  to  prevent  it.     Even  Lenin,  who  was  to  choose  the  activist 
aspect of the doctrine, wrote in 1905, in the style of an act of excommunication: “It 
is a reactionary way of thinking to try to find salvation in the working class in any 
other way than in the top - heavy deve lopment of capitalism.”    It is not in the nature 
of  economics,  according  to  Marx,  to  make  leaps  in  the  dark  and  it  must  not  be 
encouraged  to  gallop  ahead.     It  is  completely  false  to  say  that  the  socialist 
reformers  remained  faithful  to  Marx  on  this  point.     On  the  contrary,  fatalism 
excludes  all  reforms,  in  that  there  would  be  a  risk  of  mitigating  the  catastrophic 
aspect of the outcome and, consequently, delaying the inevitable result.    The logic 
of  such  an  attitude  leads  to  the  approval  of  everything  that  t ends  to  increase 
working - class poverty.    The worker must be given nothing so that one day he can 
  147  

have everything.  
         And yet Marx saw the danger of this particular form of quietism.    Power cannot 
be  looked  forward  to  or  else  it  is  looked  forward  to  ind efinitely.     A  day  comes 
when  it  must  be  seized,  and  it  is  the  exact  definition  of  this  day  that  remains  of 
doubtful clarity to all readers of Marx.    On this point he never stops contradicting 
himself.     He  remarked  that  society  was  “historically  compelled  t o  pass  through  a 
period   of   dictatorship   by   the   working   classes.”      As   for   the   nature   of   this 
dictatorship,  he  definitions  are  contradictory.     [Michel  Collinet  in  The  Tragedy  of 
Marxism  points out in Marx three forms of the seizure of power by the proletaria t: 
Jacobin  republic  in  the  Communist  Manifesto ,  authoritarian  dictatorship  in  the  18 
Brumaire , and federal and libertarian government in the Civil War in  France.]    We 
are sure that he condemned the State in no uncertain terms, sayin g that its existence 
and the existence of servitude are inseparable.    But he protested against Bakunin’s 
nevertheless  judicious  observation  of  finding  the  idea  of  provisional  dictatorship 
contrary  to  what  is  known  as  human  nature.     Marx  thought,  it  is  true ,  that  the 
dialectical  truths  were  superior  to  psychological  truths.     What  does  the  dialectic 
say?     That  “the  abolition  of  the  State  has  no  meaning  except  among  communists, 
where  it  is  an  inevitable  result  of  the  suppression  of  classes,  the  disappearance  o f 
which necessarily leads to the disappearance of the need for a power organized by 
one  class  for  the  oppression  of  another.”     According  to  the  sacred  formula,  the 
government of people was then to be replaced by the administration of affairs.    The 
dialecti c  was  therefore  explicit  and  justified  the  existence  of  the  proletarian  State 
only  for  the  period  necessary  for  the  destruction  or  integration  of  the  bourgeois 
class.     But,  unfortunately,  the  prophecy  and  its  attitude  of  fatalism  allowed  other 
interpretati ons.    If it is certain that the kingdom will come, what does time matter?    
Suffering is never provisional for the man who does not believe in the future.    But 
one hundred years of suffering are fleeting in the eyes of the man who prophesies, 
for the hundre d and first year, the definitive city.    In the perspective of the Marxist 
prophecy,   nothing   matters.      In   any   event,   when   the   bourgeois   class   has 
disappeared,  the  proletariat  will  establish  the  rule  of  the  universal  man  at  the 
summit of production, by the v ery logic of productive development.    What does it 
matter that this should be accomplished by dictatorship and violence?    In this New 
Jerusalem, echoing with the roar of miraculous machinery, who will still remember 
the cry of the victims?  
         The golde n age, postponed until the end of history and coincident, to add to its 
attractions,  with  an  apocalypse,  therefore  justifies  everything.     The  prodigious 
ambitions of Marxism must be considered and its inordinate doctrines evaluated, in 
order  to  understand  that  hope  on  such  a  scale  leads  to  the  inevitable  neglect  of 
problems  that  therefore  appear  to  be  secondary.     “Communism  insofar  as  it  is  the 
real  appropriation  of  the  human  essence  by  man  and  for  man,  insofar  as  it  is  the 
  148  

return of man to himself as a soc ial being  –  in other words, as a human being  –  a 
complete  conscious  return  which  preserves  all  the  values  of  the  inner  movement, 
this communism, being absolute naturalism, coincides with humanism: it is the real 
end  of  the  quarrel  between  man  and  nature,  b etween  man  and  man,  between 
essence and existence, between externalization and the affirmation of self, between 
liberty and necessity, between the individual and the species.    It solves the mystery 
of  history  and  is  aware  of  having  solved  it.”     It  is  only  the  language  here  that 
attempts  to  be  scientific.     Basically,  where  is  the  difference  from  Fourier,  who 
announces “fertile deserts, sea water made drinkable and tasting of violets, eternal 
spring ...”?    The eternal springtime of mankind is foretold to us in  the language of 
an encyclical.    What can man without God want and hope for, if not the kingdom 
of  man?     This  explains  the  exaltation  of  Marxist  disciples.     “In  a  society  without 
anguish, it is easy to ignore death,” says one of them.    However, and this is  the real 
condemnation of our society, the anguish of death is a luxury that is felt far more 
by  the  idler  than  by  the  worker,  who  is  stifled  by  his  own  occupation.     But  every 
kind of socialism is Utopian, most of all scientific socialism.    Utopia replaces  God 
by  the  future.  Then  it  proceeds  to  identify  the  future  with  ethics;  the  only  values 
are  those  which  serve  this  particular  future.     For  that  reason  Utopias  have  almost 
always  been  coercive  and  authoritarian.     [Morelly,  Babeuf,  and  Godwin  in  reality 
desc ribe societies based on an inquisition.]    Marx, insofar as he is a Utopian, does 
not differ from his frightening predecessors, and one part of his teaching more than 
justifies his successors.  
         It has undoubtedly been correct to emphasize the ethical  demands that form the 
basis  of  the  Marxist  dream.     It  must,  in  all  fairness,  be  said,  before  examining  the 
check  to  Marxism,  that  in  them  lies  the  real  greatness  of  Marx.     The  very  core  of 
his  theory  was  that  work  is  profoundly  dignified  and  unjustly  despi sed.     He 
rebelled  against  the  degradation  of  work  to  the  level  of  a  commodity  and  of  the 
worker  to  the  level  of  an  object.     He  reminded  the  privileged  that  their  privileges 
were  not  divine  and  that  property  was  not  an  eternal  right.     He  gave  a  bad 
conscien ce  to  those  who  had  no  right  to  a  clear  conscience,  and  denounced  with 
unparalleled  profundity  a  class  whose  crime  is  not  so  much  having  had  power  as 
having  used  it  to  advance  the  ends  of  a  mediocre  society  deprived  of  any  real 
nobility.     To  him  we  owe  the   idea  which  is  the  despair  of  our  times  –   but  here 
despair  is  worth  more  than  any  hope  –   that  when  work  is  a  degradation,  it  is  not 
life, even though it occupies every moment of a life.    Who, despite the pretensions 
of this society, can sleep in it in peac e when they know that it derives its mediocre 
pleasures from the work of millions of dead souls?    By demanding for the worker 
real  riches,  which  are  not  the  riches  of  money  but  of  leisure  and  creation,  he  has 
reclaimed, despite all appearance to the contra ry, the dignity of man.    In doing so, 
and  this  can  be  said  with  conviction,  he  never  wanted  the  additional  degradation 
  149  

that has been imposed on man in his name.    One of his phrases, which for once is 
clear  and  trenchant,  forever  withholds  from  his  triumpha nt  disciples  the  greatness 
and the humanity which once were his: “An end that requires unjust means is not a 
just end.”  
         But Nietzsche’s tragedy is found here once again.    The aims, the prophecies are 
generous  and  universal,  but  the  doctrine  is  restr ictive,  and  the  reduction  of  every 
value  to  historical  terms  leads  to  the  direst  consequences.     Marx  thought  that  the 
ends  of  history,  at  least,  would  prove  to  be  moral  and  rational.     That  was  his 
Utopia.    But Utopia, at least in the form he knew it, is de stined to serve cynicism, 
of which he wanted no part.    Marx destroys all transcendence, then carries out, by 
himself,  the  transition  from  fact  to  duty.     But  his  concept  of  duty  has  no  other 
origin but fact.    The demands for justice ends in injustice if it  is not primarily based 
on  an  ethical  justification  of  justice;  without  this,  crime  itself  one  day  becomes  a 
duty.     When  good  and  evil  are  reintegrated  in  time  and  confused  with  events, 
nothing is any longer good or bad, but only either premature or out of  date.    Who 
will decide on the opportunity, if not the opportunist?    Later, say the disciples, you 
shall judge.    But the victims will not be there to judge.    For the victim, the present 
is  the  only  value,  rebellion  the  only  action.     Messianism,  in  order  to  exist,  must 
construct a defence against the victims.    It is possible that Marx did not want this, 
but  in  this  lies  his  responsibility  which  must  be  examined,  that  he  incurred  by 
justifying, in the name of the revolution, the henceforth bloody struggle agai nst all 
forms of rebellion.  
   
   
         The Failing of the Prophecy  
   
         Hegel haughtily brings history to an end in 1807; the disciples of Saint - Simon 
believe  that  the  revolutionary  convulsions  of  1830  and  1848  are  the  last;  Comte 
dies in 1857 preparin g to climb into the pulpit and preach positivism to a humanity 
returned at last from the path of error. With the same blind romanticism, Marx, in 
his turn, prophesies the classless society and the solution of the historical mystery.    
Slightly  more  circumsp ect,  however,  he  does  not  fix  the  date.     Unfortunately,  his 
prophecy  also  described  the  march  of  history  up  to  the  hour  of  fulfilment;  it 
predicted the trend of events.    The events and the facts, of course, have forgotten to 
arrange themselves according to  the synthesis; and this already explains why it has 
been  necessary  to  rally  them  by  force.     But  above  all,  the  prophecies,  from  the 
moment that they begin to betray the living hopes of millions of men, cannot with 
impunity  remain  indeterminate.     A  time  co mes  when  deception  transforms  patient 
hope  into  furious  disillusionment  and  when  the  ends,  affirmed  with  the  mania  of 
obstinacy,  demanded  with  ever - increasing  cruelty,  make  obligatory  the  search  for 
  150  

other means.  
         The   revolutionary   movement   at   the   end    of   the   nineteenth   century   and 
beginning of the twentieth lived, like the early Christians, in the expectation of the 
end of the world and the advent of the proletarian Christ.    We know how persistent 
this sentiment was among primitive Christian communitie s.    Even at the end of the 
fourth century a bishop in proconsular  Africa   calculated that the world would only 
exist for another one hundred and one years.    At the end of this period would come 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  must  be  me rited  without  further  delay.     This 
sentiment  is  prevalent  in  the  first  century  [On  the  imminence  of  this  event,  see 
Mark ix, 1: xiii,30; Matthew x, 23; xvi, 27 - 8; xxiv, 34; Luke ix, 26 - 7; xxi, 22, etc.] 
and  explains  the  indifference  of  the  early  Christians   toward  purely  theological 
questions.    If the advent is near, everything must be consecrated to a burning faith 
rather than to works and to dogma.    Until Clement and Tertullian during more than 
a  century,  Christian  literature  ignored  theological  problems  a nd  did  not  elaborate 
on  the  subject  of  works.     But  from  the  moment  the  advent  no  longer  seems 
imminent, man must live with his faith  -  in other words, compromise.    Then piety 
and  the  catechism  appear  on  the  scene.     The  evangelical  advent  fades  into  the 
dis tance;  Saint  Paul   has  come  to  establish  dogma.     The  Church  has  incorporated 
the faith that has only an ardent desire for the kingdom to come.    Everything had to 
be  organized  in  the  period,  even  martyrdom,  of  which  the  temporal  witne sses  are 
the  monastic  orders,  and  even  the  preaching,  which  was  to  be  found  again  in  the 
guise of the Inquisition.  
         A  similar  movement  was  born  of  the  check  to  the  revolutionary  advent.     The 
passages from Marx already cited give a fair idea of the bu rning hope that inspired 
the revolutionary spirit of the time.    Despite partial setbacks, this faith never ceased 
to  increase  up  to  the  moment  when  it  found  itself,  in  1917,  face  to  face  with  the 
partial  realization  of  its  dreams.     “We  are  fighting  for  the   gates  of  heaven,”  cried 
Liebknecht.     In  1917  the  revolutionary  world  really  believed  that  it  had  arrived 
before   those   gates.      Rosa   Luxemburg’s   prophecy   was   being   realized.      “The 
revolution   will   rise   resoundingly   tomorrow   to   its   full   height   and,   to   your 
co nsternation, will announce with the sound of all its trumpets: I was, I am, I shall 
be.”    The   Spartakus   movement   believed   that   it   had   achieved   the   definitive 
revolution because, according to Marx himself, the latter would come to pass after 
the Russian Rev olution had been consummated by a Western revolution.    After the 
revolution  of  1917,  a  Soviet  Germany  would,  in  fact,  have  opened  the  gates  of 
heaven.    But the Spartakus movement is crushed, the French general strike of 1920 
fails, the Italian revolutionar y movement is strangled.    Liebknecht then recognizes 
that the time is not ripe for revolution.    “The period has not yet drawn to a close.”    
But also, and now we grasp how defeat can excite vanquished faith to the point of 
religious ecstasy: “At the crash o f economic collapse whose rumblings can already 
  151  

be heard, the sleeping soldiers of the proletariat will awake as at the fanfare of the 
Last  Judgement,  and  the  corpses  of  the  victims  of  the  struggle  will  arise  and 
demand  an  accounting  from  those  who  are  bow ed  down  with  curses.”     While 
awaiting  these  events,  Liebknecht  and  Rosa  Luxemburg  are  assassinated,  and 
Germany   rushes  towards  servitude.     The  Russian  Revolution  remains  isolated, 
living  in  defiance  of  its  own  system,  still  far  from   the  celestial  gates,  with  an 
apocalypse  to  organize.     The  advent  is  again  postponed.     Faith  is  intact,  but  it 
totters beneath an enormous load of problems and discoveries which Marxism had 
not  foreseen.     The  new  religion  is  once  more  confronted  with  Galilee:  to  preserve 
its faith, it must deny the sun and humiliate free man.  
         What  does  Galilee   say,  in  fact,  at  this  moment?     What  are  the  errors, 
demonstrated  by  history  itself,  of  the  prophecy?     We  know  t hat  the  economic 
evolution  of  the  contemporary  world  refutes  a  certain  number  of  the  postulates  of 
Marx.     If  the  revolution  is  to  occur  at  the  end  of  two  parallel  movements,  the 
unlimited shrinking of capital and the unlimited expansion of the proletariat,  it will 
not  occur  or  ought  not  to  have  occurred.     Capital  and  proletariat  have  both  been 
equally  unfaithful  to  Marx.     The  tendency  observed  in  industrial  England   of  the 
nineteenth  century  has,  in  certain  cases,  changed  its  course,  and  in  others  become 
more  complex.     Economic  crises,  which  should  have  occurred  with  increasing 
frequency, have, on the contrary, become more sporadic: capitalism has learned the 
secrets of planned production and has contributed on its own part to the grow th of 
the  Moloch   State.     Moreover,  with  the  introduction  of  companies  in  which  stock 
could  be  held,  capital,  instead  of  becoming  increasingly  concentrated,  has  given 
rise to a new category of smallholders who se very last desire would certainly be to 
encourage  strikes.     Small  enterprises  have  been,  in  many  cases,  destroyed  by 
competition  as  Marx  foresaw.     But  the  complexity  of  modern  production  has 
generated  a  multitude  of  small  factories  around  great  enterpris es.     In  1938  Ford 
was  able  to  announce  that  five  thousand  two  hundred  independent  workshops 
supplied him with their products.    Of course, large industries inevitably assimilated 
these  enterprises  to  a  certain  extent.     But  the  essential  thing  is  that  these  small 
industrialists form an intermediary social layer which complicates the scheme that 
Marx  imagined.     Finally,  the  law  of  concentration  has  proved  absolutely  false  in 
agricultural economy, which was treated with considerable frivolity by Marx.    The 
hiat us is important here.    In one of its aspects, the history of socialism in our times 
can  be  considered  as  the  struggle  between  the  proletarian  movement  and  the 
peasant  class.     This  struggle  continues,  on  the  historical  plane,  the  nineteenth -
century   ideologi cal   struggle   between   authoritarian   socialism   and   libertarian 
socialism,  of  which  the  peasant  and  artisan  origins  are  quite  evident.     Thus  Marx 
had, in the ideological material of his time, the elements for a study of the peasant 
problem.     But  his  desire  to   systematize  made  him  oversimplify  everything.     This 
  152  

particular  simplification  was  to  prove  expensive  for  the  kulaks  who  constituted 
more than five million historic exceptions to be brought, by death and deportation, 
within the Marxist pattern.  
         The  same desire for simplification diverted Marx from the phenomenon of the 
nation in the very century of nationalism.    He believed that through commerce and 
exchange, through the very victory of the proletariat, the barriers would fall.    But it 
was  national  b arriers  that  brought  about  the  fall  of  the  proletarian  ideal.     As  a 
means of explaining history, the struggle between nations has been proved at least 
as  important  as  the  class  struggle.     But  nations  cannot  be  entirely  explained  by 
economics; therefore the  system ignored them.  
         The  proletariat,  on  its  part,  did  not  toe  the  line.     First  of  all,  Marx’s  fear  is 
confirmed: reforms and trade unions brought about a rise in the standard of living 
and an amelioration in working conditions.    These improvements  are very far from 
constituting  an  equitable  settlement  of  the  social  problem;  but  the  miserable 
condition of the English textile workers in Marx’s time, far from becoming general 
and   even   deteriorating,   as   he   would   have   liked,   has   on   the   contrary   been 
all eviated.     Marx  would  not  complain  about  this  today,  the  equilibrium  having 
been re - established by another error in his predictions.    It has, in fact, been possible 
to  prove  that  the  most  efficacious  revolutionary  or  trade - union  asset  has  always 
been the ex istence of a working - class elite who have not been sterilized by hunger.    
Poverty  and  degeneration  have  never  ceased  to  be  what  they  were  before  Marx’s 
time,  and  what  he  did  not  want  to  admit  they  were  despite  all  his  observations: 
factors  contributing  to  servitude,  not  to  revolution.     One  third  of  working - class 
Germany   was unemployed in 1933.    Bourgeois society was then obliged to provide 
a means of livelihood for these unemployed, thus bringing about the situation that 
Marx  said  wa s  essential  for  revolution.     But  it  is  not  a  good  thing  that  future 
revolutionaries  should  be  put  in  the  situation  of  expecting  to  be  fed  by  the  State.    
Thus  unnatural  habit  leads  to  others,  which  are  even  less  good,  and  which  Hitler 
made into doctrine.  
          Finally,  the  proletariat  did  not  increase  in  numbers  indefinitely.     The  very 
condition   of   industrial   production,   which   every   Marxist   is   called   upon   to 
encourage,  improved,  to  a  considerable  extent,  the  conditions  of  the  middle  class 
[From   1920   to1930,    in   a   period   of   intense   productivity,   the   number   of 
metallurgical   workers   decreased   in   the   United   States,   while   the   number   of 
salesmen  working  for  the  same  industry  almost  doubled.]  and  even  created  a  new 
social  stratum,  the  technicians.     The  ideal,  so  dea r  to  Lenin,  of  a  society  in  which 
the  engineer  would  at  the  same  time  be  a  manual  labourer  is  in  conflict  with  the 
facts.    The principal fact is that technology, like science, has reached such a degree 
of complication that it is not possible for a single m an to understand the totality of 
its principles and applications.    It is almost impossible, for instance, for a physicist 
  153  

today  to  have  a  complete  understanding  of  the  biological  science  of  his  times.    
Even  within  the  realms  of  physics  he  cannot  claim  to  b e  equally  familiar  with 
every  branch  of  the  subject.     It  is  the  same  in  technology.     From  the  moment  that 
productivity,  which  is  considered  by  both  bourgeois  and  Marxist  as  a  benefit  in 
itself,  is  developed  to  enormous  proportions,  the  division  of  labour,  which  Marx 
thought  could  have  been  avoided,  became  inevitable.     Every  worker  has  been 
brought  to  the  point  of  performing  a  particular  function  without  knowing  the 
overall  plan  into  which  his  work  will  fit.     Those  who  co - ordinate  individual  work 
have formed , by their very function, a class whose social importance is decisive.  
         It is only fair to point out that this era of technocracy announced by Burnham 
was  described,  about  twenty  years  ago,  by  Simone  Weil  in  a  form  that  can  be 
considered  complete,  wi thout  drawing  Burnham’s  unacceptable  conclusions.     To 
the two traditional forms of oppression known to humanity  –  oppression by armed 
force and by wealth  –  Simone Weil adds a third  –  oppression by occupation.    “One 
can  abolish  the  opposition  between  the  bu yer  and  the  seller  of  work,”  she  wrote, 
“without abolishing the opposition between those who dispose of the machine and 
those of whom the machine disposes.”    The Marxist plan to abolish the degrading 
opposition  of  intellectual  work  to  manual  work  has  come  into  conflict  with  the 
demands   of   production,   which   elsewhere   Marx   exalted.      Marx   undoubtedly 
foresaw,  in  Das  Kapital ,  the  importance  of  the  “manager”  on  the  level  of 
maximum  concentration  of  capital.     But  he  did  not  believe  that  this  concentration 
of  capi tal  could  survive  the  abolition  of  private  property.     Division  of  labour  and 
private  property,  he  said,  are  identical  expressions.     History  has  demonstrated  the 
contrary.      The   ideal   regime   based   on   collective   property   could   be   defined, 
according  to  Lenin,  as  justice  plus  electricity.     In  the  final  analysis  it  is  only 
electricity, without justice.  
         The idea of a mission of the proletariat has not, so far, been able to formulate 
itself  in  history:  this  sums  up  the  failing  of  the  Marxist  prophecy.     The  f ailure  of 
the  Second  International  has  proved  that  the  proletariat  was  influenced  by  other 
things as well as its economic condition and that, contrary to the famous formula, it 
had a fatherland.    The majority of the proletariat accepted or submitted to the  war 
and  collaborated,  willy - nilly,  in  the  nationalist  excesses  of  the  times.     Marx 
intended that the working classes before they triumphed should have acquired legal 
and  political  acumen.     His  error  lay  only  in  believing  that  extreme  poverty,  and 
particul arly  industrial  poverty,  could  lead  to  political  maturity.     Moreover,  it  is 
quite  certain  that  the  revolutionary  capacity  of  the  masses  was  curtailed  by  the 
decapitation of the libertarian revolution, during and after the Commune.    After all, 
Marxism    easil y    dominated    the    working - class    movement    from    1872    on, 
undoubtedly  because  of  its  own  strength,  but  also  because  the  only  socialist 
tradition  that  could  have  opposed  it  had  been  drowned  in  blood;  there  were 
  154  

practically no Marxists among the insurgents of 187 1.    This automatic purification 
of revolution has been continued, thanks to the activities of police states, until our 
times.     More  and  more,  revolution  has  found  itself  delivered  into  the  hands  of  its 
bureaucrats  and  doctrinaires  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  e nfeebled  and  bewildered 
masses  on  the  other.  When  the  revolutionary  elite  are  guillotined  and  when 
Talleyrand  is  left  alive,  who  will  oppose  Bonaparte?     But  to  these  historical 
reasons  are  added  economic  necessities.     The  passages  by  Simone  Weil  on  the 
con dition  of  the  factory  worker  [ La  Condition  ouvrière   (Paris:  Gallimard.)]  must 
be read in order to realize to what degree of moral exhaustion and silent despair the 
rationalization of labour can lead.    Simone Weil is right in saying that the worker’s 
condit ion  is  doubly  inhumane  in  that  he  is  first  deprived  of  money  and  then  of 
dignity.    Work in which one can have an interest, creative work, even though it is 
badly  paid,  does  not  degrade  life.     Industrial  socialism  has  done  nothing  essential 
to  alleviate  the   condition  of  the  workers  because  it  has  not  touched  on  the  very 
principle  of  production  and  the  organization  of  labour,  which,  on  the  contrary,  it 
has extolled.    It even went so far as to offer the worker a historic justification of his 
lot of much the sa me value as a promise of celestial joys to one who works himself 
to death; never did it attempt to give him the joy of creation.    The political form of 
society  is  no  longer  in  question  at  this  level,  but  the  beliefs  of  a  technical 
civilization  on  which  cap italism  and  socialism  are  equally  dependent.     Any  ideas 
that do not advance the solution of this problem hardly touch on the misfortunes of 
the worker.  
         Only through the interplay of economic forces, so much admired by Marx, has 
the  proletariat  been  able  to  reject  the  historical  mission  with  which  Marx  had 
rightly   charged   it.      His   error   can   be   excused   because,   confronted   with   the 
debasement of the ruling classes, a man who has the future of civilization at heart 
instinctively looks for an elite as a r eplacement.    But this instinctive search is not, 
in  itself  alone,  creative.     The  revolutionary  bourgeoisie  seized  power  in  1789 
because  they  already  had  it.     At  this  period  legality,  as  Jules  Monnerot  says,  was 
lagging  behind  the  facts.     The  facts  were  tha t  the  bourgeoisie  were  already  in 
possession of the posts of command and of the new power: money. The proletariat 
were not at all in the same position, having only their poverty and their hopes and 
being  kept  in  their  condition  of  misery  by  the  bourgeoisie .     The  bourgeois  class 
debased  itself  by  a  mania  for  production  and  material  power,  while  the  very 
organization of this mania made the creation of an elite impossible. [Lenin was the 
first  to  record  this  truth,  but  without  any  apparent  bitterness.     If  his  words  are 
terrible for revolutionary hopes, they are no less so for Lenin himself.    He dared to 
say,  in  fact,  that  the  masses  would  more  easily  accept  bureaucratic  and  dictatorial 
centralism because “discipline and organization are assimilated more easily  by the 
proletariat,  thanks  to  the  hard  school  of  the  factory.”]     But  criticism  of  this 
  155  

organization and the development of rebel conscience could, on the contrary, forge 
a  reserve  elite.     Only  revolutionary  trade  unionism,  with  Pelloutier  and  Sorel, 
embark ed  on  this  course  and  wanted  to  create,  by  professional  and  cultural 
education,  new  cadres  for  which  a  world  without  honour  was  calling  and  still 
calls.     But  that  could  not  be  accomplished  in  a  day  and  the  new  masters  were 
already  on  the  scene,  interested  in  making  immediate  use  of  human  unhappiness 
for the sake of happiness in the distant future, rather than relieving as much and as 
soon  as  possible  the  suffering  of  millions  of  men.     The  authoritarian  socialists 
deemed  that  history  was  going  too  slowly  and   that  it  was  necessary,  in  order  to 
hurry  it  on,  to  entrust  the  mission  of  the  proletariat  to  a  handful  of  doctrinaires.    
For that very reason they have been the first to deny this mission.    Nevertheless it 
exists, not in the exclusive sense that Marx give s it, but in the sense that a mission 
exists  for  any  human  group  which  knows  how  to  derive  pride  and  fecundity  from 
its labours and its sufferings.    So that it can manifest itself, however, a risk must be 
taken and confidence put in working - class freedom a nd spontaneity.    Authoritarian 
socialism,  on  the  contrary,  has  confiscated  this  living  freedom  for  the  for  the 
benefit of an ideal freedom, which is yet to come.    In so doing, whether it wished 
to or not, it reinforced the attempt at enslavement begun by i ndustrial capitalism.    
By the combined action of these two factors and during a hundred and fifty years, 
except in the  Paris   of the Commune, which was the last refuge of rebel revolution, 
the proletariat has had no other historical  mission but to be betrayed.    The workers 
fought  and  died  to  give  power  to  the  military  or  to  intellectuals  who  dreamed  of 
becoming  military  and  who  would  enslave  them  in  their  turn.     This  struggle, 
however, has been the source of their dignity, a fact that  is recognized by all who 
have  chosen  to  share  their  aspirations  and  their  misfortunes.     But  this  dignity  has 
been acquired in opposition to the whole clan of old and new masters.    At the very 
moment  when  they  dare  to  make  use  of  it,  it  denies  them.     In  on e  sense,  it 
announces their eclipse.  
         The  economic  predictions  of  Marx  have,  therefore,  been  at  least  called  in 
question  by  reality.     What  remains  true  in  his  vision  of  the  economic  world  is  the 
establishment  of  a  society  more  and  more  defined  by  the   rhythm  of  production.    
But  he  shared  this  concept,  in  the  enthusiasm  of  his  period,  with  bourgeois 
ideology.     The  bourgeois  illusions  concerning  science  and  technical  progress, 
shared by the authoritarian socialists, gave birth to the civilization of the  machine -
tamers,   which   can,   through   the   stresses   of   competition   and   the   desire   for 
domination,  be  separated  into  enemy  blocs,  but  which  on  the  economic  plane  is 
subject   to   identical   laws:   the   accumulation   of   capital   and   rationalized   and 
continually  increasi ng  production.     The  political  difference,  which  concerns  the 
degree of omnipotence of the State, is appreciable, but can be reduced by economic 
evolution.     Only  the  difference  in  ethical  concepts  –   formal  virtue  as  opposed  to 
  156  

historical   cynicism  –    seems   su bstantial.      But   the   imperative   of   production 
dominates both universes and makes them, on the economic plane, one world. [It is 
worth specifying that productivity is only injurious when it is considered as an end, 
not as a means, in which case it could have  a liberating effect.]   
         In any event, if the economic imperative can no longer be denied, [Although it 
was deniable  –  until the eighteenth century  –  during all the period in which Marx 
thought  he  had  discovered  it.     Historical  examples  in  which  the  conflict  between 
forms of civilization did not end in progress in methods of production: destruction 
of the Mycenæan civilization, invasion of  Rome   by the barbarians, expulsion of the 
Moors from  Spain, exterm ination of the Albigenses.] its consequences are not what 
Marx  imagined.     Economically  speaking,  capitalism  becomes  oppressive  through 
the  phenomenon  of  accumulation.     It  is  oppressive  through  being  what  it  is,  it 
accumulates  in  order  to  increase  what  it  i s,  to  exploit  it  all  the  more,  and 
accordingly  to  accumulate  still  more.     At  that  moment  accumulation  would  be 
necessary only to a very small extent in order to guarantee social benefits.    But the 
revolution, in its turn, becomes industrialized and realize s that, when accumulation 
is  an  attribute  of  technology  itself,  and  not  of  capitalism,  the  machine  finally 
conjures  up  the  machine.     Every  form  of  collectivity,  fighting  for  survival,  is 
forced to accumulate instead of distributing its revenues.    It accumu lates in order to 
increase  in  size  and  so  to  increase  in  power.     Whether  bourgeois  or  socialist,  it 
postpones  justice  for  a  later  date,  in  the  interests  of  power  alone.     But  power 
opposes other forms of power.    It arms and rearms because others are arming  and 
rearming.    It does not stop accumulating and will never cease to do so until the day 
when  perhaps  it  will  reign  alone  on  earth.     Moreover,  for  that  to  happen,  it  must 
pass  through  a  war.     Until  that  day  the  proletariat  will  receive  only  the  bare 
minimu m for its subsistence.    The revolution compels itself to construct, at a great 
expenditure in human lives, the industrialist and capitalist intermediary that its own 
system demands.    Revenue is replaced by human labour.    Slavery then becomes the 
general  co ndition,  and  the  gates  of  heaven  remain  locked.     Such  is  the  economic 
law  governing  a  world  that  lives  by  the  cult  of  production,  and  the  reality  is  even 
more  bloody  than  the  law.     Revolution,  in  the  dilemma  into  which  it  has  been  led 
by  its  bourgeois  oppo nents  and  its  nihilist  supporters,  is  nothing  but  slavery.    
Unless  it  changes  its  principles  and  its  path,  it  can  have  no  other  final  result  than 
servile  rebellions,  obliterated  in  blood  or  the  hideous  prospect  of  atomic  suicide.    
The  will  to  power,  the  ni hilist  struggle  for  domination  and  authority,  have  done 
considerably  more  than  sweep  away  the  Marxist  Utopia.     This  has  become  in  its 
turn  a  historic  fact  destined  to  be  put  to  use  like  all  the  other  historic  facts.     This 
idea,  which  was  supposed  to  domina te  history,  has  become  lost  in  history;  the 
concept  of  abolishing  means  has  been  reduced  to  a  means  in  itself  and  cynically 
manipulated  for  the  most  banal  and  bloody  ends.     The  uninterrupted  development 
  157  

of production has not ruined the capitalist regime to  the benefit of the revolution.    
It  has  equally  been  the  ruin  of  both  bourgeois  and  revolutionary  society  to  the 
benefit of an idol that has the snout of power.  
   
         How could a so - called scientific socialism conflict to such a point with facts?    
The a nswer is easy: it was not scientific.    On the contrary, its defeat resulted from a 
method ambiguous enough to wish to be simultaneously determinist and prophetic, 
dialectic  and  dogmatic.     If  the  mind  is  only  the  reflection  of  events,  it  cannot 
anticipate t heir progress, except by hypothesis.    If Marxist theory is determined by 
economics,  it  can  describe  the  past  history  of  production,  not  its  future,  which 
remains in the realms of probability.    The task of historical materialism can only be 
to  establish  a  m ethod  of  criticism  of  contemporary  society;  it  is  only  capable  of 
making suppositions, unless it abandons its scientific attitude, about the society of 
the future.    Moreover, is it not for this reason that its most important work is called 
Capital   and  not  Revolution ?     Marx  and  the  Marxists  allowed  themselves  to 
prophesy  the  future  and  the  triumph  of  communism  to  the  detriment  of  their 
postulates and of scientific method.  
         Then  predictions  could  be  scientific,  on  the  contrary,  only  by  ceasing  to 
prophe sy  definitively.     Marxism  is  not  scientific;  at  the  best,  it  has  scientific 
prejudices.    It brought out into the open the profound difference between scientific 
reasoning,  that  fruitful  instrument  of  research,  of  thought,  and  even  of  rebellion, 
and  histori cal  reasoning,  which  German  ideology  invented  by  its  negation  of  all 
principles.     Historical  reasoning  is  not  a  type  of  reasoning  that,  within  the 
framework  of  its  own  functions,  can  pass  judgement  on  the  world.     While 
pretending  to  judge  it,  it  really  tri es  to  determine  its  course.     Essentially  a  part  of 
events,  it  directs  them  and  is  simultaneously  pedagogic  and  all - conquering.    
Moreover, its most abstruse descriptions conceal the most simple truths.    If man is 
reduced to nothing but a character in histor y, he has no other choice but to subside 
into the sound and fury of a completely irrational history or to endow history with 
the  form  of  human  reason.     Therefore  the  history  of  contemporary  nihilism  is 
nothing  but  a  prolonged  endeavour  to  give  order,  by  hu man  forces  alone  and 
simply by force, to a history no longer endowed with order.    The pseudo - reasoning 
ends by identifying itself with cunning and strategy, while waiting to culminate in 
the ideological Empire.    What part could science play in this concept ?    Nothing is 
less  determined  on  conquest  than  reason.     History  is  not  made  with  scientific 
scruples; we are even condemned to not making history from the moment when we 
claim to act with scientific objectivity.    Reason does not preach, or if it does, it i s 
no longer reason.    That is why historical reason is an irrational and romantic form 
of reason, which sometimes recalls the false logic of the insane and at other times 
the mystic affirmation of the word.  
  158  

         The  only  really  scientific  aspect  of  Marxis m  is  to  be  found  in  its  preliminary 
rejections of myths and in its exposure of the crudest kind of interests.    But in this 
respect Marx is not more scientific in his attitude than La Rochefoucauld; and that 
is just the attitude that he abandons when he emb arks on prophecy.    Therefore it is 
not surprising that, to make Marxism scientific and to preserve this fiction, which 
is very useful in this century of science, it has been a necessary first step to render 
science  Marxist  through  terror.     The  progress  of  science,  since  Marx,  has  roughly 
consisted in replacing determinism and the rather crude mechanism of its period by 
a  doctrine  of  provisional  probability.     Marx  wrote  to  Engels  that  the  Darwinian 
theory  constituted  the  very  foundation  of  their  method.     For   Marxism  to  remain 
infallible,  it  has  therefore  been  necessary  to  deny  all  biological  discoveries  made 
since  Darwin.     As  it  happens  that  all  discoveries  since  the  unexpected  mutations 
established by De Vries have consisted in introd ucing, contrary to the doctrines of 
determinism,  the  idea  of  chance  into  biology,  it  has  been  necessary  to  entrust  to 
Lyssenko  with  the  task  of  disciplining  chromosomes  and  of  demonstrating  once 
again  the  truth  of  the  most  elementary  determinism.     That  is  ridiculous:  but  put  a 
police  force  under  Flaubert’s  Monsieur  Homais  and  he  would  no  longer  be 
ridiculous,  and  there  we  have  the  twentieth  century.     As  far  as  that  is  concerned, 
the   twentieth   century   has   also   witnessed   the   denial   of   the   principle   of 
indeter minism  in  science,  of  limited  relativity,  of  the  quantum  theory,  [Roger 
Callois, in  Critique du Marxisme  (Paris: Gallimard), remarks that Stalinism objects 
to the quantum theory, but makes use of atomic science, which is derived from it.] 
and, finally, of  every general tendency of contemporary science.    Marxism is only 
scientific  today  in  defiance  of  Heisenberg,  Bohr,  Einstein,  and  all  the  greatest 
minds of our time.    After all, there is really nothing mysterious about the principle 
that consists in using s cientific reasoning to the advantage of a prophecy.    This has 
already  been  named  the  principle  of  authority,  and  it  is  this  that  guides  the 
Churches when they wish to subject living reason to dead faith and freedom of the 
intellect to the maintenance of te mporal power.  
         Finally, there remains of Marx’s prophecy  –  henceforth in conflict with its two 
principles,  economy  and  science  –   only  the  passionate  annunciation  of  an  event 
that  will  take  place  in  the  very  far  future.     The  only  recourse  of  the  Marxi sts 
consists in saying that the delays are simply longer than was imagined and that one 
day,  far  away  in  the  future,  the  end  will  justify  all.     In  other  words,  we  are  in 
purgatory and we are promised that there will be no hell.    And so the problem that 
is  posed  is  of  another  order.     If  the  struggle  waged  by  one  or  two  generations 
throughout a period of economic evolution which is, perforce, beneficial suffices to 
bring    about    a    classless    society,    then    the    necessary    sacrifice    becomes 
comprehensible  to  the  man   with  a  militant  turn  of  mind;  the  future  for  him  has  a 
concrete aspect  –  the aspect of his child, for instance.    But if, when the sacrifice of 
  159  

several  generations  has  proved  insufficient,  we  must  then  embark  on  an  infinite 
period of universal strife one t housand times more destructive than before, then the 
conviction of faith in needed in order to accept the necessity of killing and dying.    
This new faith is no more founded on pure reason than were the ancient faiths.  
         In  what  terms  is  it  possible  to   imagine  this  end  of  history?     Marx  did  not  fall 
back  on  Hegel’s  terms.     He  said,  rather  obscurely,  that  communism  was  only  a 
necessary aspect of the future of humanity, and did not comprise the entire future.    
But  either  communism  does  not  terminate  the  h istory  of  contradictions  and 
suffering,  and  then  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  see  how  one  can  justify  so  much 
effort and sacrifice; or it does terminate it, and it is no longer possible to image the 
continuation of history except as an advance toward this p erfected form of society.    
Thus  a  mystic  idea  is  arbitrarily  introduced  into  a  description  that  claims  to  be 
scientific.     The  final  disappearance  of  political  economy  –   the  favourite  theme  of 
Marx and Engels  –  signifies the end of all suffering.    Economics , in fact, coincides 
with pain and suffering in history.    We arrive at last in the Garden of Eden.  
         We come no nearer to solving the problem by declaring that it is not a question 
of  the  end  of  history,  but  of  a  leap  into  the  midst  of  a  different  his tory.     We  can 
only imagine this other history in terms of our own history; for man they are both 
one  and  the  same  thing.     Moreover,  this  other  history  poses  the  same  dilemma.    
Either  it  is  not  the  solution  of  all  contradictions  and  we  suffer,  die,  and  kill   for 
almost  nothing,  or  it  is  the  solution  of  contradictions  and  therefore,  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  terminates  our  history.     Marxism,  at  this  stage,  is  only  justified  by 
the definitive city.  
         Can it be said, therefore, that this city of ends has  a meaning?    It has, in terms 
of the sacred universe, once the religious postulate has been admitted.    The world 
was  created,  it  will  have  an  end;  Adam  left  Eden,  humanity  must  return  there.     It 
has no meaning, in the historical uni verse, if the dialectical postulate is admitted.    
The  dialectic  correctly  applied  cannot  and  must  not  come  to  an  end.  [See  the 
excellent  discussion  by  Jules  Mournrot  in  Sociologie  du  communisme ,  Part  III.]    
The antagonistic terms of a historical situation  can negate one another and then be 
surmounted  in  a  new  synthesis.     But  there  is  no  reason  why  this  new  synthesis 
should  be  better  than  the  original.     Or  rather  there  is  only  a  reason  for  this 
supposition,  if  one  arbitrarily  imposes  an  end  to  the  dialectic,   and  if  one  then 
applies  a  judgement  based  on  outside  values.     If  the  classless  society  is  going  to 
terminate  history,  then  capitalist  society  is,  in  effect,  superior  to  feudal  society  to 
the  extent  that  it  brings  the  advent  of  this  classless  society  still   nearer.     But  if  the 
dialectic  postulate  is  admitted  at  all,  it  must  be  admitted  entirely.     Just  as 
aristocratic society has been succeeded by a society without an aristocracy but with 
classes,  it  must  be  concluded  that  the  society  of  classes  will  be  succe eded  by  a 
classless  society,  but  animated  by  a  new  antagonism  still  to  be  defined.     A 
  160  

movement  that  is  refused  a  beginning  cannot  have  an  end.  “If  socialism,”  says  an 
anarchist essayist, [Ernestan:  Socialism and Freedom .] “is an eternal evolution, its 
mean s  are  its  end.”     More  precisely,  it  has  no  ends;  it  has  only  means  which  are 
guaranteed  by  nothing  unless  by  a  value  foreign  to  evolution.     In  this  sense,  it  is 
correct  to  remark  that  the  dialectic  is  not  and  cannot  be  revolutionary.     From  our 
point  of  vie w,  it  is  only  nihilism  –   pure  movement  which  aims  at  denying 
everything which is not itself.  
         There  is  in  this  universe  no  reason,  therefore,  to  imagine  the  end  of  history.    
That is the only justification, however, for the sacrifices demanded of huma nity in 
the name of Marxism.    But it has no other reasonable basis but a  petitio principii , 
which  introduces  into  history  –   a  kingdom  that  was  meant  to  be  unique  and  self -
sufficient  -    a value foreign to history.    Since that value is, at the same time, for eign 
to ethics, it is not, properly speaking, a value on which one can base one’s conduct; 
it is a dogma without foundation that can be adopted only as the desperate effort to 
escape of a mind which is being stifled by solitude or by nihilism, or a value w hich 
is going to be imposed by those whom dogma profits.    The end of history is not an 
exemplary or a perfectionist value; it is an arbitrary and terroristic principle.  
         Marx recognized that all revolutions before his time had failed.    But he claimed  
that  the  revolution  announced  by  him  must  succeed  definitively.     Up  to  now,  the 
workers’ movement has lived on this affirmation which has been continually belied 
by  facts  and  of  which  it  is  high  time  that  the  falsehood  should  be  dispassionately 
denounced.     In  proportion  as  the  prophecy  was  postponed,  the  affirmation  of  the 
coming  of  the  final  kingdom,  which  could  only  find  the  most  feeble  support  in 
reason, became an article of faith.    The sole value of the Marxist world henceforth 
resides,  despite  Marx,  i n  a  dogma  imposed  on  an  entire  ideological  empire.     The 
kingdom of ends is used, like the ethics of eternity and the kingdom of heaven, for 
purposes of social mystification.    Élie Halévy declared himself unqualified to say if 
socialism  was  going  to  lead  to   the  universalization  of  the  Swiss   Republic   or  to 
European  Cæsarism.     Nowadays  we  are  better  informed.     The  prophecies  of 
Nietzsche, on this point at least, are justified.    Marxism is henceforth to win fame, 
in  defiance  of  its  own  teachings  and,  by  an  inevitable  process  of  logic,  by 
intellectual Cæsarism, which we must now finally describe.    The last representative 
of the struggle of justice against grace, it takes over, without having wanted to do 
so,  the  str uggle  of  justice  against  truth.     How  to  live  without  grace  -   that  is  the 
question  that  dominates  the  nineteenth  century.     “By  justice,”  answered  all  those 
who did not want to accept absolute nihilism.    To the people who despaired of the 
kingdom of heaven,  they promised the kingdom of men.    The preaching of the City 
of  Humanity   increased in fervour up to the end of the nineteenth century, when it 
became  really  visionary  in  tone  and  placed  scientific  certainties  in  the  service  of 
Utopi a.     But  the  kingdom  has  retreated  into  the  distance,  gigantic  wars  have 
  161  

ravaged  the  oldest  countries  of  Europe,  the  blood  of  rebels  has  bespattered  walls, 
and  total  justice  has  approached  not  a  step  nearer.     The  question  of  the  twen tieth 
century  –  for which the terrorists of 1905 died and which tortures the contemporary 
world  –   has  gradually  been  specified:  how  to  live  without  grace  and  without 
justice?  
         Only nihilism, and not rebellion, has answered that question.    Up to now,  only 
nihilism  has  spoken,  returning  once  more  to  the  theme  of  the  romantic  rebels: 
“Frenzy.”     Frenzy  in  terms  of  history  is  called  power.     The  will  to  power  came  to 
take  the  place  of  the  will  to  justice,  pretending  at  first  to  be  identified  with  it  and 
the n  relegating  it  to  a  place  somewhere  at  the  end  of  history,  waiting  until  such 
time  as  nothing  remains  on  earth  to  dominate.     Thus  the  ideological  consequence 
has triumphed over the economic consequence: the history of Russian Communism 
gives  the  lie  to  ev ery  one  of  its  principles.     Once  more  we  find,  at  the  end  of  this 
long  journey,  metaphysical  rebellion,  which,  this  time,  advances  to  the  clash  of 
arms and the whispering of passwords, but forgetful of its real principles, burying 
its solitude in the bosom  of armed masses, covering the emptiness of its negations 
with obstinate scholasticism, still directed toward the future, which it has made its 
only god, but separated from it by a multitude of nations that must be overthrown 
and  continents  that  must  be  do minated.     With  action  as  its  unique  principle,  and 
with the kingdom of man as an alibi, it has already begun, in the east of  Europe, to 
construct its own armed camp, face to face with other armed camps.  
   
   
         The  Kingdo m   of  Ends  
   
         Marx  never  dreamed  of  such  a  terrifying  apotheosis.     Nor,  indeed,  did  Lenin, 
though  he  took  a  decisive  step  toward  establishing  a  military  Empire.     As  good  a 
strategist  as  he  was  a  mediocre  philosopher,  he  first  of  all  posed  hims elf  the 
problem of the seizure of power.    Let us note immediately that it is absolutely false 
to talk, as if often done, of Lenin’s Jacobinism.    Only his idea of units of agitators 
and  revolutionaries  is  Jacobin.     The  Jacobins  believed  in  principles  and  in   virtue; 
they  died  because  they  had  to  deny  them.     Lenin  believes  only  in  the  revolution 
and in the virtue of expediency.    “One must be prepared for every sacrifice, to use 
if necessary every stratagem, ruse, illegal method, to be determined to conceal the  
truth,   for   the   sole   purpose   of   penetrating   the   labour   unions   ...   and   of 
accomplishing,  despite  everything,  the  Communist  task.”     The  struggle  against 
formal morality, inaugurated by Hegel and Marx, is found again in Lenin with his 
criticism of inefficacious  revolutionary attitudes.    Complete dominion was the aim 
of this movement.  
         It  we  examine  the  two  works  written  at  the  beginning  [ What  to  Do?   (1902)] 
  162  

and  at  the  end  [ The  State  and  the  Revolution   (1917)]  of  his  career  as  an  agitator, 
one  is  struck  by  the  fact  that  he  never  ceased  to  fight  mercilessly  against  the 
sentimental  forms  of  revolutionary  action.     He  wanted  to  abolish  the  morality  of 
revolutionary action because he believed, correctly, that revolutionary power could 
not  be  established  while  sti ll  respecting  the  Ten  Commandments.     When  he 
appears,  after  his  first  experiments  on  the  stage  of  history,  where  he  was  to  play 
such  an  important  role,  to  see  him  take  the  world  so  freely  and  so  naturally  as  it 
had  been  shaped  by  the  ideology  and  the  econo my  of  the  preceding  century,  one 
would  imagine  him  to  be  the  first  man  of  a  new  era.     Completely  impervious  to 
anxiety,  to  nostalgia,  to  ethics,  he  takes  command,  looks  for  the  best  method  of 
making the machine run, and decides that certain virtues are sui table for the driver 
of history’s chariot and that others are not.    He gropes a little at first and hesitates 
as  to  whether  Russia   should  first  pass  through  the  capitalist  and  industrial  phase.    
But  this  comes  to  the  same  as  doubtin g  whether  the  revolution  can  take  place  in 
Russia.    He himself is Russian and his task is to make the Russian Revolution.    He 
jettisons  economic  fatalism  and  embarks  on  action.     He  roundly  declares,  from 
1902  on,  that  the  workers  wi ll  never  elaborate  an  independent  ideology  by 
themselves.    He denies the spontaneity of the masses.    Socialist doctrine supposes a 
scientific  basis  that  only  the  intellectuals  can  give  it.     When  he  says  that  all 
distinctions  between  workers  and  intellectua ls  must  be  effaced,  what  he  really 
means is that it is possible not to be proletarian and know better than the proletariat 
what  its  interests  are.     He  then  congratulates  Lassalle  for  having  carried  on  a 
tenacious  struggle  against  the  spontaneity  of  the  mas ses.     “Theory,”  he  says, 
“should  subordinate  spontaneity.”  [Marx  said  much  the  same:  “What  certain 
proletarians,  or  even  the  entire  proletariat,  imagine  to  be  their  goal  is  of  no 
importance.”]     In  plain  language,  that  means  that  revolution  needs  leaders  an d 
theorists.  
         He   attacks   both   reformism,   which   he   considers   guilty   of   dissipating 
revolutionary  strength,  and  terrorism,  [We  know  that  his  elder  brother,  who  had 
chosen  terrorism,  was  hanged.]  which  he  thinks  an  exemplary  and  inefficacious 
attitude.    The revolution, before being either economic or sentimental, is military.    
Until the day that the revolution breaks out, revolutionary action is identified with 
strategy.     Autocracy  is  its  enemy,  whose  main  source  of  strength  is  the  police 
force,   which   is    nothing   but   a   corps   of   professional   political   soldiers.      The 
conclusion  is  simple:  “The  struggle  against  the  political  police  demands  special 
qualities,  demands  professional  revolutionaries.”     The  revolution  will  have  its 
professional  army  as  well  as  the  masses,  which  can  be  conscripted  when  needed.    
This corps of agitators must be organized before the mass is organized.    A network 
of agents is the expression that Lenin uses, thus announcing the reign of the secret 
society and of the realist monks of the r evolution: “We are the Young Turks of the 
  163  

revolution,” he said, “with something of the Jesuit added.”    From that moment the 
proletariat no longer has a mission.    It is only one powerful means, among others, 
in the hands of the revolutionary ascetics. [Hein e already called the socialists “the 
new puritans.”    Puritanism and revolution go, historically, together.]  
         The  problem  of  the  seizure  of  power  brings  in  its  train  the  problem  of  the 
State.     The  State  and  the  Revolution   (1917),  which  deals  with  this   subject,  is  the 
strangest  and  the  most  contradictory  of  pamphlets.     Lenin  employs  in  it  his 
favourite  method,  which  is  the  method  of  authority.  With  the  help  of  Marx  and 
Engels,  he  begins  by  taking  a  stand  against  any  kind  of  reformism  which  would 
claim t o utilize the bourgeois State  –  that organism of domination of one class over 
another.     The  bourgeois  State  owes  its  survival  to  the  police  and  to  the  army 
because   it   is   primarily   an   instrument   of   oppression.      It   reflects   both   the 
irreconcilable  antagonism   of  the  classes  and  the  forcible  subjugation  of  this 
antagonism.    This authority of fact is only worthy of contempt.    “Even the head of 
the  military  power  of  a  civilized  State  must  envy  the  head  of  the  clan  whom 
patriarchal society surrounded with voluntar y respect, not with respect imposed by 
the  club.”     Moreover,  Engels  has  firmly  established  that  the  concept  of  the  State 
and  the  concept  of  a  free  society  are  irreconcilable.     “Classes  will  disappear  as 
ineluctably  as  they  appeared.     With  the  disappearance   of  classes,  the  State  will 
inevitably  disappear.     The  society  that  reorganizes  production  on  the  basis  of  the 
free and equal association of the producers will relegate the machine of State to the 
place  it  deserves:  to  the  museum  of  antiquities,  side  by  si de  with  the  spinning -
wheel and the bronze axe.”  
         Doubtless  this  explains  why  inattentive  readers  have  ascribed  the  reason  for 
writing  The  State  and  the  Revolution   to  Lenin’s  anarchistic  tendencies  and  have 
regretted  the  peculiar  posterity  of  a  doctri ne  so  severe  about  the  army,  the  police, 
club, and bureaucracy.    But Lenin’s points of view, in order to be understood, must 
always  be  considered  in  terms  of  strategy.     If  he  defends  so  very  energetically 
Engels’  thesis  about  the  disappearance  of  the  bourg eois  State,  it  is  because  he 
wants, on the one hand, to put an obstacle in the way of the pure “economism” of 
Plekhanov   and   Kautsky   and,   on   the   other,   to   demonstrate   that   Kerensky’s 
government  is  a  bourgeois  government,  which  must  be  destroyed.     One  month 
later, moreover, he destroys it.  
         It  was  also  necessary  to  answer  those  who  objected  to  the  fact  that  the 
revolution  itself  had  need  of  an  administrative  and  repressive  apparatus.     There 
again   Marx   and   Engels   are   largely   used   to   prove,   authoritativel y,   that   the 
proletarian  State  is  not  a  State  organized  on  the  lines  of  other  states,  but  a  State 
which, by definition, is in the process of withering away.    “As soon as there is no 
longer  a  social  class  which  must  be  kept  oppressed  ....  a  State  ceases  to  be 
necessary.    The first act by which the [proletarian] State really establishes itself as 
  164  

the  representative  of  an  entire  society  –   the  seizure  of  the  society’s  means  of 
production  –  is, at the same time, the last real act of the State.    For the government 
o f people is substituted the administration of things.... The State is not abolished, it 
perishes.”     The  bourgeois  State  is  first  suppressed  by  the  proletariat.     Then,  but 
only  then,  the  proletarian  State  fades  away.     The  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  is 
ne cessary  –   first,  to  crush  or  suppress  what  remains  of  the  bourgeois  class; 
secondly, to bring about the socialization of the means of production.    Once these 
two tasks are accomplished, it immediately begins to wither away.  
         Lenin, therefore, begins  from the firm and definite principle that the State dies 
as  soon  as  the  socialization  of  the  means  of  production  is  achieved  and  the 
exploiting class has consequently been suppressed.    Yet, in the same pamphlet, he 
ends  by  justifying  the  preservation,  even   after  the  socialization  of  the  means  of 
production and, without any predictable end, of the dictatorship of a revolutionary 
faction over the rest of the people.    The pamphlet, which makes continual reference 
to  the  experiences  of  the  Commune,  flatly  contr adicts  the  contemporary  federalist 
and anti - authoritarian ideas that produced the Commune; and it is equally opposed 
to the optimistic forecasts of Marx and Engels.    The reason for this is clear; Lenin 
had not forgotten that the Commune failed.    As for the  means of such a surprising 
demonstration, they were even more simple: with each new difficulty encountered 
by the revolution, the State as described by Marx is endowed with a supplementary 
prerogative.     Ten  pages  farther  on,  without  any  kind  of  transition ,  Lenin  in  effect 
affirms that power is necessary to crush the resistance of the exploiters “and also to 
direct the great mass of the population, peasantry, lower middle classes, and semi -
proletariat,  in  the  management  of  the  socialist  economy.”     The  shift   here  is 
undeniable;  the  provisional  State  of  Marx   and  Engels  is  charged  with  a  new 
mission,  which  risks  prolonging  its  life  indefinitely.     Already  we  can  perceive  the 
contradiction of the Stalinist regime in conflict with its offic ial philosophy.    Either 
this  regime  has  realized  the  classless  socialist  society,  and  the  maintenance  of  a 
formidable  apparatus  of  repression  is  not  justified  in  Marxist  terms,  or  it  has  not 
realized  the  classless  society  and  has  therefore  proved  that  Marx ist  doctrine  is 
erroneous and, in particular, that the socialization of the means of production does 
not  mean  the  disappearance  of  classes.     Confronted  with  its  official  doctrine,  the 
regime is forced to choose: the doctrine is false, or the regime has bet rayed it.    In 
fact,  together  with  Nechaiev  and  Tkachev,  it  is  Lassalle,  the  inventor  of  State 
socialism, whom Lenin has caused to triumph in  Russia, to the detriment of Marx.    
From this moment on, the history of the interior struggl es of the party, from Lenin 
to  Stalin,  is  summed  up  in  the  struggle  between  the  workers’  democracy  and 
military   and   bureaucratic   dictatorship;   in   other   words,   between   justice   and 
expediency.  
         There is a moment’s doubt about whether Lenin is not going  to find a kind of 
  165  

means  of  conciliation  when  we  hear  him  praising  the  measures  adopted  by  the 
Commune:   elected,   revocable   functionaries,   remunerated   like   workers,   and 
replacement  of  industrial  bureaucracy  by  direct  workers’  management.     We  even 
catch a gl impse of a federalist Lenin who praises the institution and representation 
of the communes.    But it becomes rapidly clear that this federalism is only extolled 
to  the  extent  that  it  signifies  the  abolition  of  parliamentarianism.     Lenin,  in 
defiance  of  ever y  historical  truth,  calls  it  centralism  and  immediately  puts  the 
accent  on  the  idea  of  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  while  reproaching  the 
anarchists  for  their  intransigence  concerning  the  State.     At  this  point  a  new 
affirmation,  based  on  Engels,  is   introduced  which  justifies  the  continuation  of  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  after  socialization,  after  the  disappearance  of  the 
bourgeois  class,  and  even  after  control  of  the  masses  has  finally  been  achieved.    
The preservation of authority will now  have as limits those that are prescribed for 
it by the very conditions of production.    For example, the final withering away of 
the State will coincide with the moment when accommodation can be provided for 
all,  free  of  charge.     It  is  the  higher  phase  of  Communism:  “To  each  according  to 
his needs.”    Until then, the State will continue.  
         How  rapid  will  be  the  development  toward  this  higher  phase  of  Communism 
when  each  shall  receive  according  to  his  needs?     “That  we  do  not  and  cannot 
know.... We have no  data that allow us to solve these questions.”    “For the sake of 
greater clarity,” Lenin affirms with his customary arbitrariness, “it has never been 
vouchsafed  to  any  socialist  to  guarantee  the  advent  of  the  higher  phase  of 
Communism.”     It  can  be  said  that   at  this  point  freedom  definitely  dies.     From  the 
rule of the masses and the concept of the proletarian revolution we first pass on to 
the  idea  of  a  revolution  made  and  directed  by  professional  agents.     The  relentless 
criticism  of  the  State  is  then  reconci led  with  the  necessary,  but  provisional, 
dictatorship of the proletariat, embodied in its leaders.    Finally, it is announced that 
the end of this provisional condition cannot be foreseen and that, what is more, no 
one has ever presumed to promise that ther e will be an end.    After that it is logical 
that  the  autonomy  of  the  soviets  should  be  contested.     Makhno  betrayed,  and  the 
sailors of Kronstadt crushed by the party.  
         Undoubtedly, many of the affirmations of Lenin, who was a passionate lover of 
just ice,  can  still  be  opposed  to  the  Stalinist  regime;  mainly  the  notion  of  the 
withering away of the State.    Even if it is admitted that the proletarian State cannot 
disappear before many years have passed, it is still necessary, according to Marxist 
doctrine ,  that  it  should  tend  to  disappear  and  become  less  and  less  restrictive  in 
order  that  it  should  be  able  to  call  itself  proletarian.     It  is  certain  that  Lenin 
believed  this  trend  to  be  inevitable  and  that,  in  this  particular  sense,  he  has  been 
ignored.     For   more  than  thirty  years  the  proletarian  State  has  shown  no  signs  of 
progressive   anaemia.      On   the   contrary,   it   seems   to   be   enjoying   increasing 
  166  

prosperity.     Meanwhile,  in  a  lecture  at  the  Sverdlov  University  two  years  later, 
under  the  pressure  of  outside  eve nts  and  interior  realities,  Lenin  spoke  with  a 
precision which left little doubt about the indefinite continuation of the proletarian 
super - State.    “With this machine, or rather this weapon [the State], we shall crush 
every  form  of  exploitation,  and  when  t here  are  no  longer  any  possibilities  of 
exploitation left on earth, no more people owning land or factories, no more people 
gorging  themselves  under  the  eyes  of  others  who  are  starving,  when  such  things 
become  impossible,  then  and  only  then  shall  we  cast  t his  machine  aside.     Then 
there  will  be  neither  State  nor  exploitation.”     Therefore  as  long  as  there  exists  on 
earth,  and  no  longer  in  a  specific  society,  one  single  oppressed  person  and  one 
proprietor,  so  long  the  State  will  continue  to  exist.     It  also  wil l  be  obliged  to 
increase in strength during this period so as to vanquish one by one the injustices, 
the  governments  responsible  for  injustice,  the  obstinately  bourgeois  nations,  and 
the  people  who  are  blind  to  their  own  interests.     And  when,  on  an  earth  t hat  has 
finally  been  subdued  and  purged  of  enemies,  the  final  iniquity  shall  have  been 
drowned in the blood of the just and the unjust, then the State, which has reached 
the limit of all power, a monstrous idol covering the entire earth, will be discreetly  
absorbed into the silent city of Justice.  
         Under  the  easily  predictable  pressure  of  adverse  imperialism,  the  imperialism 
of justice was born, in reality, with Lenin.    But imperialism, even the imperialism 
of justice, has no other end but defeat or w orld empire.    Until then it has no other 
means  but  injustice.     From  now  on,  the  doctrine  is  definitively  identified  with  the 
prophecy.     For  the  sake  of  justice  in  the  far - away  future,  it  authorizes  injustice 
throughout  the  entire  course  of  history  and  beco mes  the  type  of  mystification 
which  Lenin  detested  more  than  anything  else  in  the  world.     It  contrives  the 
acceptance  of  injustice,  crime,  and  falsehood  by  the  promise  of  a  miracle.     Still 
greater  production,  still  more  power,  uninterrupted  labour,  incessa nt  suffering, 
permanent  war,  and  then  a  moment  will  come  when  universal  bondage  in  the 
totalitarian empire will be miraculously changed into its opposite: free leisure in a 
universal   republic.      Pseudo - revolutionary   mystification   has   now   acquired   a 
formula:  all freedom must be crushed in order to conquer the empire, and one day 
the  empire  will  be  the  equivalent  of  freedom.     And  so  the  way  to  unity  passes 
through totality.  
   
   
         Totality and Trials  
   
         Totality is, in effect, nothing more than the a ncient dream of unity common to 
both  believers  and  rebels,  but  projected  horizontally  onto  an  earth  deprived  of 
God.    To renounce every value, therefore, amounts to renouncing rebellion in order 
  167  

to escape the Empire and slavery.    Criticism of formal values  cannot pass over the 
concept  of  freedom.     Once  the  impossibility  has  been  recognized  of  creating,  by 
means  of  the  forces  of  rebellion  alone,  the  free  individual  of  whom  the  romantics 
dreamed, freedom itself has also been incorporated in the movement of hi story.    It 
has  become  freedom  fighting  for  existence,  which,  in  order  to  exist,  must  create 
itself.    Identified with the dynamism of history, it cannot play its proper role until 
history comes to a stop, in the realization of the  Un iversal   City.    Until then, every 
one  of  its  victories  will  lead  to  an  antithesis  that  will  render  it  pointless.     The 
German  nation  frees  itself  from  its  oppressors,  but  at  the  price  of  the  freedom  of 
every  German.     The  individuals  u nder  a  totalitarian  regime  are  not  free,  even 
though  man  in  the  collective  sense  is  free.     Finally,  when  the  Empire  delivers  the 
entire human species, freedom will reign over herds of slaves, who at least will be 
free in relation to God and, in general, in  relation to every kind of transcendence.    
The dialectic miracle, the transformation of quantity into quality, is explained here: 
it is the decision to call total servitude freedom.    Moreover, as in all the examples 
cited  by  Hegel  and  Marx,  there  is  no  obj ective  transformation,  but  only  a 
subjective change of denomination.    In other words, there is no miracle.    If the only 
hope  of  nihilism  lies  in  thinking  that  millions  of  slaves  can  one  day  constitute  a 
humanity  which  will  be  freed  forever,  then  history  is   nothing  but  a  desperate 
dream.     Historical  thought  was  to  deliver  man  from  subjection  to  a  divinity;  but 
this   liberation   demanded   of   him   the   most   absolute   subjection   to   historical 
evolution.    Then man takes refuge in the permanence of the party in the sam e way 
that  he  formerly  prostrated  himself  before  the  altar.     That  is  why  the  era  which 
dares  to  claim  that  it  is  the  most  rebellious  that  has  ever  existed  only  offers  a 
choice of various types of conformity.    The real passion of the twentieth century is 
se rvitude.  
         But  total  freedom  is  no  more  easy  to  conquer  than  individual  freedom.     To 
ensure man’s empire over the world, it is necessary to suppress in the world and in 
man  everything  that  escapes  the  Empire,  everything  that  does  not  come  under  the 
re ign  of  quantity:  and  this  is  an  endless  undertaking.     The  Empire  must  embrace 
time,  space,  and  people,  which  compose  the  three  dimensions  of  history.     It  is 
simultaneously war, obscurantism, and tyranny, desperately affirming that one day 
it will be libert y, fraternity, and truth; the logic of its postulates obliges it to do so.    
There is undoubtedly in  Russia   today, even in its Communist doctrines, a truth that 
denies  Stalanist  ideology.     But  this  ideology  has  its  logic,  which  must  be  isolated 
and exposed if we wish the revolutionary spirit to escape final disgrace.  
         The cynical intervention of the armies of the Western powers against the Soviet 
Revolution  demonstrated,  among  other  things,  to  the  Russian  revolutionaries  that 
wa r  and  nationalism  were  realities  in  the  same  category  as  the  class  struggle.    
Without  an  international  solidarity  of  the  working  classes,  a  solidarity  that  would 
  168  

come  into  play  automatically,  no  interior  revolution  could  be  considered  likely  to 
survive unl ess an international order was created.    From then on, it was necessary 
to  admit  that  the  Universal   City   could  only  be  built  on  two  conditions:  either  by 
almost  simultaneous  revolutions  in  every  big  country,  or  by  the  liquidation, 
through  war,  of  the  bourgeois  nations;  permanent  revolution  or  permanent  war.    
We  know  that  the  first  point  of  view  almost  triumphed.     The  revolutionary 
movements  in  Germany,  Italy,  and   France   marked  the  high  point   in  revolutionary 
hopes  and  aspirations.     But  the  crushing  of  these  revolutions  and  the  ensuing 
reinforcement  of  capitalist  regimes  have  made  war  the  reality  of  the  revolution.    
T hus  the  philosophy  of  enlightenment  finally  led  to  the  Europe   of  the  black - out.    
By the logic of history and of doctrine, the  Universal   City, which was to have been 
realized  by  the  spo ntaneous  insurrection  of  the  oppressed,  has  been  little  by  little 
replaced by the Empire, imposed by means of power.    Engels, with the approval of 
Marx,   dispassionately   accepted   this   prospect   when   he   wrote   in   answer   to 
Bakunin’s  Appeal  to  the  Slavs :  “The  n ext  world  war  will  cause  the  disappearance 
from the surface of the globe, not only of reactionary classes and dynasties, but of 
whole  races  of  reactionaries.     That  also  is  part  of  progress.”     That  particular  form 
of  progress,  in  Engels’  mind,  was  destined  to  eliminate  the  Russia   of  the  czars.    
Today  the  Russian  nation  has  reversed  the  direction  of  progress.     War,  cold  and 
lukewarm,  is  the  slavery  imposed  by  world  Empire.     But  now  that  it  has  become 
imperialist,  the  revolution  is  in  a n  impasse.     If  it  does  not  renounce  its  false 
principles  in  order  to  return  to  the  origins  of  rebellion,  it  only  means  the 
continuation,    for    several    generations    and    until    capitalism    spontaneously 
decomposes, of a total dictatorship over hundreds of million s of men; or, if it wants 
to  precipitate  the  advent  of  the  Universal  City,  it  only  signifies  the  atomic  war, 
which  it  does  not  want  and  after  which  any  city  whatsoever  will  only  be  able  to 
contemplate  complete  destruction.     World  revolution,  by  the  very  la ws  of  the 
history  it  so  imprudently  deified,  is  condemned  to  the  police  or  to  the  bomb.     At 
the  same  time,  it  finds  itself  confronted  with  yet  another  contradiction.     The 
sacrifice  of  ethics  and  virtue,  the  acceptance  of  all  the  means  that  it  constantly 
ju stified  by  the  end  it  pursued,  can  only  be  accepted,  if  absolutely  necessary,  in 
terms of an end that is reasonably likely to be realized.    The cold war supposes, by 
the indefinite prolongation of dictatorship, the indefinite negation of this end.    The 
dan ger  of  war,  moreover,  makes  this  end  highly  unlikely.     The  extension  of  the 
Empire  over  the  face  of  the  earth  is  an  inevitable  necessity  for  twentieth - century 
revolution.     But  this  necessity  confronts  it  with  a  final  dilemma:  to  construct  new 
principles  fo r  itself  or  to  renounce  justice  and  peace,  whose  definitive  reign  it 
always wanted.  
         While waiting to dominate space, the Empire sees itself also compelled to reign 
over  time.     In  denying  every  stable  truth,  it  is  compelled  to  go  to  the  point  of 
  169  

deny ing  the  very  lowest  form  of  truth  –   the  truth  of  history.     It  has  transported 
revolution, which is still impossible on a worldwide scale, back into a past that it is 
determined  to  deny.     Even  that,  too,  is  logical.     Any  kind  of  coherence  that  is  not 
purely  economic between the past and the future of humanity supposes a constant 
which, in its turn, can lead to a belief in a human nature.    The profound coherence 
that  Marx,  who  was  a  man  of  culture,  had  perceived  as  existing  between  all 
civilizations,  threaten ed  to  swamp  his  thesis  and  to  bring  to  light  a  natural 
continuity, far broader in scope that economic continuity.    Little by little, Russian 
Communism  has  been  forced  to  burn  its  bridges,  to  introduce  a  solution  of 
continuity  into  the  problem  of  historical   evolution.     The  negation  of  every  genius 
who proves to be a heretic (and almost all of them do), the denial of the benefits of 
civilization, of art  –  to the infinite degree in which it escapes from history  –  and the 
renunciation  of  vital  traditions,  have  gradually  forced  contemporary  Marxism 
within narrower and narrower limits.    It has not sufficed for Marxism to deny or to 
silence  the  things  in  the  history  of  the  world  which  cannot  be  assimilated  by  its 
doctrine, or to reject the discoveries of modern sci ence.    It has also had to rewrite 
history, even the most recent and the best - known, even the history of the party and 
of  the  Revolution.     Year  by  year,  sometimes  month  by  month,  Pravda   corrects 
itself, and rewritten editions of the official history books f ollow one another off the 
presses.    Lenin is censored, Marx is not published.    At this point comparison with 
religious obscurantism is no longer even fair.    The Church never went so far as to 
decide that the divine manifestation was embodied in two, then i n four, or in three, 
and then again in two, persons.    The acceleration of events that is part of our times 
also  affects  the  fabrication  of  truth,  which,  accomplished  at  this  speed,  becomes 
pure fantasy.    As in the fairy story, in which all the looms of an  entire town wove 
the  empty  air  to  provide  clothes  for  the  king,  thousands  of  men,  whose  strange 
profession  it  is,  rewrite  a  presumptuous  version  of  history,  which  is  destroyed  the 
same evening while waiting for the calm voice of a child to proclaim suddenl y that 
the  king  is  naked.     This  small  voice,  the  voice  of  rebellion,  will  then  be  saying, 
what  all  the  world  can  already  see,  that  a  revolution  which,  in  order  to  last,  is 
condemned  to  deny  its  universal  vocation,  or  to  renounce  itself  in  order  to  be 
unive rsal, is living by false principles.  
         Meanwhile, these principles continue to dominate the lives of millions of men.    
The dream of Empire, held in check by the realities of time and space, gratifies its 
desires  on  humanity.     People  are  not  only  hosti le  to  the  Empire  as  individuals:  in 
that  case  the  traditional  methods  of  terror  would  suffice.     They  are  hostile  to  it 
insofar  as  human  nature,  to  date,  has  never  been  able  to  live  by  history  alone  and 
has always escaped from it by some means.    The Empire  supposes a negation and a 
certainty:  the  certainty  of  the  infinite  malleability  of  man  and  the  negation  of 
human   nature.      Propaganda   techniques   serve   to   measure   the   degree   of   this 
  170  

malleability   and   try   to   make   reflection   and   conditioned   reflex   coincide.    
Pr opaganda  makes  it  possible  to  sign  a  pact  with  those  who  for  years  have  been 
designated as the mortal enemy.    Even more, it allows the psychological effect thus 
obtained to be reversed and the people, once again, to be aligned against this same 
enemy.     The   experiment  has  not  yet  been  brought  to  an  end,  but  its  principle  is 
logical.     If  there  is  no  human  nature,  then  the  malleability  of  man  is,  in  fact, 
infinite.     Political  realism,  on  this  level,  is  nothing  but  unbridled  romanticism,  a 
romanticism of expedi ency.  
         In this way it is possible to explain why Russian Marxism rejects, in its entirety 
and  even  though  it  knows  very  well  how  to  make  use  of  it,  the  world  of  the 
irrational.     The  irrational  can  serve  the  Empire  as  well  as  refute  it.     The  irrationa l 
escapes  calculation,  and  calculation  alone  must  reign  in  the  Empire.     Man  is  only 
an  interplay  of  forces  that  can  be  rationally  influenced.     A  few  inconsiderate 
Marxists were rash enough to imagine that they could reconcile their doctrine with 
Freud’s, f or example.    Their eyes were opened for them quickly enough.    Freud is 
a   heretic   thinker   and   a   “petit   bourgeois”   because   he   brought   to   light   the 
unconscious  and  bestowed  on  it  at  least  as  much  reality  as  on  the  super  or  social 
ego.    This unconscious mind c an therefore define the originality of a human nature 
opposed  to  the  historic  ego.     Man,  on  the  contrary,  must  be  explained  in  terms  of 
the  social  and  rational  ego  and  as  an  object  of  calculation.     Therefore  it  has  been 
necessary to enslave not only each i ndividual life, but also the most irrational and 
the   most   solitary   event   of   all,   the   expectancy   of   which   accompanies   man 
throughout his entire life.    The Empire, in its convulsive effort to found a definitive 
kingdom, strives to integrate death.  
         A  l iving  man  can  be  enslaved  and  reduced  to  the  historic  condition  of  an 
object.     But  if  he  dies  in  refusing  to  be  enslaved,  he  reaffirms  the  existence  of 
another  kind  of  human  nature  which  refuses  to  be  classified  as  an  object.     That  is 
why the accursed is n ever produced and killed before the eyes of the world unless 
he  consents  to  say  that  his  death  is  just  and  unless  he  conforms  to  the  Empire  of 
objects.    One must die dishonoured or no longer exist  –  neither in life nor in death.    
In  the  latter  event,  the  v ictim  does  not  die,  he  disappears.     If  he  is  punished,  his 
punishment would be a silent protest and might cause a fissure in the totality.    But 
the  culprit  is  not  punished,  he  is  simply  replaced  in  the  totality  and  thus  helps  to 
construct the machine of Em pire.    He is transformed into a cog in the machinery of 
production, so indispensable that in the long run he will not be used in production 
because  he  is  guilty,  but  considered  guilty  because  production  has  need  of  him.    
The  concentration - camp  system  of  th e  Russians  has,  in  fact,  accomplished  the 
dialectical  transition  from  the  government  of  people  to  the  administration  of 
objects, but by identifying people with objects.  
         Even  the  enemy  must  collaborate  in  the  common  endeavour.     Beyond  the 
  171  

confines  of   the  Empire  there  is  no  salvation.     This  is,  or  will  be,  the  Empire  of 
friendship.     But  this  friendship  is  the  befriending  of  objects,  for  the  friend  cannot 
be  preferred  to  the  Empire.     The  friendship  of  people  –   and  there  is  no  other 
definition of it  –  is  specific solidarity, to the point of death, against everything that 
is not part of the kingdom of friendship.    The friendship of objects is friendship in 
general, friendship with everything, which supposes  –  when it is a question of self -
preservation  –   mu tual  denunciation.     He  who  loves  his  friend  loves  him  in  the 
present, and the revolution wants to love only a man who has not yet appeared.    To 
love  is,  in  a  certain  way,  to  kill  the  perfect  man  who  is  going  to  be  born  of  the 
revolution.    In order that one  day he may live, he should from now on be preferred 
to anyone else.    In the kingdom of humanity, men are bound by ties of affection; in 
the Empire of objects, men are united by mutual accusation.    The city that planned 
to be the city of fraternity becomes  an ant - heap of solitary men.  
         On another plane, only a brute in a state of irrational fury can imagine that men 
should  be  sadistically  tortured  in  order  to  obtain  their  consent.     Such  an  act  only 
accomplishes the subjugation of one man by another, i n an outrageous relationship 
between persons.    The representative of rational totality is content, on the contrary, 
to  allow  the  object  to  subdue  the  person  in  the  soul  of  man.     The  highest  mind  is 
first  of  all  reduced  to  the  level  of  the  lowest  by  the  pol ice  technique  of  joint 
accusation.     Then  five,  ten,  twenty  nights  of  insomnia  will  culminate  an  illusory 
conviction and will bring yet another dead soul into the world.    From this point of 
view, the only psychological revolution known to our times since Fr eud’s has been 
brought  about  by  the  NKVD  and  the  political  police  in  general.     Guided  by  a 
determinist  hypothesis  that  calculates  the  weak  points  and  the  degree  of  elasticity 
of the soul, these new techniques have once again thrust aside one of man’s limit s 
and  have  attempted  to  demonstrate  that  no  individual  psychology  is  original  and 
that  the  common  measure  of  all  human  character  is  matter.     They  have  literally 
created the physics of the soul.  
         From that point on, traditional human relations have be en transformed.    These 
progressive  transformations  characterize  the  world  of  rational  terror  in  which,  in 
different   degrees,  Europe   lives.      Dialogue   and   personal   relations   have   been 
replaced   by   propaganda   or   polemic,   which   are   two   k inds   of   monologue.    
Abstraction, which belongs to the world of power and calculation, has replaced the 
real passions, which are in the domain of the flesh and of the irrational.    The ration 
coupon  substituted  for  bread;  love  and  friendship  submitted  to  a  d octrine,  and 
destiny to a plan; punishment considered the norm, and production substituted for 
living creation, quite satisfactorily describe this disembodied Europe, peopled with 
positive  or  negative  symbols  of  power.     “How  miserable,”  Marx  exclaims,  “is  a 
society  that  knows  no  better  means  of  defence  than  the  executioner!”     But  in 
Marx’s day the executioner had not yet become a philosopher and at least made no 
  172  

pretence of universal philanthropy.  
         The  ultimate  contradiction  of  the  greatest  revolution   that  history  ever  knew 
does  not,  after  all,  lie  entirely  in  the  fact  that  it  lays  claim  to  justice  despite  an 
uninterrupted  procession  of  violence  and  injustice.     This  is  an  evil  common  to  all 
times and a product of servitude or mystification.    The traged y of this revolution is 
the  tragedy  of  nihilism  –   it  confounds  itself  with  the  drama  of  contemporary 
intelligence, which, while claiming to be universal, is only responsible for a series 
of mutilations of men’s minds.    Totality is not unity.    The state of  siege, even when 
it is extended to the very boundaries of the earth, is not reconciliation.    The claim 
to a universal city is supported in this revolution only by rejecting two thirds of the 
world  and  the  magnificent  heritage  of  the  centuries,  and  by  denyi ng,  to  the 
advantage of history, both nature and beauty and by depriving man of the power of 
passion, doubt, happiness, and imaginative invention  –  in a word, of his greatness.    
The  principles  that  men  give  to  themselves  end  by  overwhelming  their  noblest 
i ntentions.     By  dint  of  argument,  incessant  struggle,  polemics,  excommunications, 
persecutions conducted and suffered, the universal city of free and fraternal man is 
slowly   diverted   and   gives   way   to   the   only   universe   in   which   history   and 
expediency can in  fact be elevated to the position of supreme judges: the universe 
of the trial.  
         Every   religion   revolves   around   the   concepts   of   innocence   and   guilt.    
Prometheus,  the  first  rebel,  however,  denies  the  right  to  punish.     Zeus  himself, 
Zeus above all, is n ot innocent enough to exercise this right.    Thus rebellion, in its 
very first manifestation, refuses to recognize punishment as legitimate.    But in his 
last  incarnation,  at  the  end  of  his  exhausting  journey,  the  rebel  once  more  adopts 
the religious concept  of punishment and places it at the centre of his universe.    The 
supreme  judge  is  no  longer  in  the  heavens;  history  itself  acts  as  an  implacable 
divinity.    History, in one sense, is nothing but a protracted punishment, for the real 
reward  will  be  reaped  on ly  at  the  end  of  time.     We  are  far,  it  would  seem,  from 
Marxism and from Hegel, and even farther from the first rebels.    Nevertheless, all 
purely  historical  thought  leads  to  the  brink  of  this  abyss.     To  the  extent  to  which 
Marx  predicted  the  inevitable  est ablishment  of  the  classless  city  and  to  the  extent 
to  which  he  thus  establishes  the  good  will  of  history,  every  check  to  the  advance 
toward  freedom  must  be  imputed  to  the  ill  will  of  mankind.     Marx  reintroduced 
crime  and  punishment  into  the  unchristian  wor ld,  but  only  in  relation  to  history.    
Marxism  in  one  of  its  aspects  is  a  doctrine  of  culpability  on  man’s  part  and 
innocence on history’s.    His interpretation of history is that when it is deprived of 
power,  it  expresses  itself  in  revolutionary  violence;  a t  the  height  of  its  power  it 
risked becoming legal violence  –  in other words, terror and trial.  
         In the universe of religion, moreover, the final judgement is postponed; it is not 
necessary for crime to be punished without delay or for innocence to b e rewarded.    
  173  

In the new universe, on the other hand, the judgement pronounced by history must 
be  pronounced  immediately,  for  culpability  coincides  with  the  check  to  progress 
and  with  punishment.     History  has  judged  Bukarin  in  that  it  condemned  him  to 
death .    It proclaims the innocence of Stalin: he is the most powerful man on earth.    
It is the same with Tito, about whom we do not know, so we are told, whether he is 
guilty or not.    He is on trial, as was Trotsky, whose guilt only became clear at the 
moment w hen the murderer’s axe cracked his skull.    Tito has been denounced, but 
not  yet  struck  down.     When  he  has  been  struck  down,  his  guilt  will  be  certain.    
Besides,  Trotsky’s  and  Tito’s  provisional  innocence  depended  and  depends  to  a 
large extent on geography;  they were far removed from the arm of secular power.    
That is why those who can be reached by that arm must be judged without delay.    
The  definitive  judgement  of  history  depends  on  an  infinite  number  of  judgements 
which will have been pronounced between n ow and then and which will finally be 
confirmed  or  invalidated.     Thus  there  is  the  promise  of  mysterious  rehabilitations 
on  the  day  when  the  tribunal  of  the  world  will  be  established  by  the  world  itself.    
Some, who will proclaim themselves contemptible tra itors, will enter the Pantheon 
of mankind; others who maintain their innocence will be condemned to the hell of 
history.     But  who,  then,  will  be  the  judge?     Man  himself,  finally  fulfilled  in  his 
divinity.     Meanwhile,  those  who  conceived  the  prophecy,  and  w ho  alone  are 
capable of reading in history the meaning with which they previously endowed it, 
will  pronounce  sentence  –   definitive  for  the  guilty,  provisional  sentences  for  the 
judges.     But  it  sometimes  happens  that  those  who  judge,  like  Rajk,  are  judged  i n 
their  turn.     Must  we  believe  that  he  no  longer  interpreted  history  correctly?     His 
defeat  and  death  in  fact  prove  it.     Then  who  guarantees  that  those  who  judge  him 
today  will  not  be  traitors  tomorrow,  hurled  down  from  the  height  of  their 
judgement  seat  t o  the  concrete  caves  where  history’s  damned  are  dying?     The 
guarantee  lies  in  their  infallible  clairvoyance.     What  proof  is  there  of  that?     Their 
uninterrupted success.    The world of trial is a spherical world in which success and 
innocence  authenticate  ea ch  other  and  where  every  mirror  reflects  the  same 
mystification.  
         Thus  there  will  be  a  historic  grace,  [“The  rise  of  reason,”  in  the  historical 
universe,  presents  the  problem  of  evil  in  a  new  form.]  whose  power  alone  can 
interpret events and which fa vours or excommunicates the subject of the Empire.    
To  guard  against  its  caprices,  the  latter  has  only  faith  at  his  disposal  –   faith  as 
defined  in  the  Spiritual  Exercises   of  Saint  Ignatius:  “We  should  always  be 
prepared,  so  as  never  to  err,  to  believe  that   what  I  see  as  white  is  black,  if  the 
hierarchic   Church   defines   it   thus.”      Only   this   active   faith   held   by   the 
representatives  of  truth  can  save  the  subject  from  the  mysterious  ravages  of 
history.     He  is  not  yet  free  of  the  universe  of  trial  to  which  he  is  bound  by  the 
historic  sentiment  of  fear.     But  without  this  faith  he  runs  a  perpetual  risk  of 
  174  

becoming,  without  having  wished  to  do  so  and  with  the  best  intentions  in  the 
world, an objective criminal.  
         The universe of trial finally culminates in this  concept, at which point we have 
come  full  circle.     At  the  end  of  this  long  insurrection  in  the  name  of  human 
innocence,  there  arises,  by  an  inevitable  perversion  of  fact,  the  affirmation  of 
general  culpability.     Every  man  is  a  criminal  who  is  unaware  of  be ing  so.     The 
objective criminal is, precisely, he who believed himself innocent.    His actions he 
considered subjectively inoffensive, or even advantageous for the future of justice.    
But it is demonstrated to him that objectively his actions have been harm ful to that 
future.      Are   we   dealing   with   scientific   objectivity?      No,   but   with   historical 
objectivity.     How  is  it  possible  to  know,  for  example,  if  the  future  of  justice  is 
compromised   by   the   unconsidered   denunciation   of   present   injustice?      Real 
objectivit y  would  consist  in  judging  by  those  results  which  can  be  scientifically 
observed  and  by  facts  and  their  general  tendencies.     But  the  concept  of  objective 
culpability proves that this curious kind of objectivity is only based on results and 
facts  which  will   only  become  accessible  to  science  in  the  year  2000,  at  the  very 
earliest.     Meanwhile,  it  is  embodied  in  an  interminable  subjectivity  which  is 
imposed  on  others  as  objectivity:  and  that  is  the  philosophic  definition  of  terror.    
This type of objectivity has  no definable meaning, but power will give it a content 
by decreeing that everything of which it does not approve is guilty.    It will consent 
to say, or allow to be said, to philosophers who live outside the Empire, that in this 
way it is taking a risk in  regard to history, just as the objective culprit took a risk, 
though  without  knowing  it.     When  victim  and  executioner  have  disappeared,  the 
matter will be judged.    But this consolation is of any value only to the executioner, 
who has really no need of it.    Meanwhile, the faithful are regularly bidden to attend 
strange  feasts  where,  according  to  scrupulous  rites,  victims  overwhelmed  with 
contrition are offered as sacrifice to the god of history.  
         The express object of this idea is to prevent indifferen ce to matters of faith.    It 
is  compulsory  evangelization.     The  law,  whose  function  it  is  to  pursue  suspects, 
fabricates  them.     By  fabricating  them,  it  converts  them.     In  bourgeois  society,  for 
example, every citizen is supposed to approve the law.    In obje ctive society every 
citizen will be presumed to disapprove of it.    Or at least he should always be ready 
to  prove  that  he  does  not  disapprove  of  it.     Culpability  no  longer  has  any  factual 
basis;   it   simply   consists   of   absence   of   faith,   which   explains   the   ap parent 
contradiction of the objective system.    Under a capitalist regime, the man who says 
he  is  neutral  is  considered  objectively  to  be  favourable  to  the  regime.     Under  the 
regime  of  the  Empire,  the  man  who  is  neutral  is  considered  hostile  objectively  to 
the  regime.     There  is  nothing  astonishing  about  that.     If  a  subject  of  the  Empire 
does  not  believe  in  the  Empire,  he  is,  of  his  own  choice,  nothing,  historically 
speaking;  therefore  he  takes  sides  against  history  and  is,  in  other  words,  a 
  175  

blasphemer.     Even   lip  service  paid  to  faith  will  not  suffice;  it  must  be  lived  and 
acted  upon  in  order  to  be  served  properly  and  the  citizen  must  be  always  on  the 
alert  to  consent  in  time  to  the  changes  in  dogma.     At  the  slightest  error  potential 
culpability  becomes  in  its   turn  objective  culpability.     Consummating  its  history  in 
this  manner,  the  revolution  is  not  content  with  killing  all  rebellion.     It  insists  in 
holding  every  man,  even  the  most  servile,  responsible  for  the  fact  that  rebellion 
ever  existed  and  still  exists  under  the  sun.     In  the  universe  of  the  trial,  conquered 
and completed at last, a race of culprits will endlessly shuffle toward an impossible 
innocence, under the grim regard of the grand inquisitors.    In the twentieth century 
power wears the mask of trage dy.  
   
         Here ends Prometheus’ surprising itinerary.    Proclaiming his hatred of the gods 
and  his  love  of  mankind,  he  turns  away  from  Zeus  with  scorn  and  approaches 
mortal  men  in  order  to  lead  them  in  an  assault  against  the  heavens.     But  men  are 
weak  an d  cowardly;  they  must  be  organized.     They  love  pleasure  and  immediate 
happiness; they must be taught to refuse, in order to grow up, immediate rewards.    
Thus  Prometheus,  in  his  turn,  becomes  a  master  who  first  teaches  and  then 
commands.     Men  doubt  that  the y  can  safely  attack  the  city  of  light  and  are  even 
uncertain whether the city exists.    They must be saved from themselves.    The hero 
then  tells  them  that  he,  and  he  alone,  knows  the  city.     Those  who  doubt  his  word 
will  be  thrown  into  the  desert,  chained  to   a  rock,  offered  to  the  vultures.     The 
others will march henceforth in darkness, behind the pensive and solitary master.    
Prometheus alone has become god and reigns over the solitude of men.    But from 
Zeus  he  has  gained  only  solitude  and  cruelty;  he  is  no  longer  Prometheus,  he  is 
Cæsar.    The real, the eternal Prometheus has now assumed the aspect of one of his 
victims.    The same cry, springing from the depths of the past, rings forever through 
the Scythian desert.  
   
   
   
Rebellion and Revolution  
   
*  
   
         The  revolution  based  on  principles  kills  God  in  the  person  of  His 
representative  on  earth.     The  revolution  of  the  twentieth  century  kills  what 
remains   of   God   in   the   principles   themselves   and   consecrates   historical 
nihilism.    Whatever paths nihilism may pr oceed to take, from the moment that 
it  decides  to  be  the  creative  force  of  its  period  and  ignores  every  moral 
  176  

precept, it begins to build the  temple   of  Cæsar.    To choose history, and history 
alone,  is  to  choo se  nihilism,  in  defiance  of  the  teachings  of  rebellion  itself.    
Those  who  rush  blindly  to  history  in  the  name  of  the  irrational,  proclaiming 
that  it  is  meaningless,  encounter  servitude  and  terror  and  finally  emerge  into 
the  universe  of  concentration  camps.     Those  who  launch  themselves  into  it 
preaching  its  absolute  rationality  encounter  servitude  and  terror  and  emerge 
into  the  universe  of  the  concentration  camps.     Fascism  wants  to  establish  the 
advent of the Nietzschean superman.    It immediately discovers t hat God, if He 
exists,  may  well  be  this  or  that,  but  He  is  primarily  the  master  of  death.     If 
man wants to become God, he arrogates to himself the power of life or death 
over others.    Manufacturer of corpses and of submen, he is a sub - man himself 
and not G od, but the ignoble servant of death.    The rational revolution, on its 
part,  wants  to  realize  the  total  man  described  by  Marx.     The  logic  of  history, 
from the moment that it is totally accepted, gradually leads it, against its most 
passionate convictions,  to mutilate man more and more and to transform itself 
into objective crime.    It is not legitimate to identify the ends of Fascism with 
the  ends  of  Russian  Communism.     The  first  represents  the  exaltation  of  the 
executioner  by  the  executioner;  the  second,  mo re  dramatic  in  concept,  the 
exaltation  of  the  executioner  by  the  victims.     The  former  never  dreamed  of 
liberating  all  men,  but  only  of  liberating  a  few  by  subjugating  the  rest.     The 
latter,   in   its   most   profound   principle,   aims   at   liberating   all   men   by 
prov isionally  enslaving  them  all.     It  must  be  granted  the  grandeur  of  its 
intentions.     But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  legitimate  to  identify  the  means 
employed  by  both  with  the  political  cynicism  that  they  have  drawn  from  the 
same  source,  moral  nihilism.     Every thing  has  taken  place  as  though  the 
descendants of Stirner and of Nechaiev were making use of the descendants of 
Kaliayev  and  Proudhon.     The  nihilists  today  are  seated  on  thrones.     Methods 
of thought which claim to give the lead to our world in the name of  revolution 
has become, in reality, ideologies of consent and not of rebellion.    That is why 
our period is the period of private and public techniques of annihilation.  
         The  revolution,  obedient  to  the  dictates  of  nihilism,  has  in  fact  turned  against 
its  rebel  origins.     Man,  who  hated  death  and  the  god  of  death,  who  despaired  of 
personal survival, wanted to free himself in the immortality of the species.    But as 
long  as  the  group  does  not  dominate  the  world,  as  long  as  the  species  does  not 
reign,  it  is   still  necessary  to  die.     Time  is  pressing,  therefore;  persuasion  demands 
leisure, and friendship a structure that will never be completed; thus terror remains 
the  shortest  route  to  immortality.     But  these  extremes  simultaneously  proclaim  a 
longing  for  the   primitive  values  of  rebellion.     The  contemporary  revolution  that 
claims to deny every value is already, in itself, a standard for judging values.    Man 
wants to reign supreme through the revolution.    But why reign supreme if nothing 
  177  

has  any  meaning?     Why  w ish  for  immortality  if  the  aspect  of  life  is  so  hideous?    
There  is  no  method  of  thought  which  is  absolutely  nihilist  except,  perhaps,  the 
method  that  leads  to  suicide,  any  more  than  there  is  absolute  materialism.     The 
destruction  of  man  once  more  affirms  m an.     Terror  and  concentration  camps  are 
the  drastic  means  used  by  man  to  escape  solitude.     The  thirst  for  unity  must  be 
assuaged,  even  in  the  common  grave.     If  men  kill  one  another,  it  is  because  they 
reject  mortality  and  desire  immortality  for  all  men.    T herefore,  in  one  sense,  they 
commit  suicide.     But  they  prove,  at  the  same  time,  that  they  cannot  dispense  with 
mankind;  they  satisfy  a  terrible  hunger  for  fraternity.     “The  human  being  needs 
happiness,  and  when  he  is  unhappy,  he  needs  another  human  being.”     Those  who 
reject  the  agony  of  living  and  dying  wish  to  dominate.     “Solitude  is  power,”  says 
Sade.     Power,  today,  because  for  thousands  of  solitary  people  it  signifies  the 
suffering of others, bears witness to the need for others.    Terror is the homage th at 
the malignant recluse finally pays to the brotherhood of man.  
         But nihilism, if it does not exist, tries to do so; and that is enough to make the 
world a desert.    This particular form of madness is what has given our times their 
forbidding  aspect.     The  land  of  humanism  has  become  the  Europe   of  today,  the 
land of inhumanity.    But the times are ours and how can we disown them?    If our 
history is our hell, still we cannot avert our faces.    This horror cannot be escaped, 
but  is  assumed  in  order  to  be  ignored,  by  the  very  people  who  accepted  it  with 
lucidity  and  not  by  those  who,  having  provoked  it,  think  that  they  have  a  right  to 
pronounce judgement.    Such a plant could, in fact, thrive only in the fertile soil of 
accumulated  ini quities.     In  the  last  throes  of  a  death  struggle  in  which  men  are 
indiscriminately  involved  by  the  insanity  of  the  times,  the  enemy  remains  the 
fraternal  enemy.     Even  when  he  has  been  denounced  for  his  errors,  he  can  be 
neither  despised  nor  hated;  misfortu ne  is  today  the  common  fatherland,  and  the 
only earthly kingdom that has fulfilled the promise.  
         The longing for rest and peace must itself be thrust aside; it coincides with the 
acceptance  of  iniquity.     Those  who  weep  for  the  happy  periods  they  enco unter  in 
history  acknowledge  what  they  want:  not  the  alleviation  but  the  silencing  of 
misery.    But let us, on the contrary, sing the praises of the times when misery cries 
aloud  and  disturbs  the  sleep  of  the  surfeited  rich!     Maistre  has  already  spoken  of 
t he  “terrible  sermon  that  the  revolution  preached  to  kings.”     It  preaches  the  same 
sermon  today,  and  in  a  still  more  urgent  fashion,  to  the  dishonoured  elite  of  the 
times.    This sermon must be heard.    In every word and in every act, even though it 
be  crimin al,  lies  the  promise  of  a  value  that  we  must  seek  out  and  bring  to  light.    
The  future  cannot  be  foreseen  and  it  may  be  that  the  renaissance  is  impossible.    
Even  though  the  historical  dialectic  is  false  and  criminal,  the  world,  after  all,  can 
very  well  real ize  itself  in  crime  and  in  pursuit  of  a  false  concept.     This  kind  of 
resignation  is,  quite  simply,  rejected  here:  we  must  stake  everything  on  the 
  178  

renaissance.  
         Nothing remains for us, moreover, but to be reborn or to die.    If we are at the 
moment  in  history  when  rebellion  has  reached  the  point  of  its  most  extreme 
contradiction  by  denying  itself,  then  it  must  either  perish  with  the  world  it  has 
created or find a new object of faith and a new impetus.    Before going any farther, 
this  contradiction  must  a t  least  be  stated  in  plain  language.     It  is  not  a  clear 
definition to say like the existentialists, for example (who are also subjected for the 
moment to the cult of history and its contradictions), [Atheist existentialism at least 
wishes  to  create  a  moral ity.     This  morality  is  still  to  be  defined.     But  the  real 
difficulty  lies  in  creating  it  without  reintroducing  into  historical  existence  a  value 
foreign  to  history.]     that  there  is  progress  in  the  transition  from  rebellion  to 
revolution   and   that   the   rebel  is   nothing   if   he   is   not   revolutionary.      The 
contradiction  is,  in  reality,  considerably  more  restricted.     The  revolutionary  is 
simultaneously  a  rebel  or  he  is  not  a  revolutionary,  but  a  policeman  and  a 
bureaucrat who turns against rebellion.    But if he is a  rebel, he ends by taking sides 
against  the  revolution.     So  much  so  that  there  is  absolutely  no  progress  from  one 
attitude to the other, but coexistence and endlessly increasing contradiction.    Every 
revolutionary  ends  by  becoming  either  an  oppressor  or  a  heretic.     In  the  purely 
historical universe that they have chosen, rebellion and revolution end in the same 
dilemma: either police rule or insanity.  
         On  this  level,  therefore,  history  alone  offers  no  hope.     It  is  not  a  source  of 
values, but is still  a source of nihilism.    Can one, at least, create values in defiance 
of history, on the single level of a philosophy based on eternity?    That comes to the 
same  as  ratifying  historical  injustice  and  the  sufferings  of  man.     To  slander  the 
world  leads  to  the  n ihilism  defined  by  Nietzsche.     Thought  that  is  derived  from 
history  alone,  like  thought  that  rejects  history  completely,  deprives  man  of  the 
means and the reason for living.    The former drives him to the extreme decadence 
of  “why  live?”  the  latter  to  “how  live?”     History,  necessary  but  not  sufficient,  is 
therefore  only  an  occasional  cause.     It  is  not  absence  of  values,  nor  values 
themselves,  nor  even  the  source  of  values.     It  is  one  occasion,  among  others,  for 
man  to  prove  the  still  confused  existence  of  a  value  that  allows  him  to  judge 
history.    Rebellion itself makes us the promise of us a value.  
         Absolute  revolution,  in  fact,  supposes  the  absolute  malleability  of  human 
nature  and  its  possible  reduction  to  the  condition  of  a  historical  force.     But 
re bellion,  in  man,  is  the  refusal  to  be  treated  as  an  object  and  to  be  reduced  to 
simple historical terms.    It is the affirmation of a nature common to all men, which 
eludes  the  world  of  power.     History,  undoubtedly,  is  one  of  the  limits  of  man’s 
experience;   in  this  sense  the  revolutionaries  are  right.     But  man,  by  rebelling, 
imposes  in  his  turn  a  limit  to  history,  and  at  this  limit  the  promise  of  a  value  is 
born.    It is the birth of this value that the Cæsarian revolution implacably combats 
  179  

today  because  it  presages  its  final  defeat  and  the  obligation  to  renounce  its 
principles.    The fate of the world is not being played out at present, as it seemed it 
would   be,   in   the   struggle   between   bourgeois   production   and   revolutionary 
production;  their  end  results  will  be  the  same.     It  is  being  played  out  between  the 
forces   of   rebellion   and   those   of   the   Cæsarian   revolution.      The   triumphant 
revolution  must  prove  by  means  of  its  police,  its  trials,  and  its  excommunications 
that   there   is   no   such   thing   as   human   nature.      Humi liated   rebellion,   by   its 
contradictions,  its  sufferings,  its  continuous  defeats,  and  its  inexhaustible  pride, 
must give its content of hope and suffering to this nature.  
        “ I rebel, therefore we exist,” said the slave.    Metaphysical rebellion then add ed: 
“we  are  alone,”  by  which  we  still  live  today.     But  if  we  are  alone  beneath  the 
empty  heavens,  if  we  must  die  forever,  how  can  we  really  exist?     Metaphysical 
rebellion,  then,  tried  to  construct  existence  with  appearances.     After  which  purely 
historical  thought  came  to  say  that  to  be  was  to  act.     We  did  not  exist,  but  we 
should  exist  by  every  possible  means.     Our  revolution  is  an  attempt  to  conquer  a 
new  existence,  by  action  that  recognizes  no  moral  strictures.     That  is  why  it  is 
condemned  to  live  only  fo r  history  and  in  a  reign  of  terror.     Man  is  nothing, 
according  to  the  revolution,  if  he  does  not  obtain  from  history,  willingly  and  by 
force,  unanimous  approval.     At  this  exact  point  the  limit  is  exceeded,  rebellion  is 
first betrayed and then logically ass assinated, for it has never affirmed, in its purest 
form,  anything  but  the  existence  of  a  limit  and  the  divided  existence  that  we 
represent:  it  is  not,  originally,  the  total  negation  of  all  existence.     Quite  the 
contrary,  it  says  yes  and  no  simultaneously.     It  is  the  rejection  of  one  part  of 
existence  in  the  name  of  another  part,  which  it  exalts.     The  more  profound  the 
exaltation,  the  more  implacable  is  the  rejection.     Then,  when  rebellion,  in  rage  or 
intoxication, adopts the attitude of “all or nothing” an d the negation of all existence 
and  all  human  nature,  it  is  at  this  point  that  it  denies  itself.     Only  total  negation 
justifies the concept of a totality that must be conquered.    But the affirmation of a 
limit,  a  dignity,  and  a  beauty  common  to  all  men  onl y  entails  the  necessity  of 
extending this value to embrace everything and everyone and of advancing toward 
unity  without  denying  the  origins  of  rebellion.     In  this  sense  rebellion,  in  its 
original  authenticity,  does  not  justify  any  purely  historical  concep t.     Rebellion’s 
demand is unity; historical revolution’s demand is totality.    The former starts from 
a  negative  supported  by  an  affirmative,  the  latter  from  absolute  negation  and  is 
condemned  to  every  aspect  of  slavery  in  order  to  fabricate  an  affirmative  that  is 
dismissed  until  the  end  of  time.     One  is  creative,  the  other  nihilist.     The  first  is 
dedicated to creation so as to exist more and more completely; the second is forced 
to  produce  results  in  order  to  negate  more  and  more  completely.     The  historical  
revolution is always obliged to act in the hope, which is invariably disappointed, of 
one  day  really  existing.     Even  unanimous  consent  will  not  suffice  to  create  its 
  180  

existence.    “Obey,” said  Frederick   the Great to his subjects; but  when he died, his 
words  were:  “I  am  tired  of  ruling  slaves.”     To  escape  this  absurd  destiny,  the 
revolution  is  and  will  be  condemned  to  renounce,  not  only  its  own  principles,  but 
nihilism  as  well  as  purely  historical  values  in  order  to  rediscover  the  crea tive 
source of rebellion.    Revolution, in order to be creative, cannot do without either a 
moral or metaphysical rule to balance the insanity of history.    Undoubtedly, it has 
nothing but scorn for the formal and mystifying morality to be found in bourgeois  
society.    But its folly has been to extend this scorn to every moral demand.    At the 
very sources of its inspiration and in its most profound transports is to be found a 
rule that is not formal but that nevertheless can serve as a guide.    Rebellion, in fa ct, 
says  –  and will say more and more explicitly  –  that revolution must try to act, not 
in order to come into existence at some future date in the eyes of a world reduced 
to  acquiescence,  but  in  terms  of  the  obscure  existence  that  is  already  made 
manifest  in  the  act  of  insurrection.     This  rule  is  neither  formal  nor  subject  to 
history, it is what can be best described by examining it in its pure state  –  in artistic 
creation.    Before doing so, let us only note that to the “I rebel, therefore we exist” 
and  the   “We  are  alone”  of  metaphysical  rebellion,  rebellion  at  grips  with  history 
adds that instead of killing and dying in order to produce the being that we are not, 
we have to live and let live in order to create what we are.  
   
Part Four  
   
Rebellion and Art  
   
*  
   
         Art  is  the  activity  that  exalts  and  denies  simultaneously.     “No  artist 
tolerates  reality,”  says  Nietzsche.     That  is  true,  but  no  artist  can  get  along 
without  reality.     Artistic  creation  is  a  demand  for  unity  and  a  rejection  of  the 
world.    But it  rejects the world on account of what it lacks and in the name of 
what it sometimes is.    Rebellion can be observed here in its pure state and in 
its  original  complexities.     Thus  art  should  give  us  a  final  perspective  on  the 
content of rebellion.  
         The   hostility  to  art  shown  by  all  revolutionary  reformers  must,  however,  be 
pointed  out.     Plato  is  moderately  reasonable.     He  only  calls  in  question  the 
deceptive function of language and exiles only poets from his republic.    Apart from 
that,  he  considers  bea uty  more  important  than  the  world.     But  the  revolutionary 
movement  of  modern  times  coincides  with  an  artistic  process  that  is  not  yet 
  181  

completed.     The  Reformation  chooses  morality  and  exiles  beauty.     Rousseau 
denounces in art a corruption of nature by socie ty.    Saint - Just inveighs against the 
theatre, and in the elaborate programme he composes for the “Feast of Reason” he 
states  that  he  would  like  Reason  to  be  impersonated  by  someone  “virtuous  rather 
than beautiful.”    The French Revolution gave birth to no a rtists, but only to a great 
journalist,  Desmoulins,  and  to  a  clandestine  writer,  Sade.     It  guillotines  the  only 
poet  of  the  times.  [André  Chénier.  (ED.)]     The  only  great  prose - writer  [François 
René  Chateaubriand.  (ED.)]  took  refuge  in  London   and  pleaded  the  cause  of 
Christianity and legitimacy.    A little later the followers of Saint - Simon demanded a 
“socially  useful  form  of  art.     “Art  for  progress”  was  a  commonplace  of  the  whole 
period,  and  one  that  Hugo  revived,  without  succeeding  i n  making  it  sound 
convincing.    Vallès alone brings to his malediction of art a tone of imprecation that 
gives it authenticity.  
         This  tone  is  also  employed  by  the  Russian  nihilists.     Pisarev  proclaims  the 
deposition of æsthetic values, in favour of pr agmatic values.    “I would rather be a 
Russian shoemaker than a Russian Raphael.”    A pair of shoes, in his eyes, is more 
useful  than  Shakespeare.     The  nihilist  Nekrassov,  a  great  and  moving  poet, 
nevertheless affirms that he prefers a piece of cheese to all  of Pushkin.    Finally, we 
are   familiar   with   the   excommunication   of   art   pronounced   by   Tolstoy.    
Revolutionary  Russia   finally  even  turned  its  back  on  the  marble  statues  of  Venus 
and Apollo, still gilded by the Italian sun, that Peter  the Great had had brought to 
his  summer  garden  in  St.  Petersburg.     Suffering,  sometimes,  turns  away  from  too 
painful expressions of happiness.  
         German  ideology  is  no  less  severe  in  its  accusations.     According  to  the 
revolution ary  interpreters  of  Hegel’s  Phenomenology ,  there  will  be  no  art  in 
reconciled  society.     Beauty  will  be  lived  and  no  longer  only  imagined.     Reality, 
become  entirely  rational,  will  satisfy,  completely  by  itself,  every  appetite.     The 
criticism  of  formal  consc ience  and  of  escapist  values  naturally  extends  itself  to 
embrace art.    Art does not belong to all times; it is determined, on the contrary, by 
its  period,  and  expresses,  says  Marx,  the  privileged  values  of  the  ruling  classes.    
Thus there is only one revolu tionary form of art, which is, precisely, art dedicated 
to the service of the revolution.    Moreover, by creating beauty outside the course of 
history,  art  impedes  the  only  rational  activity:  the  transformation  of  history  itself 
into   absolute   beauty.      The   R ussian   shoemaker,   once   he   is   aware   of   his 
revolutionary  role,  is  the  real  creator  of  definitive  beauty.     As  for  Raphael,  he 
created only a transitory beauty, which will be quite incomprehensible to the new 
man.  
         Marx asks himself, it is true, how the  beauty created by the Greeks can still be 
beautiful  for  us.     His  answer  is  that  this  beauty  is  the  expression  of  the  naïve 
childhood  of  this  world  and  that  we  have,  in  the  midst  of  our  adult  struggles,  a 
  182  

nostalgia   for   this   childhood.      But   how   can   the   mast erpieces   of   the   Italian 
Renaissance,  how  can  Rembrandt,  how  can  Chinese  art  still  be  beautiful  in  our 
eyes?     What  does  it  matter!     The  trial  of  art  has  been  opened  definitively  and  is 
continuing  today  with  the  embarrassed  complicity  of  artists  and  intellec tuals 
dedicated  to  calumniating  both  their  art  and  their  intelligence.     We  notice,  in  fact, 
that in the contest between Shakespeare and the shoemaker, it is not the shoemaker 
who maligns Shakespeare or beauty but, on the contrary, the man who continues to 
read Shakespeare and who does not choose to make shoes  –  which he could never 
make, if it comes to that.    The artists of our times resemble the repentant noblemen 
of  nineteenth - century  Russia;  their  bad  conscience  is  their  excuse.     But  the  last 
emotion  that  an  artist  can  experience,  confronted  with  his  art,  is  repentance.     It  is 
going far beyond simple and necessary humility to pretend to dismiss beauty, too, 
until  the  end  of  time,  and     meanwhile,  to  deprive  all  the  world,  including  the 
shoemaker, of this additional bread of which one has taken advantage oneself.  
         This form of ascetic insanity, nevertheless, has its reasons, which at least are of 
interest to us.    They express on the æsthetic level the struggle, already described , of 
revolution  and  rebellion.     In  every  rebellion  is  to  be  found  the  metaphysical 
demand  for  unity,  the  impossibility  of  capturing  it,  and  the  construction  of  a 
substitutive  universe.     Rebellion,  from  this  point  of  view,  is  a  fabricator  of 
universes.     Thi s  also  defines  art.     The  demands  of  rebellion  are  really,  in  part, 
æsthetic  demands.     All  rebel  thought,  as  we  have  seen,  is  expressed  either  in 
rhetoric  or  in  a  closed  universe.     The  rhetoric  of  ramparts  in  Lucretius,  the 
convents  and  isolated  castles  of  Sade,  the  island  or  the  lonely  rock  of  the 
romantics, the solitary heights of Nietzsche, the primeval seas of Lautréamont, the 
parapets of Rimbaud, the terrifying castles of the surrealists, which spring up in a 
storm  of  flowers,  the  prison,  the  nation  beh ind  barbed  wire,  the  concentration 
camps,  the  empire  of  free  slaves,  all  illustrate,  after  their  own  fashion,  the  same 
need  for  coherence  and  unity.     In  these  sealed  worlds,  man  can  reign  and  have 
knowledge at last.  
         This tendency is common to all th e arts.    The artist reconstructs the world to his 
plan.    The symphonies of nature know no rests.    The world is never quiet; even its 
silence eternally resounds with the same notes, in vibrations that escape our ears.    
As for those that we perceive, they ca rry sounds to us, occasionally a chord, never 
a  melody.     Music  exists,  however,  in  which  symphonies  are  completed,  where 
melody gives its form to sound that by themselves have none, and where, finally, a 
particular  arrangement  of  notes  extracts  from  natura l  disorder  a  unity  that  is 
satisfying to the mind and the heart.  
        “ I believe more and more,” wrote Van Gogh “that God must not be judged on 
this earth.    It is one of His sketches that has turned out badly.”    Every artist tries to 
reconstruct  this  ske tch  and  to  give  it  the  style  it  lacks.     The  greatest  and  most 
  183  

ambitious  of  all  the  arts,  sculpture,  is  bent  on  capturing,  in  three  dimensions,  the 
fugitive  figure  of  man,  and  on  restoring  the  unity  of  great  style  to  the  general 
disorder  of  gestures.     Sculp ture  does  not  reject  resemblance,  of  which,  indeed,  it 
has need.    But resemblance is not its first aim.    What it is looking for, in its periods 
of  greatness,  is  the  gesture,  the  expression,  or  the  empty  stare  which  will  sum  up 
all the gestures and all the  stares in the world.    Its purpose is not to imitate, but to 
stylize  and  to  imprison  in  one  significant  expression  the  fleeting  ecstasy  of  the 
body or the infinite variety of human attitudes.    Then, and only then, does it erect, 
on  the  pediments  of  teeming  cities,  the  model,  the  type,  the  motionless  perfection 
that  will  cool,  for  one  moment,  the  fevered  brow  of  man.     The  frustrated  lover  of 
love  can  finally  gaze  at  the  Greek  caryatids  and  grasp  what  it  is  that  triumphs,  in 
the body and face of the woman, ove r every degradation.  
         The  principle  of  painting  is  also  to  make  a  choice.     “Even  genius,”  writes 
Delacroix, ruminating on his art, “is only the gift of generalizing and choosing.”     
The  painter  isolates  his  subject,  which  is  the  first  way  of  unifying   it.     Landscapes 
flee,  vanish  from  the  memory,  or  destroy  one  another.     That  is  why  the  landscape 
painter  or  the  painter  of  still  life  isolates  in  space  and  time  things  that  normally 
change  with  the  light,  get  lost  in  an  infinite  perspective,  or  disappear  under  the 
impact of other values.    The first thing that a landscape painter does is to square off 
his  canvas.     He  eliminates  as  much  as  he  includes.     Similarly,  subject - painting 
isolates,  in  both  time  and  space,  an  action  that  normally  would  become  lost  in  
another action.    Thus the painter arrives at a point of stabilization.    The really great 
creative  artists  are  those  who,  like  Piero  della  Francesca,  give  the  impression  that 
the stabilization has only just taken place, that the projection machine has sudd enly 
stopped  dead.     All  their  subjects  give  the  impression  that,  by  some  miracle  of  art, 
they   continue   to   live,   while   ceasing   to   be   mortal.      Long   after   his   death, 
Rembrandt’s  philosopher  still  meditates,  between  light  and  shade,  on  the  same 
problem.  
        “ How  vain  a  thing  is  painting  that  beguiles  us  by  the  resemblance  to  objects 
that do not please us at all.”    Delacroix, who quotes Pascal’s celebrated remark, is 
correct in writing “strange” instead of “vain.”    These objects do not please us at all 
becaus e we do not see them; they are obscured and negated by a perpetual process 
of change.    Who looked at the hands of the executioner during the Flagellation, and 
the  olive  trees  on  the  way  to  the  Cross?     But  here  we  see  them  represented, 
transfigured  by  the  i ncessant  movement  of  the  Passion;  and  the  agony  of  Christ, 
imprisoned in images of violence and beauty, cries out again each day in the cold 
rooms of museums.    A painter’s style lies in this blending of nature and history, in 
this  stability  imposed  on  ince ssant  change.     Art  realizes,  without  apparent  effort, 
the  reconciliation  of  the  unique  with  the  universal  of  which  Hegel  dreamed.    
Perhaps  that  is  why  periods,  such  as  ours,  which  are  bent  on  unity  to  the  point  of 
  184  

madness,  turn  to  primitive  arts,  in  which  stylization  is  the  most  intense  and  unity 
the  most  provocative.     The  most  extreme  stylization  is  always  found  at  the 
beginning and end of artistic movements; it demonstrates the intensity of negation 
and  transposition  which  has  given  modern  painting  its  di sorderly  impetus  toward 
interpreting unity and existence.    Van Gogh’s admirable complaint is the arrogant 
and  desperate  cry  of  all  artists.     “I  can  very  well,  in  life  and  in  painting,  too,  do 
without God.    But I cannot, suffering as I do, do without someth ing that is greater 
than I am, that is my life  –  the power to create.”  
         But  the  artist’s  rebellion  against  reality,  which  is  automatically  suspect  to  the 
totalitarian  revolution,  contains  the  same  affirmation  as  the  spontaneous  rebellion 
of the oppre ssed.    The revolutionary spirit, born of total negation, instinctively felt 
that, as well as refusal, there was also consent to be found in art; that there was a 
risk  of  contemplating  counterbalancing  action,  beauty,  and  injustice,  and  that  in 
certain case s beauty itself was a form of injustice from which there was no appeal.    
Equally well, no form of art can survive on total denial alone.    Just as all thought, 
and  primarily  that  of  non - signification,  signifies  something,  so  there  is  no  art  that 
has no sign ification.    Man can allow himself to denounce the total injustice of the 
world  and  then  demand  a  total  justice  that  he  alone  will  create.     But  he  cannot 
affirm   the   total   hideousness   of   the   world.      To   create   beauty,   he   must 
simultaneously  reject  reality  and   exalt  certain  of  its  aspects.     Art  disputes  reality, 
but  does  not  hide  from  it.     Nietzsche  could  deny  any  form  of  transcendence, 
whether  moral  or  divine,  by  saying  that  transcendence  drove  one  to  slander  this 
world  and  this  life.     But  perhaps  there  is  a  l iving  transcendence,  of  which  beauty 
carries  the  promise,  which  can  make  this  mortal  and  limited  world  preferable  to 
and  more  appealing  then  any  other.     Art  thus  leads  us  back  to  the  origins  of 
rebellion,  to  the  extent  that  it  tries  to  give  its  form  to  an  elusive  value  which  the 
future perpetually promises, but of which the artist has a presentiment and wishes 
to snatch from the grasp of history.    We shall understand this better in considering 
the  art  form  whose  precise  aim  is  to  become  part  of  the  process  of  evolution  in 
order to give it the style that it lacks; in other words, the novel.  
   
   
         Rebellion and the Novel  
   
         It  is  possible  to  separate  the  literature  of  consent,  which  coincides,  by  and 
large, with ancient history and the classical per iod, from the literature of rebellion, 
which  begins  in  modern  times.     We  note  the  scarcity  of  fiction  in  the  former.    
When it exists, with very few exceptions, it is not concerned with a story but with 
fantasy  ( Theagenes  and  Charicleia   or  Astræa ).     These  a re  fairy  tales,  not  novels.    
In the latter period, the novel form is really developed  –  a form that has not ceased 
  185  

to thrive and extend its field of activity up to the present day, simultaneously with 
the critical and revolutionary movement.    The novel is  born at the same time as the 
spirit of rebellion and expresses, on the æsthetic plane, the same ambition.  
        “ A make - believe story, written in prose,” says Littré about the novel.    Is it only 
that?    In any case, a Catholic critic, Stanislas Fumet, has  written: “Art, whatever its 
aims, is always in sinful competition with God.”    Actually, it is more correct to talk 
about  competition  with  God,  in  connection  with  the  novel,  than  of  competition 
with  man’s  civil  status.     Thibaudet  expresses  a  similar  idea  wh en  he  says  of 
Balzac:  “The  Comédie  humaine   is  the  Imitation   of  God  the  Father.”     The  aim  of 
great literature seems to be to create a closed universe or a perfect type.    The West, 
in  its  great  creative  works,  does  not  limit  itself  to  retracing  the  steps  of  its  daily 
life.    It consistently presents magnificent images which inflame its imagination and 
sets off, hotfoot, in pursuit of them.  
         After all, writing or even reading a novel is an unusual activity.    To construct a 
story by a new arrangement of ac tual facts has nothing inevitable or even necessary 
about  it.     Even  if  the  ordinary  explanation  of  the  mutual  pleasure  of  reader  and 
writer were true, it would still be necessary to ask why it was incumbent on a large 
part   of   humanity   to   take   pleasure   and  an   interest   in   make - believe   stories.    
Revolutionary  criticism  condemns  the  novel  in  its  pure  form  as  being  simply  a 
means  of  escape  for  an  idle  imagination.     In  everyday  speech  we  find  the  term 
romance   used  to  describe  an  exaggerated  description  or  lying  a ccount  of  some 
event.     Not  so  very  long  ago  it  was  a  commonplace  that  young  girls,  despite  all 
appearance  to  the  contrary,  were  “romantic,”  by  which  was  meant  that  these 
idealized creatures took no account of everyday realities.    In general, it has always 
been considered that the romantic was quite separate from life and that it enhanced 
it  while,  at  the  same  time,  betraying  it.     The  simplest  and  most  common  way  of 
envisaging romantic expression is to see it as an escapist exercise.    Common sense 
joins hand s with revolutionary criticism.  
         But  from  what  are  we  escaping  by  means  of  the  novel?     From  a  reality  we 
consider   too   overwhelming?      Happy   people   read   novels,   too,   and   it   is   an 
established  fact  that  extreme  suffering  takes  away  the  taste  for  reading.     From 
another angle, the romantic universe of the novel certainly has less substance than 
the  other  universe  where  people  of  flesh  and  blood  harass  us  without  respite.    
However, by what magic does Adolphe, for instance, seem so much more familiar 
to us th an Benjamin Constant, and Count Mosca than our professional moralists?    
Balzac once terminated a long conversation about politics and the fate of the world 
by saying: “And now let us get back to serious matters,” meaning that he wanted to 
talk about his no vels.    The incontestable importance of the world of the novel, our 
insistence, in fact, on taking seriously the innumerable myths with which we have 
been  provided  for  the  last  two  centuries  by  the  genius  of  writers,  is  not  fully 
  1 86  

explained  by  the  desire  to  escape.     Romantic  activities  undoubtedly  imply  a 
rejection  of  reality.     But  this  rejection  is  not  a  mere  escapist  flight,  and  might  be 
interpreted as the retreat of the soul which, according to Hegel, creates for itself, in 
its  disappointment,  a  fictitious   world  in  which  ethics  reigns  alone.     The  edifying 
novel,  however,  is  far  from  being  great  literature;  and  the  best  of  all  romantic 
novels,  Paul  et  Virginie ,  a  really  heartbreaking  book,  makes  no  concessions  to 
consolation.  
         The  contradiction  is  this :  man  rejects  the  world  as  it  is,  without  accepting  the 
necessity of escaping it.    In fact, men cling to the world and by far the majority do 
not  want  to  abandon  it.     Far  from  always  wanting  to  forget  it,  they  suffer,  on  the 
contrary, from not being able t o possess it completely enough, estranged citizens of 
the world, exiled from their own country.    Except for vivid moments of fulfilment, 
all  reality  for  them  is  incomplete.     Their  actions  escape  them  in  the  form  of  other 
actions,  return  in  unexpected  guise s  to  judge  them,  and  disappear  like  the  water 
Tantalus  longed  to  drink,  into  some  still  undiscovered  orifice.     To  know  the 
whereabouts of the orifice, to control the course of the river, to understand life, at 
last, as destiny  –  these are their true aspira tions.    But this vision which, in the realm 
of consciousness at least, will reconcile them with themselves, can only appear, if 
it  ever  does  appear,  at  the  fugitive  moment  that  is  death,  in  which  everything  is 
consummated.    In order to exist just once in t he world, it is necessary never again 
to exist.  
         At  this  point  is  born  the  fatal  envy  which  so  many  men  feel  of  the  lives  of 
others.     Seen  from  a  distance,  these  existences  seem  to  possess  a  coherence  and  a 
unity  which  they  cannot  have  in  reality,  bu t  which  seem  evident  to  the  spectator.    
He sees only the salient points of these lives without taking into account the details 
of  corrosion.     Thus  we  make  these  lives  into  works  of  art.     In  an  elementary 
fashion  we  turn  them  into  novels.     In  this  sense,  ev eryone  tries  to  make  his  life  a 
work  of  art.     We  want  love  to  last  and  we  know  that  it  does  not  last;  even  if,  by 
some  miracle,  it  were  to  last  a  whole  lifetime,  it  would  still  be  incomplete.    
Perhaps,  in  this  insatiable  need  for  perpetuation,  we  should  be tter  understand 
human  suffering  if  we  knew  that  it  was  eternal.     It  appears  that  great  minds  are 
sometimes  less  horrified  by  suffering  than  by  the  fact  that  it  does  not  endure.     In 
default  of  inexhaustible  happiness,  eternal  suffering  would  at  least  give  u s  a 
destiny.    But we do not even have that consolation, and our worst agonies come to 
an  end  one  day.     One  morning,  after  many  dark  nights  of  despair,  an  irrepressible 
longing to live will announce to us the fact that all is finished and that suffering has  
no more meaning than happiness.  
         The desire for possession is only another form of the desire to endure; it is this 
that  comprises  the  impotent  delirium  of  love.     No  human  being,  even  the  most 
passionately  loved  and  passionately  loving,  is  ever  in  o ur  possession.     On  the 
  187  

pitiless  earth  where  lovers  are  often  separated  in  death  and  are  always  born 
divided,  the  total  possession  of  another  human  being  and  absolute  communion 
throughout  an  entire  lifetime  are  impossible  dreams.     The  desire  for  possession  is 
insatiable, to such a point that it can survive even love itself.    To love, therefore, is 
to sterilize the person one loves.    The shamefaced suffering of the abandoned lover 
is  not  so  much  due  to  being  no  longer  loved  as  to  knowing  that  the  other  partne r 
can  and  must  love  again.     In  the  final  analysis,  every  man  devoured  by  the 
overpowering  desire  to  endure  and  possess  wishes  that  those  whom  he  has  loved 
were either sterile or dead.    This is real rebellion.    Those who have not insisted, at 
least  once,  on   the  absolute  virginity  of  human  beings  and  of  the  world,  who  have 
not trembled with longing and impotence at the fact that it is impossible, and have 
then  not  been  destroyed  by  trying  to  love  half - heartedly,  perpetually  forced  back 
upon their longing for  the absolute, cannot understand the realities of rebellion and 
its  ravening  desire  for  destruction.     But  the  lives  of  others  always  escape  us,  and 
we  escape  them  too;  they  have  no  firm  outline.     Life  from  this  point  of  view  is 
without  style.     It  is  only  an   impulse  that  endlessly  pursues  its  form  without  ever 
finding  it.     Man,  tortured  by  this,  tries  in  vain  to  find  the  form  that  will  impose 
certain  limits  between  which  he  can  be  king.     If  only  one  single  living  thing  had 
definite form, he would be reconcile d!  
         There  is  not  one  human  being  who,  above  a  certain  elementary  level  of 
consciousness, does not exhaust himself in trying to find formulas or attitudes that 
will give his existence the unity it lacks.    Appearance and action, the dandy and the 
revol utionary, all demand unity in order to exist, and in order to exist on this earth.    
As in those moving and unhappy relationships which sometimes survive for a very 
long  time  because  one  of  the  partners  is  waiting  to  find  the  right  word,  action, 
gesture,  or   situation  which  will  bring  his  adventure  to  an  end  on  exactly  the  right 
note,  so  everyone  proposes  and  creates  for  himself  the  final  word.     It  is  not 
sufficient to live, there must be a destiny that does not have to wait for death.    It is 
therefore  justif iable  to  say  that  man  has  an  idea  of  a  better  world  than  this.     But 
better does not mean different, it means unified.    This passion which lifts the mind 
above  the  commonplaces  of  a  dispersed  world,  from  which  it  nevertheless  cannot 
free itself, is the pass ion for unity.    It does not result in mediocre efforts to escape, 
however,  but  in  the  most  obstinate  demands.     Religion  or  crime,  every  human 
endeavour  in  fact,  finally  obeys  this  unreasonable  desire  and  claims  to  give  life  a 
form  it  does  not  have.     The  sa me  impulse,  which  can  lead  to  the  adoration  of  the 
heavens  or  the  destruction  of  man,  also  leads  to  creative  literature,  which  derives 
its serious content from this source.  
         What, in fact, is a novel but a universe in which action is endowed with for m, 
where  final  words  are  pronounced,  where  people  possess  one  another  completely, 
and  where  life  assumes  the  aspect  of  destiny?  [Even  if  the  novel  describes  only 
  188  

nostalgia, despair, frustration, it still creates a form of salvation.    To talk of despair 
is  to conquer it.    Despairing literature is a contradiction in terms.]    The world of the 
novel is only a rectification of the world we live in, in pursuance of man’s deepest 
wishes.     For  the  world  is  undoubtedly  the  same  one  we  know.     The  heroes  speak 
our  lan guage,  have  our  weaknesses  and  our  strength.     Their  universe  is  neither 
more  beautiful  nor  more  enlightening  than  ours.     But  they,  at  least,  pursue  their 
destinies to the bitter end and there are no more fascinating heroes than those who 
indulge  their  pass ions  to  the  fullest,  Kirilov  and  Stavrogin,  Mme  Graslin,  Julien 
Sorel,  or  the  Prince  de  Clèves.     It  is  here  that  we  can  no  longer  keep  pace  with 
them, for they complete things that we can never consummate.  
         Mme de La Fayette derived the  Princesse de  Clèves  from the most harrowing 
experiences.     Undoubtedly  she  is  Mme  de  Clèves  and  yet  she  is  not.     Where  lies 
the difference?    The difference is that Mme de La Fayette did not go into a convent 
and that no one around her died of despair.    No doubt she knew  moments, at least, 
of  agony  in  her  extraordinary  passion.     But  there  was  no  culminating - point;  she 
survived  her  love  and  prolonged  it  by  ceasing  to  live  it,  and  finally  no  one,  not 
even  herself,  would  have  known  its  pattern  if  she  had  not  given  it  the  per fect 
delineation of faultless prose.  
         Nor is there any story more romantic and beautiful than that of Sophie Tonska 
and  Casimir  in  Gobineau’s  Pléïades.     Sophie,  a  sensitive  and  beautiful  woman, 
who  makes  one  understand  Stendahl’s  confession  that  “onl y  women  of  great 
character  can  make  me  happy,”  forces  Casimir  to  confess  his  love  for  her.    
Accustomed  to  being  loved,  she  becomes  impatient  with  Casimir,  who  sees  her 
every day and yet never departs from an attitude of irritating detachment.    Casimir 
conf esses  his  love,  but  in  the  tone  of  one  stating  a  legal  case.     He  has  studied  it, 
knows  it  as  well  as  he  knows  himself,  and  is  convinced  that  this  love,  without 
which he cannot live, has no future.    He has therefore decided to tell her of his love 
and at th e same time to acknowledge that it is vain and to make over his fortune to 
her  –  she is rich, and this gesture is of no importance  –  on condition that she give 
him a very modest pension which will allow him to install himself in the suburb of 
a  town  chosen   at  random  (it  will  be  Vilna)  and  there  await  death  in  poverty.    
Casimir recognizes, moreover, that the idea of receiving from Sophie the necessary 
money on which to live represents a concession to human weakness, the only one 
he  will  permit  himself,  with,   at  long  intervals,  the  dispatch  of  a  blank  sheet  of 
paper  in  an  envelope  on  which  he  will  write  Sophie’s  name.     After  being  first 
indignant,  then  perturbed,  and  then  melancholy,  Sophie  accepts;  and  everything 
happens  as  Casimir  foresaw.     He  dies,  in  Vilna ,  of  a  broken  heart.     Romanticism 
thus  has  its  logic.     A  story  is  never  really  moving  and  successful  without  the 
imperturbable  continuity  which  is  never  part  of  real  life,  but  which  is  to  be  found 
on  the  borderland  between  reality  and  reverie.     If  Gobineau   himself  had  gone  to 
  189  

Vilna  he  would  have  got  bored  and  come  back,  or  would  have  settled  down 
comfortably.    But Casimir never experienced any desire to change nor did he ever 
wake cured of his love.    He went to the bitter end, like Heathcliff, who wanted to  
go beyond death in order to reach the very depths of hell.  
         Here   we   have   an   imaginary   world,   therefore,   which   is   created   by   the 
rectification  of  the  actual  world  –   a  world  where  suffering  can,  if  it  wishes, 
continue until death, where passions are n ever distracted, where people are prey to 
obsessions  and  are  always  present  to  one  another.     Man  is  finally  able  to  give 
himself  the  alleviating  form  and  limits  which  he  pursues  in  van  in  his  own  life.    
The  novel  creates  destiny  to  suit  any  eventuality.    I n  this  way  it  competes  with 
creation  and,  provisionally,  conquers  death.     A  detailed  analysis  of  the  most 
famous novels would show, in different perspectives each time, that the essence of 
the  novel  lies  in  this  perpetual  alteration,  always  directed  toward   the  same  ends, 
that  the  artist  makes  in  his  own  experience.     Far  from  being  moral  or  even  purely 
formal,   this   alteration   aims,   primarily,   at   unity   and   thereby   expresses   a 
metaphysical  need.     The  novel,  on  this  level,  is  primarily  an  exercise  of  the 
intell igence  in  the  service  of  nostalgic  or  rebellious  sensibilities.     It  would  be 
possible to study this quest for unity in the French analytical novel and in Melville, 
Balzac, Dostoievsky, or Tolstoy.    But a brief comparison between the two attempts 
that  stand   at  different  poles  of  the  world  of  the  novel  –   the  works  of  Proust  and 
American fiction of the last few years  –  will suffice for our purposes.  
         The  American  novel  [I  am  referring,  of  course,  to  the  “tough”  novel  of  the 
thirties  and  forties  and  not  t o  the  admirable  American  efflorescence  of  the 
nineteenth century.] claims to find its unity in reducing man either to elementals or 
to  his  external  reactions  and  to  his  behaviour.     It  does  not  choose  feelings  or 
passions to give a detailed description of,  such as we find in classic French novels.    
It rejects analysis and the search for a fundamental psychological motive that could 
explain and recapitulate the behaviour of a character.    This is why the unity of this 
novel  form  is  only  the  unity  of  the  flash  of  recognition.     Its  technique  consists  in 
describing  men  by  their  outside  appearances,  in  their  most  casual  actions,  of 
reproducing,  without  comment,  everything  they  say  down  to  their  repetitions, 
[Even  in  Faulkner,  a  great  writer  of  this  generation,  the  interior  monologue  only 
reproduces the outer husk of thought.] and finally by acting as if men were entirely 
defined  by  their  daily  automatisms.     On  this  mechanical  level  men,  in  fact,  seem 
exactly  alike,  which  explains  this  peculiar  universe  in  which  all  the  characters 
appear  interchangeable,  even  down  to  their  physical  peculiarities.     This  technique 
is  called  realistic  only  owing  to  a  misapprehension.     In  addition  to  the  fact  that 
realism in art is, as we shall see, an incomprehensible idea, it is perfect ly obvious 
that  this  fictitious  world  is  not  attempting  a  reproduction,  pure  and  simple,  of 
reality, but the most arbitrary form of stylization.    It is born of a mutilation, and of 
  190  

a voluntary mutilation, performed on reality.    The unity thus obtained is a  degraded 
unity,  a  levelling  off  of  human  beings  and  of  the  world.     It  would  seem  that  for 
these writers it is the inner life that deprives human actions of unity and that tears 
people  away  from  one  another.     This  is  a  partially  legitimate  suspicion.     But 
rebellion, which is one of the sources of the art of fiction, can find satisfaction only 
in  constructing  unity  on  the  basis  of  affirming  this  interior  reality  and  not  of 
denying  it.     To  deny  it  totally  is  to  refer  oneself  to  an  imaginary  man.     Novels  of 
vi olence  are  also  love  stories,  of  which  they  have  the  formal  conceits  –   in  their 
own  way,  they  edify.  [Bernardin  de  Saint - Pierre  and  Marquis  de  Sade,  with 
different  indications  of  it,  are  the  creators  of  the  propagandist  novel.]     The  life  of 
the   body,   reduc ed   to   its   essentials,   paradoxically   produces   an   abstract   and 
gratuitous universe, continuously denied, in its turn, by reality.    This type of novel, 
purged  of  interior  life,  in  which  men  seem  to  be  observed  behind  a  pure  pane  of 
glass,  logically  ends,  with   its  emphasis  on  the  pathological,  by  giving  itself  as  its 
unique  subject  the  supposedly  average  man.     In  this  way  it  is  possible  to  explain 
the  extraordinary  number  of  “innocents”  who  appear  in  this  universe.     The 
simpleton is the ideal subject for such a n enterprise since he can only be defined  –  
and  completely  defined  –   by  his  behaviour.     He  is  the  symbol  of  the  despairing 
world  in  which  wretched  automatons  live  in  a  machine - ridden  universe,  which 
American novelists have presented as a heart - rending but  sterile protest.  
         As   for   Proust,   his   contribution   has   been   to   create,   from   an   obstinate 
contemplation  of  reality,  a  closed  world  that  belonged  only  to  him  and  that 
indicated his victory over the transitoriness of things and over death.    But he uses 
a bsolutely  the  opposite  means.     He  upholds,  above  everything,  by  a  deliberate 
choice, a careful selection of unique experience, which the writer chooses from the 
most  secret  recesses  of  his  past.     Immense  empty  spaces  are  thus  discarded  from 
life  because  th ey  have  left  no  trace  in  the  memory.     If  the  American  novel  is  the 
novel  of  men  without  memory,  the  world  of  Proust  is  nothing  but  memory.     It  is 
concerned only with the most difficult and most exacting of memories, the memory 
that  rejects  the  dispersion  o f  the  actual  world  and  derives,  from  the  trace  of  a 
lingering  perfume,  the  secret  of  a  new  and  ancient  universe.     Proust  chooses  the 
interior  life  and,  of  the  interior  life,  that  which  is  more  interior  than  life  itself  in 
preference to what is forgotten in  the world of reality  –  in other words, the purely 
mechanical and blind aspects of the world.    But by his rejection of reality he does 
not  deny  reality.     He  does  not  commit  the  error,  which  would  counterbalance  the 
error  of  American  fiction,  of  suppressing   the  mechanical.     He  unites,  on  the 
contrary, into a superior form of unity, the memory of the past and the immediate 
sensation, the twisted foot and the happy days of times past.  
         It is difficult to return to the places of one’s early happiness.    Th e young girls 
in  the  flower  of  their  youth  still  laugh  and  chatter  on  the  seashore,  but  he  who 
  191  

watches them gradually loses his right to love them, just as those he has loved lose 
the  power  to  be  loved.     This  melancholy  is  the  melancholy  of  Proust.     It  was  
powerful  enough  in  him  to  cause  a  violent  rejection  of  all  existence.     But  his 
passion for faces and for the light attached him at the same time to life.    He never 
admitted that the happy days of his youth were lost forever.    He undertook the task 
of  re - c reating  them  and  of  demonstrating,  in  the  face  of  death,  that  the  past  could 
be  regained  at  the  end  of  time  in  the  form  of  an  imperishable  present,  both  truer 
and   richer   than   it   was   at   the   beginning.      The   psychological   analysis   of 
Remembrance  of  Things  Pas t   is  nothing  but  a  potent  means  to  an  end.     The  real 
greatness  of  Proust  lies  in  having  written  Time  Regained ,  which  resembles  the 
world of dispersion and which gives it a meaning on the very level of integration.    
His  difficult  victory,  on  the  eve  of  his  death,  is  to  have  been  able  to  extract  from 
the  incessant  flight  of  forms,  by  means  of  memory  and  intelligence  alone,  the 
tentative  trembling  symbols  of  human  unity.     The  most  definite  challenge  that  a 
work of this kind can give to creation is to present i tself as an entirety, as a closed 
and unified world.    This defines an unrepentant work of art.  
         It has been said that the world of Proust was a world without a god.    If that is 
true,  it  is  not  because  God  is  never  spoken  of,  but  because  the  ambition  of  this 
world is to be absolute perfection and to give to eternity the aspect of man.     Time 
Regained , at least in its aspirations, is eternity without God.    Proust’s work, in this 
regard,  appears  to  be  one  of  the  most  ambitious  and  most  significant  of  man’ s 
enterprises  against  his  mortal  condition.     He  has  demonstrated  that  the  art  of  the 
novel can reconstruct creation itself, in the form that it is imposed on us and in the 
form  in  which  we  reject  it.     In  one  of  its  aspects,  at  least,  this  art  consists  in 
c hoosing  the  creature  in  preference  to  his  creator.     But  still  more  profoundly,  it  is 
allied  to  the  beauty  of  the  world  or  of  its  inhabitants  against  the  powers  of  death 
and oblivion.    It is in this way that his rebellion is creative.  
   
   
         Rebellion a nd Style  
   
         By the treatment that the artist imposes on reality, he declares the intensity of 
his rejection.    But what he retains of reality in the universe that he creates reveals 
the degree of consent that he gives to at least one part of reality  –  which he draws 
from  the  shadows  of  evolution  to  bring  it  to  the  light  of  creation.     In  the  final 
analysis, if the rejection is total, reality is then completely banished and the result 
is a purely formal work.    If, on the other hand, the artists chooses,  for reasons often 
unconnected  with  art,  to  exalt  crude  reality,  the  result  is  then  realism.     In  the  first 
case the primitive creative impulse in which rebellion and consent, affirmation and 
negation  are  closely  allied  is  adulterated  to  the  advantage  of  rej ection.     It  then 
  192  

represents  formal  escapism,  of  which  our  period  has  furnished  so  many  examples 
and of which the nihilist origin is quite evident.    In the second case the artist claims 
to give the world unity by withdrawing from it all privileged perspecti ves.    In this 
sense, he confesses his need for unity, even a degraded form of unity.    But he also 
renounces  the  first  requirement  of  artistic  creation.     To  deny  the  relative  freedom 
of the creative mind more forcibly, he affirms the immediate totality of t he world.    
The act of creation denies itself in both these kinds of work.    Originally, it refused 
only  one  aspect  of  reality  while  simultaneously  affirming  another.     Whether  it 
comes  to  the  point  of  rejecting  all  reality  or  of  affirming  nothing  but  reality ,  it 
denies  itself  each  time  either  by  absolute  negation  or  by  absolute  affirmation.     It 
can be seen that, on the plane of æsthetics, this analysis coincides with the analysis 
I have sketched on the historical plane.  
         But just as there is no nihilism  that does not end by supposing a value, and no 
materialism  that,  being  self - conceived,  does  not  end  by  contradicting  itself,  so 
formal art and realist art are absurd concepts.    No art can completely reject reality. 
The Gorgon is, doubtless, a purely imagi nary creature; its face and the serpents that 
crown  it  are  part  of  nature.     Formalism  can  succeed  in  purging  itself  more  and 
more  of  real  content,  but  there  is  always  a  limit.     Even  pure  geometry,  where 
abstract  painting  sometimes  ends,  still  derives  its  c olour  and  its  conformity  to 
perspective   from   the   exterior   world.      The   only   real   formalism   is   silence.    
Moreover,   realism   cannot   dispense   with   a   minimum   of   interpretation   and 
arbitrariness.     Even  the  very  best  photographs  do  not  represent  reality;  they  resu lt 
from an act of selection and impose a limit on something that has none.    The realist 
artist and the formal artist try to find unity where it does not exist, in reality in its 
crudest state, or in imaginative creation which wants to abolish all reality.    On the 
contrary,  unity  in  art  appears  at  the  limit  of  the  transformation  that  the  artist 
imposes  on  reality.     It  cannot  dispense  with  either.     This  correction  [Delacroix 
notes  –   and  this  is  a  penetrating  observation  –   that  it  is  necessary  to  correct  the 
“ inflexible  perspective  which  (in  reality)  falsifies  the  appearance  of  objects  by 
virtue   of   precision .”]   which   the   artist   imposes   by   his   language   and   by   a 
redistribution  of  elements  derived  from  reality  is  called  style  and  gives  the  re -
created  universe  its  unity  and  its  boundaries.     It  attempts,  in  the  work  of  every 
rebel, to impose its laws on the world, and succeeds in the case of a few geniuses.    
“Poets,” said Shelley, “are the unacknowledged legislators of the world.”  
         Literary art, by its origins,  cannot fail to illustrate this vocation.    It can neither 
totally  consent  to  reality  nor  turn  aside  from  it  completely.     The  purely  imaginary 
does  not  exist,  and  even  if  it  did  exist  in  an  ideal  novel  which  would  be  purely 
disincarnate, it would have no ar tistic significance, in that the primary necessity for 
a mind in search of unity is that the unity should be communicable.    From another 
point  of  view,  the  unity  of  pure  reasoning  is  a  false  unity,  for  it  is  not  based  on 
  193  

reality.    The sentimental love stor y, the horror story, and the edifying novel deviate 
from  art  to  the  great  or  small  extent  that  they  disobey  this  law.     Real  literary 
creation, on the other hand, uses reality and only reality with all its warmth and its 
blood,  its  passion  and  its  outcries.     It  simply  adds  something  that  transfigures 
reality.  
         Likewise,   what   is   commonly   called   the   realistic   novel   tries   to   be   the 
reproduction  of  reality  in  its  immediate  aspects.     To  reproduce  the  elements  of 
reality  without  making  any  kind  of  selection  would  be,  if  such  an  undertaking 
could  be  imagined,  nothing  but  a  sterile  repetition  of  creation.     Realism  should 
only  be  the  means  of  expression  of  religious  genius  –   Spanish  art  admirably 
illustrates  this  contention  –   or,  at  the  other  extreme,  the  artist ic  expression  of 
monkeys,  which  are  quite  satisfied  with  mere  imitation.     In  fact,  art  is  never 
realistic though sometimes it is tempted to be.    To be really realistic a description 
would  have  to  be  endless.     Where  Stendhal  describes  in  one  phrase  Lucien 
L euwin’s  entrance  into  a  room,  the  realistic  artist  ought,  logically,  to  fill  several 
volumes  with  descriptions  of  characters  and  setting,  still  without  succeeding  in 
exhausting every detail.    Realism is infinite enumeration.    By this it reveals that its 
re al  ambition  is  conquest,  not  of  the  unity,  but  of  the  totality  of  the  real  world.    
Now  we  understand  why  it  should  be  the  official  æsthetic  of  a  totalitarian 
revolution.      But   the   impossibility   of   such   an   æsthetic   has   already   been 
demonstrated.     Realistic  n ovels  select  their  material,  despite  themselves,  from 
reality,  because  the  choice  and  the  conquest  of  reality  are  absolute  conditions  of 
thought  and  expression.  [Delacroix  demonstrated  this  again  with  profundity:  “For 
realism  not  to  be  a  word  devoid  of  sen se,  all  men  must  have  the  same  minds  and 
the same way of conceiving things.”] To write is already to choose.    There is thus 
an arbitrary aspect to reality, just as there is an arbitrary aspect to the ideal, which 
makes  a  realistic  novel  an  implicit  problem   novel.     To  reduce  the  unity  of  the 
world of fiction to the totality of reality can only be done by means of an  a priori  
judgement  which  eliminates  form,  reality,  and  everything  that  conflicts  with 
doctrine.     Therefore  so - called  socialist  realism  is  condem ned  by  the  very  logic  of 
nihilism  to  accumulate  the  advantages  of  the  edifying  novel  and  propaganda 
literature.  
         Whether  the  event  enslaves  the  creator  or  whether  the  creator  claims  to  deny 
the  event  completely,  creation  is  nevertheless  reduced  to  th e  degraded  form  of 
nihilist  art.     It  is  the  same  thing  with  creation  as  with  civilization:  it  presumes 
uninterrupted  tension  between  form  and  matter,  between  evolution  and  the  mind, 
and  between  history  and  values.     If  the  equilibrium  is  destroyed,  the  resu lt  is 
dictatorship  or  anarchy,  propaganda  or  formal  insanity.     In  either  case  creation, 
which always coincides with rational freedom, is impossible.    Whether it succumbs 
to the intoxication of abstraction and formal obscurantism, or whether it falls back 
  194  

o n  the  whip  of  the  crudest  and  most  ingenious  realism,  modern  art,  in  its  semi -
totality, is an art of tyrants and slaves, not of creators.  
         A work in which the content overflows the form, or in which the form drowns 
the  content,  only  bespeaks  an  uncon vinced  and  unconvincing  unity.     In  this 
domain, as in others, any unity that is not a unity of style is a mutilation.    Whatever 
may be the chosen point of view of an artist, one principle remains common to all 
creators:  stylization,  which  supposes  the  simu ltaneous  existence  of  reality  and  of 
the mind that gives reality its form.    Through style, the creative effort reconstructs 
the  world,  and  always  with  the  same  slight  distortion  that  is  the  mark  of  both  art 
and protest.    Whether it is the enlargement of th e microscope which Proust brings 
to  bear  on  human  experience  or,  on  the  contrary,  the  absurd  insignificance  with 
which the American novel endows its characters, reality is in some way artificial.    
The creative force, the fecundity of rebellion, are contain ed in this distortion which 
the  style  and  tone  of  a  work  represent.     Art  is  an  impossible  demand  given 
expression and form.    When the most agonizing protest finds its most resolute form 
of  expression,  rebellion  satisfies  its  real  aspirations  and  derives  cr eative  energy 
from this fidelity to itself.    Despite the fact that this runs counter to the prejudices 
of  the  times,  the  greatest  style  in  art  is  the  expression  of  the  most  passionate 
rebellion.     Just  as  genuine  classicism  is  only  romanticism  subdued,  geni us  is  a 
rebellion that has created its own limits.    That is why there is no genius, contrary to 
what we are taught today, in negation and pure despair.  
         This means, at the same time, that great style is not a mere formal virtue.    It is a 
mere formal  virtue when it is sought out for its own sake to the detriment of reality, 
but then it is not great style.    It no longer invents, but imitates  –  like all academic 
works  –  while real creation is, in its own fashion, revolutionary.    If stylization must 
neces sarily be rather exaggerated, since it sums up the intervention of man and the 
desire  for  rectification  which  the  artist  brings  to  his  reproduction  of  reality,  it  is 
nevertheless  desirable  that  it  should  remain  invisible  so  that  the  demand  which 
gives  birt h  to  art  should  be  expressed  in  its  most  extreme  tension.     Great  style  is 
invisible  stylization,  or  rather  stylization  incarnate.     “There  is  never  any  need,” 
says  Flaubert,  “to  be  afraid  of  exaggeration  in  art.”     But  he  adds  that  the 
exaggeration should be  “continuous and proportionate to itself.”    When stylization 
is exaggerated and obvious, the work becomes nothing but pure nostalgia; the unity 
it  is  trying  to  conquer  has  nothing  to  do  with  concrete  unity.     On  the  other  hand, 
when reality is delivered ove r to unadorned fact or to insignificant stylization, then 
the  concrete  is  presented  without  unity.     Great  art,  style,  and  the  true  aspect  of 
rebellion lie somewhere between these two heresies.  
   
   
         Creation and Revolution  
  195  

   
         In art, rebellion i s consummated and perpetuated in the act of real creation, not 
in  criticism  or  commentary.     Revolution,  in  its  turn,  can  only  affirm  itself  in  a 
civilization  and  not  in  terror  or  tyranny.     The  two  questions  that  are  posed  by  our 
times  to  a  society  caught  i n  a  dilemma  –   Is  creation  possible?     Is  the  revolution 
possible?  –   are  in  reality  only  one  question,  which  concerns  the  renaissance  of 
civilization.  
         The  revolution  and  art  of  the  twentieth  century  are  tributaries  of  the  same 
nihilism  and  live  in  the   same  contradiction.     They  deny,  however,  all  that  they 
affirm  even  in  their  own  actions,  and  both  try  to  find  an  impossible  solution 
through terror.    The contemporary revolution believes that it is inaugurating a new 
world  when  it  is  really  only  the  contr adictory  climax  of  the  old  one.     Finally 
capitalist society and revolutionary society are one and the same thing to the extent 
that they submit themselves to the same means  –  industrial production  –  and to the 
same promise.    But one makes its promise in th e name of formal principles that it 
is  quite  incapable  of  incarnating  and  that  are  denied  by  the  methods  it  employs.    
The  other  justifies  its  prophecy  in  the  name  of  the  only  reality  it  recognizes,  and 
ends by mutilating reality.    The society based on prod uction is only productive, not 
creative.  
         Contemporary  art,  because  it  is  nihilistic,  also  flounders  between  formalism 
and realism.    Realism, moreover, is just as much bourgeois, when it is “tough,” as 
socialist when it becomes edifying.    Formalism b elongs just as much to the society 
of  the  past,  when  it  takes  the  form  of  gratuitous  abstraction,  as  to  the  society  that 
claims  to  be  the  society  of  the  future  –   when  it  becomes  propaganda.     Language 
destroyed  by  irrational  negation  becomes  lost  in  verbal  delirium;  subject  to 
determinist ideology, it is summed up in the slogan.    Halfway between the two lies 
art.     If  the  rebel  must  simultaneously  reject  the  frenzy  of  annihilation  and  the 
acceptance  of  totality,  the  artist  must  simultaneously  escape  from  the  passion  for 
formality  and  the  totalitarian  æsthetic  of  reality.     The  world  today  is  one,  in  fact, 
but its unity is the unity of nihilism.    Civilization is only possible if, by renouncing 
the  nihilism  of  formal  principles  and  nihilism  without  principles,  th e  world 
rediscovers  the  road  to  a  creative  synthesis.     In  the  same  way,  in  art  the  time  of 
perpetual  commentary  and  factual  reporting  is  at  the  point  of  death;  it  announces 
the advent of creative artists.  
         But  art  and  society,  creation  and  revolution ,  to  prepare  for  this  event,  must 
rediscover the source of rebellion where refusal and acceptance, the unique and the 
universal,  the  individual  and  history  balance  each  other  in  a  condition  of  acute 
tension.    Rebellion in itself is not an element of civili zation.    But it is a preliminary 
to all civilization.    Rebellion alone, in the blind alley in which we live, allows us to 
hope  for  the  future  of  which  Nietzsche  dreamed:  “Instead  of  the  judges  and  the 
  196  

oppressor,  the  creator.”     This  formula  certainly  does  n ot  authorize  the  ridiculous 
illusion of a civilization controlled by artists.    It only illuminates the drama of our 
times  in  which  work,  entirely  subordinated  to  production,  has  ceased  to  be 
creative.     Industrial  society  will  open  the  way  to  a  new  civiliza tion  only  by 
restoring  to  the  worker  the  dignity  of  a  creator;  in  other  words,  by  making  him 
apply  his  interest  and  his  intelligence  as  much  to  the  work  itself  as  it  what  it 
produces.     The  type  of  civilization  that  is  inevitable  will  not  be  able  to  separat e, 
among classes as well as among individuals, the worker from the creator; any more 
than  artistic  creation  dreams  of  separating  form  and  substance,  history  and  the 
mind.    In this way it will bestow on everyone the dignity that rebellion affirms.    It 
would  be unjust, and moreover Utopian, for Shakespeare to direct the shoemakers’ 
union.     But  it  would  be  equally  disastrous  for  the  shoemakers’  union  to  ignore 
Shakespeare.    Shakespeare without the shoemaker serves as an excuse for tyranny.    
The  shoemaker  witho ut  Shakespeare  is  absorbed  by  tyranny  when  he  does  not 
contribute  to  its  propagation.     Every  act  of  creation,  by  its  mere  existence,  denies 
the world of master and slave.    The appalling society of tyrants and slaves in which 
we survive will find its death  and transfiguration only on the level of creation.  
         But  the  fact  that  creation  is  necessary  does  not  perforce  imply  that  it  is 
possible.     A  creative  period  in  art  is  determined  by  the  order  of  a  particular  style 
applied  to  the  disorder  of  a  particula r  time.     It  gives  form  and  formulas  to 
contemporary  passions.     Thus  it  no  longer  suffices,  for  a  creative  artist,  to  imitate 
Mme  de  La  Fayette  in  a  period  when  our  morose  rulers  have  no  more  time  for 
love.    Today, when collective passions have stolen a mar ch on individual passions, 
the ecstasy of love can always be controlled by art.    But the ineluctable problem is 
also  to  control  collective  passions  and  the  historical  struggle.     The  scope  of  art, 
despite  the  regrets  of  the  plagiarists,  has  been  extended  fr om  psychology  to  the 
human condition.    When the passions of the times put the fate of the whole world 
at stake, creation wishes to dominate the whole of destiny.    But, at the same time, it 
maintains, in the face of totality the affirmation of unity.    In si mple words, creation 
is then imperilled, first by itself, and then by the spirit of totality.    To create, today, 
is to create dangerously.  
         In order to dominate collective passions they must, in fact, be lived through and 
experienced,  at  least  relati vely.     At  the  same  time  that  he  experiences  them,  the 
artist  is  devoured  by  them.     The  result  is  that  our  period  is  rather  the  period  of 
journalism than of the work of art.    The exercise of these passions, finally, entails 
far greater chances of death than  in the period of love and ambition, in that the only 
way of living collective passions is to be willing to die for them and by their hand.    
The  greatest  opportunity  for  authenticity  is,  today,  the  greatest  defeat  of  art.     If 
creation is impossible during  wars and revolutions, then we shall have no creative 
artists, for war and revolution are our lot.    The myth of unlimited production brings 
  197  

war  in  its  train  as  inevitably  as  clouds  announce  a  storm.     Wars  lay  waste  to  the 
West and kill the flower of a gener ation.    Hardly has it arisen from the ruins when 
the bourgeois system sees the revolutionary system advancing upon it.    Genius has 
not  even  had  time  to  be  reborn;  the  war  that  threatens  us  will  kill  all  those  who 
perhaps might have been geniuses.    If a cre ative classicism is, nevertheless, proved 
possible,  we  must  recognize  that,  even  though  it  is  rendered  illustrious  by  one 
name alone, it will be the work of an entire generation.    The chances of defeat, in 
the century of destruction, can only be compensate d for by the hazard of numbers; 
in  other  words,  the  chance  that  of  ten  authentic  artists  one,  at  least,  will  survive, 
take  charge  of  the  first  utterances  of  his  brother  artists,  and  succeed  in  finding  in 
his life both the time for passion and the time for  creation.    The artist, whether he 
likes  it  or  not,  can  no  longer  be  a  solitary,  except  in  the  melancholy  triumph  he 
owes to his fellow artists.    Rebellious art also ends by revealing the “We are,” and 
with it the way to a burning humility.  
         Meanwhile ,  the  triumphant  revolution,  in  the  aberrations  of  its  nihilism, 
menaces  those  who,  in  defiance  of  it,  claim  to  maintain  the  existence  of  unity  in 
totality.     One  of  the  implications  of  history  today,  and  still  more  of  the  history  of 
tomorrow,  is  the  strugg le  between  the  artists  and  the  new  conquerors,  between 
witnesses to the creative revolution and the founders of the nihilist revolution.    As 
to  the  outcome  of  the  struggle,  it  is  only  possible  to  make  inspired  guesses.     At 
least  we  know  that  it  must  hencef orth  be  carried  on  to  the  bitter  end.     Modern 
conquerors  can  kill,  but  do  not  seem  to  be  able  to  create.     Artists  know  how  to 
create  but  cannot  really  kill.     Murderers  are  only  very  exceptionally  found  among 
artists.    In the long run, therefore, art in our  revolutionary societies must die.    But 
then the revolution will have lived its allotted span.    Each time that the revolution 
kills in a man the artist that he might have been, it attenuates itself a little more.    If, 
finally,  the  conquerors  succeed  in  mou lding  the  world  according  to  their  laws,  it 
will not prove that quantity is king, but that this world is hell.    In this hell, the place 
of  art  will  coincide  with  that  of  vanquished  rebellion,  a  blind  and  empty  hope  in 
the  pit  of  despair.     Ernst  Dwinger  in  his  Siberian  Diary   mentions  a  German 
lieutenant  –   for  years  a  prisoner  in  a  camp  where  cold  and  hunger  were  almost 
unbearable  -  who constructed himself a silent piano with wooden keys.    In the most 
abject  misery,  perpetually  surrounded  by  a  ragged  mob,  he  composed  a  strange 
music  which  was  audible  to  him  alone.     And  for  us  who  have  been  thrown  into 
hell,  mysterious  melodies  and  the  torturing  images  of  a  vanished  beauty  will 
always  bring  us,  in  the  midst  of  crime  and  folly,  the  echo  of  that  harmonious 
insurr ection  which  bears  witness,  throughout  the  centuries,  to  the  greatness  of 
humanity.  
         But  hell  can  endure  for  only  a  limited  period,  and  life  will  begin  again  one 
day.     History  may  perhaps  have  an  end;  but  our  task  is  not  to  terminate  it  but  to 
  198  

create  it, in the image of what we henceforth know to be true.    Art, at least, teaches 
us that man cannot be explained by history alone and that he also finds a reason for 
his  existence  in  the  order  of  nature.     For  him,  the  great  god  Pan  is  not  dead.     His 
most i nstinctive act of rebellion, while it affirms the value and the dignity common 
to all men, obstinately claims, so as to satisfy its hunger for unity, an integral part 
of the reality whose name is beauty.    One can reject all history and yet accept the 
world   of  the  sea  and  stars.     The  rebels  who  wish  to  ignore  nature  and  beauty  are 
condemned  to  banish  from  history  everything  with  which  they  want  to  construct 
the  dignity  of  existence  and  of  labour.     Every  great  reformer  tries  to  create  in 
history  what  Shakespe are,  Cevantes,  Molière,  and  Tolstoy  knew  how  to  create:  a 
world always ready to satisfy the hunger for freedom and dignity which every man 
carries  in  his  heart.     Beauty,  no  doubt,  does  not  make  revolutions.     But  a  day  will 
come when revolutions will have n eed of beauty.    The procedure of beauty, which 
is  to  contest  reality  while  endowing  it  with  unity,  is  also  the  procedure  of 
rebellion.    Is it possible eternally to reject injustice without ceasing to acclaim the 
nature of man and the beauty of the world?     Our answer is yes.    This ethic, at once 
unsubmissive and loyal, is in any event the only one that lights the way to a truly 
realistic  revolution.     In  upholding  beauty,  we  prepare  the  way  for  the  day  of 
regeneration  when  civilization  will  give  first  place  –   far  ahead  of  the  formal 
principles  and  degraded  values  of  history  –   to  this  living  virtue  on  which  is 
founded the common dignity of man and the world he lives in, and which we must 
now define in the face of a world that insults it.  
 
Part Five  
   
Thought at  the  Meridian  
   
Rebellion and Murder  
   
*  
   
         Far from this source of life, however,  Europe   and the revolution are being 
shaken to the core by a spectacular convulsion.    During the last century, man 
cast off the fetters  of religion.    Hardly was he free, however, when he created 
new  and  utterly  intolerable  chains.     Virtue  dies  but  is  born  again,  more 
exacting  than  ever.     It  preaches  an  ear - splitting  sermon  on  charity  to  all 
comers  and  a  kind  of  love  for  the  future  which  ma kes  a  mockery  of 
contemporary  humanism.     When  it  has  reached  this  point  of  stability,  it  can 
  199  

only wreak havoc.    A day arrives when it becomes bitter, immediately adopts 
police methods, and, for the salvation of mankind, assumes the ignoble aspect 
of  an  inq uisition.     At  the  climax  of  contemporary  tragedy,  we  therefore 
become   intimates   of   crime.      The   sources   of   life   and   of   creation   seem 
exhausted.     Fear  paralyzes  a  Europe   peopled  with  phantoms  and  machines.    
Between two holocausts, sca ffolds are installed in underground caverns where 
humanist  executioners  celebrate  their  new  cult  in  silence.     What  cry  would 
ever trouble them?    The poets themselves, confronted with the murder of their 
fellow  men,  proudly  declare  that  their  hands  are  clea n.     The  whole  world 
absentmindedly  turns  its  back  on  these  crimes;  the  victims  have  reached  the 
extremity  of  their  disgrace:  they  are  a  bore.     In  ancient  times  the  blood  of 
murder at least produced a religious horror and in this way sanctified the value 
of  life.    The real condemnation of the period we live in is, on the contrary, that 
it  leads  us  to  think  that  it  is  not  bloodthirsty  enough.     Blood  is  no  longer 
visible; it does not bespatter the faces of our pharisees visibly enough.    This is 
the  extreme  of  nihilism;  blind  and  savage  murder  becomes  an  oasis  and  the 
imbecile  criminal  seems  positively  refreshing  in  comparison  with  our  highly 
intelligent executioners.  
         Having  believed  for  a  long  time  that  it  could  fight  against  God  with  all 
humanity  as  its   ally,  the  European  mind  then  perceived  that  it  must  also,  if  it  did 
not want to die, fight against men.    The rebels who, united against death, wanted to 
construct,  on  the  foundation  of  the  human  species,  a  savage  immortality  are 
terrified at the prospect  of being obliged to kill in their turn.    Nevertheless, if they 
retreat   they   must   accept   death;   if   they   advance   they   must   accept   murder.    
Rebellion, cut off from its origins and cynically travestied, oscillates, on all levels, 
between  sacrifice  and  murder.     The  form  of  justice  that  it  advocated  and  that  it 
hoped  was  impartial  has  turned  out  to  be  summary.     The  kingdom  of  grace  has 
been  conquered,  but  the  kingdom  of  justice  is  crumbling  too.     Europe   is  dying  of 
this  disappointing  reali zation.     Rebellion  pleaded  for  the  innocence  of  mankind, 
and  now  it  has  hardened  its  heart  against  its  own  culpability.     Hardly  does  it  start 
off in search of totality when it receives as its portion the most desperate sensations 
of  solitude.     It  wanted  to   enter  into  communion  with  mankind  and  now  it  has  no 
other hope but to assemble, one by one, throughout the years, the solitary men who 
fight their way toward unity.  
         Must  we  therefore  renounce  every  kind  of  rebellion,  whether  we  accept,  with 
all  its   injustices,  a  society  that  outlives  its  usefulness,  or  whether  we  decide, 
cynically, to serve, against the interest of man, the inexorable advance of history?    
After  all,  if  the  logic  of  our  reflection  should  lead  to  a  cowardly  conformism  it 
would   have   to    be   accepted   as   certain   families   sometimes   accept   inevitable 
dishonour.    If it must also justify all the varieties of attempts against man, and even 
  200  

his  systematic  destruction,  it  would  be  necessary  to  consent  to  his  suicide.     The 
desire for justice would  finally realize its ambition: the disappearance of a world of 
tradesmen and police.  
         But are we still living in a rebellious world?    Has not rebellion become, on the 
contrary, the excuse of a new variety of tyrant?    Can the “We are” contained in the 
movement of rebellion, without shame and without subterfuge, be reconciled with 
murder?    In assigning oppression a limit within which begins the dignity common 
to all men, rebellion defined a primary value.    It put in the first rank of its frame of 
referen ce  an  obvious  complicity  among  men,  a  common  texture,  the  solidarity  of 
chains,  a  communication  between  human  being  and  human  being  which  makes 
men both similar and united.    In this way, it compelled the mind to take a first step 
in  defiance  of  an  absurd  w orld.     By  this  progress  it  rendered  still  more  acute  the 
problem that it must now solve in regard to murder.    On the level of the absurd, in 
fact, murder would only give rise to logical contradictions; on the level of rebellion 
it is mental laceration.    Fo r it is now a question of deciding whether it is possible to 
kill  someone  whose  resemblance  to  ourselves  we  have  at  last  recognized  and 
whose  identity  we  have  just  sanctified.     When  we  have  only  just  conquered 
solitude,  must  we  then  re - establish  it  definit ively  by  legitimizing  the  act  that 
isolates everything?    To force solitude on a man who has just come to understand 
that he is not alone, is that not the definitive crime against man?  
         Logically,  one  should  reply  that  murder  and  rebellion  are  contrad ictory.     If  a 
single  master  should,  in  fact,  be  killed,  the  rebel,  in  a  certain  way,  is  no  longer 
justified  in  using  the  terms  community  of  men   from  which  he  derived  his 
justification.     If  this  world  has  no  higher  meaning,  if  man  is  only  responsible  to 
man ,  it  suffices  for  a  man  to  remove  one  single  human  being  from  the  society  of 
the living to automatically exclude himself from it.    When Cain kills Abel, he flees 
to the desert.    And if murderers are legion, then this legion lives in the desert and in 
that  other kind of solitude called promiscuity.  
         From the moment that he strikes, the rebel cuts the world in two.    He rebelled 
in  the  name  of  the  identity  of  man  with  man  and  he  sacrifices  this  identity  by 
consecrating the difference in blood.    His only  existence, in the midst of suffering 
and  oppression,  was  contained  in  this  identity.     The  same  movement,  which 
intended  to  affirm  him,  thus  brings  an  end  to  his  existence.     He  can  claim  that 
some, or even almost all, are with him.    But if one single human  being is missing 
in   the   irreplaceable   world   of   fraternity,   then   this   world   is   immediately 
depopulated.    If we are not, then I am not and this explains the infinite sadness of 
Kaliayev and the silence of Saint - Just.    The rebels, who have decided to gain the ir 
ends  through  violence  and  murder,  have  in  vain  replaced,  in  order  to  preserve  the 
hope  of  existing,  “We  are”  by  the  “We  shall  be.”     When  the  murderer  and  the 
victim have disappeared, the community will provide its own justification without 
  201  

them.     The  ex ception  having  lasted  its  appointed  time,  the  rule  will  once  more 
become  possible.     On  the  level  of  history,  as  in  individual  life,  murder  is  thus  a 
desperate exception or it is nothing.    The disturbance that it brings to the order of 
things offers no hope  of a future; it is an exception and therefore it can be neither 
utilitarian  nor  systematic  as  the  purely  historical  attitude  would  have  it.     It  is  the 
limit  that  can  be  reached  but  once,  after  which  one  must  die.     The  rebel  has  only 
one way of reconciling  himself with his act of murder if he allows himself to be led 
into performing it: to accept his own death and sacrifice.    He kills and dies so that 
it  shall  be  clear  that  murder  is  impossible.     He  demonstrates  that,  in  reality,  he 
prefers the “We are” to  the “We shall be.”    The calm happiness of Kaliayev in his 
prison, the serenity of Saint - Just when he walks toward the scaffold, are explained 
in their turn.    Beyond that farthest frontier, contradiction and nihilism begin.  
   
   
         Nihilistic Murder  
   
          Irrational  crime  and  rational  crime,  in  fact,  both  equally  betray  the  value 
brought to light by the movement of rebellion.    Let us first consider the former.    He 
who  denies  everything  and  assumes  the  authority  to  kill  –   Sade,  the  homicidal 
dandy,  the  pitiless  Unique,  Karamazov,  the  zealous  supporters  of  the  unleashed 
bandit  –   lay  claim  to  nothing  short  of  total  freedom  and  the  unlimited  display  of 
human  pride.     Nihilism  confounds  creator  and  created  in  the  same  blind  fury.    
Suppressing  every  principle  of  hope,  it  rejects  the  idea  of  any  limit,  and  in  blind 
indignation, which no longer is even aware of its reasons, ends with the conclusion 
that  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  kill  when  the  victim  is  already  condemned  to 
death.  
         But  its  reasons  –   the  mutual  recognition  of  a  common  destiny  and  the 
communication   of   men   between   themselves  –    are   always   valid.      Rebellion 
proclaimed  them  and  undertook  to  serve  them.     In  the  same  way  it  defined,  in 
contradiction  to  nihilism,  a  rule  of  conduct  that  has  no  need  to  await  the  end  of 
history  to  explain  its  actions  and  which  is,  nevertheless,  not  formal.     Contrary  to 
Jacobin  morality,  it  made  allowances  for  everything  that  escapes  from  rules  and 
laws.    It opened the way to a morality which, far from obeying abst ract principles, 
discovers  them  only  in  the  heat  of  battle  and  in  the  incessant  movement  of 
contradiction.     Nothing  justifies  the  assertion  that  these  principles  have  existed 
externally;  it  is  of  no  use  to  declare  that  they  will  one  day  exist.     With  us,  an d 
throughout all history, they deny servitude, falsehood, and terror.  
         There  is,  in  fact,  nothing  in  common  between  a  master  and  a  slave;  it  is 
impossible  to  speak  and  communicate  with  a  person  who  has  been  reduced  to 
servitude.     Instead  of  the  impli cit  and  untrammelled  dialogue  through  which  we 
  202  

come to recognize our similarity and consecrate our destiny, servitude gives sway 
to the most terrible of silences.    If injustice is bad for the rebel, it is not because it 
contradicts an eternal idea of justi ce, but because it perpetuates the silent hostility 
that separates the oppressor from the oppressed.    It kills the small part of existence 
that can be realized on this earth through the mutual understanding of men.    In the 
same  way,  since  the  man  who  lies  shuts  himself  off  from  other  men,  falsehood  is 
therefore  proscribed  and,  on  a  slightly  lower  level,  murder  and  violence,  which 
impose   definitive   silence.      The   mutual   understanding   and   communication 
discovered  by  rebellion  can  survive  only  in  the  free  excha nge  of  conversation.    
Every  ambiguity,  every  misunderstanding,  leads  to  death;  clear  language  and 
simple  words  are  the  only  salvation  from  this  death.  [It  is  worth  noting  that  the 
language  peculiar  to  totalitarian  doctrines  is  always  a  scholastic  or  admini strative 
language.] The climax of every tragedy lies in the deafness of its heroes.    Plato is 
right and not Moses and Nietzsche.    Dialogue on the level of mankind is less costly 
than  the  gospel  preached  by  totalitarian  regimes  in  the  form  of  a  monologue 
di ctated  from  the  top  of  a  lonely  mountain.     On  the  stage  as  in  reality,  the 
monologue  precedes  death.     Every  rebel,  solely  by  the  movement  that  sets  him  in 
opposition to the oppressor, therefore pleads for life, undertakes to struggle against 
servitude, fal sehood, and terror, and affirms, in a flash, that these three afflictions 
are the cause of silence between men, that they obscure them from one another and 
prevent  them  from  rediscovering  themselves  in  the  only  value  that  can  save  them 
from nihilism  –  the  long complicity of men at grips with their destiny.  
         In a flash  –  but that is time enough to say, provisionally, that the most extreme 
form of freedom, the freedom to kill, is not compatible with the sense of rebellion.    
Rebellion  is  in  no  way  the  de mand  for  total  freedom.     On  the  contrary,  rebellion 
puts  total  freedom  up  for  trial.     It  specifically  attacks  the  unlimited  power  that 
authorizes a superior to violate the forbidden frontier.    Far from demanding general 
independence,  the  rebel  wants  it  to  be  recognized  that  freedom  has  its  limits 
everywhere  that  a  human  being  is  to  be  found  –   the  limit  being  precisely  that 
human   being’s   power   to   rebel.      The   most   profound   reason   for   rebellious 
intransigence is to be found here.    The more aware rebellion is o f demanding a just 
limit,  the  more  inflexible  it  becomes.     The  rebel  undoubtedly  demands  a  certain 
degree of freedom for himself; but in no case, if he is consistent, does he demand 
the right to destroy the existence and the freedom of others.    He humiliat es no one.    
The  freedom  he  claims,  he  claims  for  all;  the  freedom  he  refuses,  he  forbids 
everyone  to  enjoy.     He  is  not  only  the  slave  against  the  master,  but  also  man 
against  the  world  of  master  and  slave.     Therefore,  thanks  to  rebellion,  there  is 
somethin g  more  in  history  than  the  relation  between  mastery  and  servitude.    
Unlimited  power  is  not  the  only  law.     It  is  in  the  name  of  another  value  that  the 
rebel  affirms  the  impossibility  of  total  freedom  while  he  claims  for  himself  the 
  203  

relative freedom necessar y to recognize this impossibility.    Every human freedom, 
at  its  very  roots,  is  therefore  relative.     Absolute  freedom,  which  is  the  freedom  to 
kill, is the only one which does not claim, at the same time as itself, the things that 
limit  and  obliterate  it.     Thus  it  cuts  itself  off  from  its  roots  and  –   abstract  and 
malevolent shade  –  wanders haphazardly until such time as it imagines that it has 
found substance in some ideology.  
         It  is  then  possible  to  say  that  rebellion,  when  it  develops  into  destructio n,  is 
illogical.     Claiming  the  unity  of  the  human  condition,  it  is  a  force  of  life,  not  of 
death.     Its  most  profound  logic  is  not  the  logic  of  destruction;  it  is  the  logic  of 
creation.     Its  movement,  in  order  to  remain  authentic,  must  never  abandon  any  of 
the terms of the contradiction that sustains it.    It must be faithful to the  yes  that it 
contains as well as to the  no  that nihilistic interpretations isolate in rebellion.    The 
logic of the rebel is to want to serve justice so as not to add to the injusti ce of the 
human  condition,  to  insist  on  plain  language  so  as  not  to  increase  the  universal 
falsehood,  and  to  wager,  in  spite  of  human  misery,  for  happiness.     Nihilistic 
passion, adding to falsehood and injustice, destroys in its fury its original demands 
a nd  thus  deprives  rebellion  of  its  most  cogent  reasons.     It  kills  in  the  fond 
conviction that this world is dedicated to death.    The consequence of rebellion, on 
the  contrary,  is  to  refuse  to  legitimize  murder  because  rebellion,  in  principle,  is  a 
protest a gainst death.  
         But  in  man  were  capable  of  introducing  unity  into  the  world  entirely  on  his 
own, if he could establish the reign, by his own decree, of sincerity, innocence, and 
justice,  he  would  be  God  Himself.     Equally,  if  he  could  accomplish  all  th is,  there 
would be no more reasons for rebellion.    If rebellion exists, it is because falsehood, 
injustice,  and  violence  are  part  of  the  rebel’s  condition.     He  cannot,  therefore, 
absolutely claim not to kill or lie, without renouncing his rebellion and acc epting, 
once  and  for  all,  evil  and  murder.     But  no  more  can  he  agree  to  kill  and  lie,  since 
the inverse reasoning which would justify murder and violence would also destroy 
the  reasons  for  his  insurrection.     Thus  the  rebel  can  never  find  peace.     He  knows 
w hat is good and, despite himself, does evil.    The value that supports him is never 
given  to  him  once  and  for  all;  he  must  fight  to  uphold  it,  unceasingly.     Again  the 
existence he achieves collapses if rebellion does not support it.    In any case, if he is 
n ot  always  able  not  to  kill,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  he  can  put  his  conviction 
and  passion  to  work  at  diminishing  the  chances  of  murder  around  him.     His  only 
virtue  will  lie  in  never  yielding  to  the  impulse  to  allow  himself  to  be  engulfed  in 
the shad ows that surround him and in obstinately dragging the chains of evil, with 
which  he  is  bound,  toward  the  light  of  good.     If  he  finally  kills  himself,  he  will 
accept  death.     Faithful  to  his  origins,  the  rebel  demonstrates  by  sacrifice  that  his 
real freedom  is not freedom from murder but freedom from his own death.    At the 
same  time,  he  achieves  honour  in  metaphysical  terms.     Thus  Kaliayev  climbs  the 
  204  

gallows  and  visibly  designates  to  all  his  fellow  men  the  exact  limit  where  man’s 
honour begins and ends.  
   
   
          Historical Murder  
   
         Rebellion  also  deploys  itself  in  history,  which  demands  not  only  exemplary 
choices,  but  also  efficacious  attitudes.     Rational  murder  runs  the  risk  of  finding 
itself  justified  by  history.     The  contradiction  of  rebellion,  the n,  is  reflected  in  an 
apparently insoluble contradiction, of which the two counterparts in politics are on 
the  one  hand  the  opposition  between  violence  and  non - violence,  and  on  the  other 
hand the opposition between justice and freedom.    Let us try to defin e them in the 
terms of their paradox.  
         The positive value contained in the initial movement of rebellion supposes the 
renunciation  of  violence  committed  on  principle.     It  consequently  entails  the 
impossibility  of  stabilizing  a  revolution.     Rebellion  is,  incessantly,  prey  to  this 
contradiction.     On  the  level  of  history  it  becomes  even  more  insoluble.     If  I 
renounce  the  project  of  making  human  identity  respected,  I  abdicate  in  favour  of 
oppression, I renounce rebellion and fall back on an attitude of ni hilistic consent.    
Then  nihilism  becomes  conservative.     If  I  insist  that  human  identity  should  be 
recognized  as  existing,  then  I  engage  in  an  action  which,  to  succeed,  supposes  a 
cynical  attitude  toward  violence  and  denies  this  identity  and  rebellion  itsel f.     To 
extend the contradiction still farther, if the unity of the world cannot come from on 
high, man must construct it on his own level, in history.    History without a value to 
transfigure  it,  is  controlled  by  the  law  of  expediency.     Historical  materiali sm, 
determinism, violence, negation of every form of freedom which does not coincide 
with expediency and the world of courage and of silence, are the highly legitimate 
consequences  of  a  pure  philosophy  of  history.     In  the  world  today,  only  a 
philosophy  of  eternity  could  justify  non - violence.     To  absolute  worship  of  history 
and of the historical situation it would ask whence it had sprung.    Finally, it would 
put  the  responsibility  for  justice  in  God’s  hands,  thus  consecrating  injustice.    
Equally,  its  answers ,  in  their  turn,  would  insist  on  faith.     The  objection  will  be 
raised of evil, and of the paradox of an all - powerful and malevolent, or benevolent 
and sterile, God.    The choice will remain open between grace and history, God or 
the sword.  
         What, then , should be the attitude of the rebel?    He cannot turn away from the 
world and from history without denying the very principle of his rebellion, nor can 
he  choose  eternal  life  without  resigning  himself,  in  one  sense,  to  evil.     If,  for 
example, he is not a  Christian, he should go to the bitter end.    But to the bitter end 
means  to  choose  history  absolutely  and  with  it  murder,  if  murder  is  essential  to 
  205  

history:  to  accept  the  justification  of  murder  is  again  to  deny  his  origins.     If  the 
rebel  makes  no  choice,  h e  chooses  the  silence  and  slavery  of  others.     If,  in  a 
moment  of  despair,  he  declares  that  he  opts  both  against  God  and  against  history, 
he  is  the  witness  of  pure  freedom;  in  other  words,  of  nothing.     In  our  period  of 
history and in the impossible conditio n in which he finds himself, of being unable 
to  affirm  a  superior  motive  that  does  not  have  its  limits  in  evil,  his  apparent 
dilemma is silence or murder  –  in either case, a surrender.  
         And  it  is  the  same  again  with  justice  and  freedom.     These  two  de mands  are 
already  to  be  found  at  the  beginning  of  the  movement  of  rebellion  and  are  to  be 
found   again   in   the   first   impetus   of   revolution.      The   history   of   revolutions 
demonstrates,  however,  that  they  almost  always  conflict  as  though  their  mutual 
demands  wer e  irreconcilable.     Absolute  freedom  is  the  right  of  the  strongest  to 
dominate.     Therefore  it  prolongs  the  conflicts  that  profit  by  injustice.     Absolute 
justice  is  achieved  by  the  suppression  of  all  contradiction:  therefore  it  destroys 
freedom.  [In  his  Entr etiens  sur  le  bon  usage  de  la  liberté  ( Conversations  on  the 
Good Use of Freedom ), Jean Grenier lays the foundation for an argument that can 
be summed up thus: absolute freedom is the destruction of all value; absolute value 
suppresses all freedom.    Likewis e Palante: “If there is a single and universal truth, 
freedom  has  no  reason  for  existing.”]    The  revolution  to  achieve  justice,  through 
freedom,  ends  by  aligning  them  against  each  other.     Thus  there  exists  in  every 
revolution, once the class that dominated  up to then has been liquidated, a stage in 
which  it  gives  birth,  itself,  to  a  movement  of  rebellion  which  indicates  its  limits 
and  announces  its  chances  of  failure.     The  revolution,  first  of  all,  proposes  to 
satisfy the spirit of rebellion which has given  rise to it; then it is compelled to deny 
it,  the  better  to  affirm  itself.     There  is,  it  would  seem,  an  ineradicable  opposition 
between the movement of rebellion and the attainments of revolution.  
         But these contradictions only exist in the absolute.    They suppose a world and a 
method  of  thought  without  meditation.     There  is,  in  fact,  no  conciliation  possible 
between  a  god  who  is  totally  separated  from  history  and  a  history  purged  of  all 
transcendence.     Their  representatives  on  earth  are,  indeed,  the  yogi  and  the 
commissar.    But the difference between these two types of men is not, as has been 
stated,  the  difference  between  ineffectual  purity  and  expediency.     The  former 
chooses only the ineffectiveness of abstention and the second the ineffectiveness o f 
destruction.     Because  both  reject  the  conciliatory  value  that  rebellion,  on  the 
contrary, reveals, they offer us only two kinds of impotence, both equally removed 
from reality, that of good and that of evil.  
         If,  in  fact,  to  ignore  history  comes  to   the  same  as  denying  reality,  it  is  still 
alienating  oneself  from  reality  to  consider  history  as  a  completely  self - sufficient 
absolute.     The  revolution  of  the  twentieth  century  believes  that  it  can  avoid 
nihilism  and  remain  faithful  to  true  rebellion,  by  r eplacing  God  by  history.     In 
  206  

reality,  it  fortifies  the  former  and  betrays  the  latter.     History  in  its  pure  form 
furnishes  no  value  by  itself.     Therefore  one  must  live  by  the  principles  of 
immediate expediency and keep silent or tell lies.    Systematic viole nce, or imposed 
silence,  calculation  or  concerted  falsehood  become  the  inevitable  rule.     Purely 
historical  thought  is  therefore  nihilistic:  it  wholeheartedly  accepts  the  evil  of 
history  and  in  this  way  is  opposed  to  rebellion.     It  is  useless  for  it  to  affi rm,  in 
compensation, the absolute rationality of history, for historical reason will never be 
fulfilled  and  will  never  have  its  full  meaning  or  value  until  the  end  of  history.     In 
the meanwhile, it is necessary to act, and to act without a moral rule in or der that 
the  definitive  rule  should  one  day  be  realized.     Cynicism  as  a  political  attitude  is 
only  logical  as  a  function  of  absolutist  thought;  in  other  words,  absolute  nihilism 
on the one hand, absolute rationalism on the other. [We see again, and this ca nnot 
be  said  too  often,  that  absolute  rationalism  is  not  rationalism.     The  difference 
between the two is the same as the difference between cynicism and realism.    The 
first drives the second beyond the limits that give it meaning and legitimacy.    More 
brut al,  it  is  finally  less  efficacious.     It  is  violence  opposed  to  force.]    As  for  the 
consequences, there is no difference between the two attitudes.    From the moment 
that they are accepted, the earth becomes a desert.  
         In  reality,  the  purely  historical   absolute  is  not  even  conceivable.     Jaspers’s 
thought,  for  example,  in  its  essentials,  underlines  the  impossibility  of  man’s 
grasping totality, since he lives in the midst of this totality.    History, as an entirety, 
could  exist  only  in  the  eyes  of  an  obser ver  outside  it  and  outside  the  world.    
History  only  exists,  in  the  final  analysis,  for  God.     Thus  it  is  impossible  to  act 
according  to  plans  embracing  the  totality  of  universal  history.     Any  historical 
enterprise can therefore only be a more or less reason able or justifiable adventure.    
It is primarily a risk.    Insofar as it is a risk it cannot be used to justify any excess or 
any ruthless and absolutist position.  
         If,  on  the  other  hand,  rebellion  could  found  a  philosophy  it  would  be  a 
philosophy of l imits, of calculated ignorance, and of risk.    He who does not know 
everything  cannot  kill  everything.     The  rebel,  far  from  making  an  absolute  of 
history,  rejects  and  disputes  it,  in  the  name  of  a  concept  that  he  has  of  his  own 
nature.     He  refuses  his  condi tion,  and  his  condition  to  a  large  extent  is  historical.    
Injustice,  the  transience  of  time,  death  –   all  are  manifest  in  history.     In  spurning 
them,  history  itself  is  spurned.     Most  certainly  the  rebel  does  not  deny  the  history 
that  surrounds  him;  it  is  in   terms  of  this  that  he  attempts  to  affirm  himself.     But 
confronted  with  it,  he  feels  like  the  artist  confronted  with  reality;  he  spurns  it 
without escaping from it.    He had never succeeded in creating an absolute history.    
Even though he can participate, b y the force of events, in the crime of history, he 
cannot necessarily legitimate it.    Rational crime not only cannot be admitted on the 
level of rebellion, but also signifies the death of rebellion.    To make this evidence 
  207  

more convincing, rational crime ex ercises itself, in the first place, on rebels whose 
insurrection contests a history that is henceforth deified.  
         The mystification peculiar to the mind which claims to be revolutionary today 
sums  up  and  increases  bourgeois  mystification.     It  contrive s,  by  the  promise  of 
absolute  justice,  the  acceptance  of  perpetual  injustice,  of  unlimited  compromise, 
and of indignity.    Rebellion itself only aspires to the relative and can only promise 
an  assured  dignity  coupled  with  relative  justice.     It  supposes  a  li mit  at  which  the 
community  of  man  is  established.     Its  universe  is  the  universe  of  relative  values. 
  Instead  of  saying,  with  Hegel  and  Marx,  that  all  is  necessary,  it  only  repeats  that 
all is possible and that, at a certain point of the farthest frontier,  it is worth making 
the  supreme  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  the  possible.     Between  God  and  history,  the 
yogi  and  the  commissar,  it  opens  a  difficult  path  where  contradictions  may  exist 
and thrive.    Let us consider the two contradictions given as an example in  this way.  
         A  revolutionary  action  which  wishes  to  be  coherent  in  terms  of  its  origins 
should be embodied in an active consent to the relative.    Uncompromising as to its 
means,  it  would  accept  an  approximation  as  far  as  its  ends  are  concerned  and,  so  
that the approximation should become more and more accurately defined, it would 
allow  absolute  freedom  of  speech.     Thus  it  would  preserve  the  common  existence 
that justifies its insurrection.    In particular, it would preserve as an absolute law the 
perman ent possibility of self - expression.    This defines a particular line of conduct 
in  regard  to  justice  and  freedom.     There  is  no  justice  in  society  without  natural  or 
civil  rights  as  its  basis.     There  are  no  rights  without  expression  of  those  rights.     If 
the  rights are expressed without hesitation it is more than probable that, sooner or 
later,  the  justice  they  postulate  will  come  to  the  world.     To  conquer  existence,  we 
must start from the small amount of existence we find in ourselves and not deny it 
from the  very beginning.    To silence the law until justice is established is to silence 
it  forever  since  it  will  have  no  more  occasion  to  speak  if  justice  reigns  forever.    
Once  more,  we  thus  confide  justice  into  the  keeping  of  those  who  alone  have  the 
ability  to  m ake  themselves  heard  –   those  in  power.     For  centuries,  justice  and 
existence  as  dispensed  by  those  in  power  have  been  considered  a  favour.     To  kill 
freedom in order to establish the reign of justice comes to the same as resuscitating 
the  idea  of  grace  with out  divine  intercession  and  of  restoring  by  a  mystifying 
reaction the mystic body in its basest elements.    Even when justice is not realized, 
freedom  preserves  the  power  to  protest  and  guarantees  human  communication.    
Justice in a silent world, justice ens laved and mute, destroys mutual complicity and 
finally  can  no  longer  be  justice.     The  revolution  of  the  twentieth  century  has 
arbitrarily  separated,  for  overambitious  ends  of  conquest,  two  inseparable  ideas.    
Absolute  freedom  mocks  at  justice.     Absolute  ju stice  denies  freedom.     To  be 
fruitful,  the  two  ideas  must  find  their  limits  in  each  other.     No  man  considers  that 
his  condition  is  free  if  it  is  not  at  the  same  time  just,  nor  just  unless  it  is  free.    
  208  

Freedom,  precisely,  cannot  even  be  imagined  without  the   power  of  saying  clearly 
what is just and what is unjust, of claiming all existence in the name of a small part 
of existence which refuses to die.    Finally there is a justice, though a very different 
kind  of  justice,  in  restoring  freedom,  which  is  the  only   imperishable  value  of 
history.     Men  are  never  really  willing  to  die  except  for  the  sake  of  freedom: 
therefore they do not believe in dying completely.  
         The  same  reasoning  can  be  applied  to  violence.     Absolute  non - violence  is  the 
negative  basis  of  sl avery  and  its  acts  of  violence;  systematic  violence  positively 
destroys the living community and the existence we receive from it.    To be fruitful, 
these  two  ideas  must  establish  final  limits.     In  history,  considered  as  an  absolute, 
violence  finds  itself  l egitimized;  as  a  relative  risk,  it  is  the  cause  of  a  rupture  in 
communication.    It must therefore preserve, for the rebel, its provisional character 
of  effraction  and  must  always  be  bound,  if  it  cannot  be  avoided,  to  a  personal 
responsibility and to an imm ediate risk.    Systematic violence is part of the order of 
things;  in  a  certain  sense,  this  is  consolatory.     Führerprinzip   or  historical  Reason, 
whatever  order  may  establish  it,  it  reigns  over  the  universe  of  things,  not  the 
universe of men.    Just as the re bel considers murder as the limit that he must, if he 
is  so  inclined,  consecrate  by  his  own  death,  so  violence  can  only  be  an  extreme 
limit  which  combats  another  form  of  violence,  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  an 
insurrection.    If an excess of injustice  renders the latter inevitable, the rebel rejects 
violence  in  advance,  in  the  service  of  a  doctrine  or  of  a  reason  of  State.     Every 
historical crisis, for example, terminates in institutions.    If we have no control over 
the  crisis  itself,  which  is  pure  haza rd,  we  do  have  control  over  the  institutions, 
since we can define them, choose the ones for which we will fight, and thus bend 
our effort toward their establishment.    Authentic arts of rebellion will only consent 
to take up arms for institutions that limit  violence, not for those which codify it.    A 
revolution  is  not  worth  dying  for  unless  it  assumes  the  immediate  suppression  of 
the death penalty; not worth going to prison for unless it refuses in advance to pass 
sentence without fixed terms.    If rebel viol ence employs itself in the establishment 
of  these  institutions,  announcing  its  aims  as  often  as  it  can,  it  is  the  only  way  in 
which it can be really provisional.    When the end is absolute, historically speaking, 
and  when  it  is  believed  certain  of  realizati on,  it  is  possible  to  go  so  far  as  to 
sacrifice others.    When it is not, only oneself can be sacrificed, in the hazards of a 
struggle for the common dignity of man.    Does the end justify the means?    That is 
possible.    But what will justify the end?    To tha t question, which historical thought 
leaves pending, rebellion replies: the means.  
         What  does  such  an  attitude  signify  in  politics?     And,  first  of  all,  is  it 
efficacious?     We  must  answer  without  hesitation  that  it  is  the  only  attitude  that  is 
efficac ious  today.     There  are  two  sorts  of  efficacy:  that  of  typhoons  and  that  of 
sap.     Historical  absolutism  is  not  efficacious,  it  is  efficient;  it  has  seized  and  kept 
  209  

power.     Once  it  is  in  possession  of  power,  it  destroys  the  only  creative  reality.    
Uncompromi sing and limited action, springing from rebellion, upholds this reality 
and only tries to extend it farther and farther.    It is not said that this action cannot 
conquer.    It is said that it runs the risk of not conquering and of dying.    But either 
revoluti on  will  take  this  risk  or  it  will  confess  that  it  is  only  the  undertaking  of  a 
new  set  of  masters,  punishable  by  the  same  scorn.     A  revolution  that  is  separated 
from  honour  betrays  its  origins  that  belong  to  the  reign  of  honour.     Its  choice,  in 
any  case,  i s  limited  to  material  expediency  and  final  annihilation,  or  to  risks  and 
hence to creation.    The revolutionaries of the past went ahead as fast as they could 
and their optimism was complete.    But today the revolutionary spirit has grown in 
knowledge  and  cl ear - sightedness;  it  has  behind  it  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  of 
experience.     Moreover,  the  revolution  has  lost  its  illusions  of  being  a  public 
holiday.     It  is,  entirely  on  its  own,  a  prodigious  and  calculated  enterprise,  which 
embraces the entire universe.    It knows, even though it does not always say so, that 
it will be world - wide or that it will not be at all.    Its chances are balanced against 
the risk of a universal war, which, even in the event of victory, will only present it 
with an Empire of ruins.    I t can remain faithful to its nihilism, and incarnate in the 
charnel  houses  the  ultimate  reason  of  history.     Then  it  will  be  necessary  to 
renounce   everything   except   the   silent   music   that   will   again   transfigure   the 
terrestrial hell.    But the revolutionary sp irit in Europe can also, for the first and last 
time, reflect upon its principles, ask itself what the deviation is which leads it into 
terror  and  into  war,  and  rediscover  with  the  reasons  for  its  rebellion,  its  faith  in 
itself.  
   
   
   
Moderation and Excess  
   
*  
   
         The  errors  of  contemporary  revolution  are  first  of  all  explained  by  the 
ignorance  or  systematic  misconception  of  that  limit  which  seems  inseparable 
from  human  nature  and  which  rebellion  reveals.     Nihilist  thought,  because  it 
neglects this fro ntier, ends by precipitating itself into a uniformly accelerated 
movement.    Nothing any longer checks it in its course and it reaches the point 
of  justifying  total  destruction  or  unlimited  conquest.     We  now  know,  at  the 
end  of  this  long  inquiry  into  rebell ion  and  nihilism,  that  rebellion  with  no 
other  limits  but  historical  expediency  signifies  unlimited  slavery.     To  escape 
this  fate,  the  revolutionary  mind,  if  it  wants  to  remain  alive,  must  therefore 
  210  

return again to the sources of rebellion and draw its ins piration from the only 
system  of  thought  which  is  faithful  to  its  origins:  thought  that  recognizes 
limits.     If  the  limit  discovered  by  rebellion  transfigures  everything,  if  every 
thought, every action that goes beyond a certain point negates itself, there  is, 
in  fact,  a  measure  by  which  to  judge  events  and  men.     In  history,  as  in 
psychology, rebellion is an irregular pendulum, which swings in an erratic arc 
because  it  is  looking  for  its  most  perfect  and  profound  rhythm.     But  its 
irregularity  is  not  total:  i t  functions  around  a  pivot.     Rebellion,  at  the  same 
time that it suggests a nature common to all men, brings to light the measure 
and the limit which are the very principle of this nature.  
         Every  reflection  today,  whether  nihilist  or  positivist,  give s  birth,  sometimes 
without knowing it, to standards that science itself confirms.    The quantum theory, 
relativity, the uncertainty of interrelationships, define a world that has no definable 
reality except on the scale of average greatness, which is our ow n.    The ideologies 
which  guide  our  world  were  born  in  the  time  of  absolute  scientific  discoveries.    
Our real knowledge, on the other hand, only justifies a system of thought based on 
relative  discoveries.     “Intelligence,”  says  Lazare  Bickel,  “is  our  facult y  for  not 
developing what we think to the very end, so that we can still believe in reality.”    
Approximative  thought  is  the  only  creator  of  reality.  [Science  today  betrays  its 
origins and denies its own acquisitions in allowing itself to be put to the serv ice of 
State terrorism and the desire for power.    Its punishment and its degradation lie in 
only  being  able  to  produce,  in  an  abstract  world,  the  means  of  destruction  and 
enslavement.     But  when  the  limit  is  reached,  science  will  perhaps  serve  the 
individua l rebellion.    This terrible necessity will mark the decisive turning - point.]  
         The very forces of matter, in their blind advance, impose their own limits.    That 
is  why  it  is  useless  to  want  to  reverse  the  advance  of  technology.     The  age  of  the 
spinnin g - wheel  is  over  and  the  dream  of  a  civilization  of  artisans  is  vain.     The 
machine  is  bad  only  in  the  way  that  it  is  now  employed.     Its  benefits  must  be 
accepted even if its ravages are rejected.    The truck, driven day and night, does not 
humiliate  its  driv er,  who  knows  it  inside  out  and  treats  it  with  affection  and 
efficiency.    The real and inhuman excess lies in the division of labour.    But by dint 
of  this  excess,  a  day  comes  when  a  machine  capable  of  a  hundred  operations, 
operated by one man, creates one  sole object.    This man, on a different scale, will 
have partially rediscovered the power of creation which he possessed in the days of 
the artisan.    The anonymous producer then more nearly approaches the creator.    It 
is  not  certain,  naturally,  that  industr ial  excess  will  immediately  embark  on  this 
path.     But  it  already  demonstrates,  by  the  way  it  functions,  the  necessity  for 
moderation  and  gives  rise  to  reflections  on  the  proper  way  to  organize  this 
moderation.     Either  this  value  of  limitation  will  be  reali zed,  or  contemporary 
excesses will only find their principle and peace in universal destruction.  
  211  

         This  law  of  moderation  equally  well  extends  to  all  the  contradictions  of 
rebellious  thought.     The  real  is  not  entirely  rational,  nor  is  the  rational  ent irely 
real.     As  we  have  seen  in  regard  to  surrealism,  the  desire  for  unity  not  only 
demands  that  everything  should  be  rational.     It  also  wishes  that  the  irrational 
should not be sacrificed.    One cannot say that nothing has any meaning, because in 
doing  so  one  affirms  a  value  sanctioned  by  an  opinion;  not  that  everything  has  a 
meaning,  because  the  word  everything  has  no  meaning  for  us.     The  irrational 
imposes  limits  on  the  rational,  which,  in  its  turn,  gives  it  its  moderation.    
Something has a meaning, final ly, which we must obtain from meaninglessness.    In 
the  same  way,  it  cannot  be  said  that  existence  takes  place  only  on  the  level  of 
essence.     Where  could  one  perceive  essence  except  on  the  level  of  existence  and 
evolution?     But  nor  can  it  be  said  that  being   is  only  existence.     Something  that  is 
always in the process of development could not exist  –  there must be a beginning.    
Being  can  only  prove  itself  in  development,  and  development  is  nothing  without 
being.    The world is not in a condition of pure stabili ty; nor is it only movement.    It 
is  both  movement  and  stability.  The  historical  dialectic,  for  example,  is  not  in 
continuous pursuit of an unknown value.    It revolves around the limit, which is its 
prime   value.      Heraclitus,   the   discoverer   of   the   constant   c hange   of   things, 
nevertheless  set  a  limit  to  this  perpetual  process.     This  limit  was  symbolized  by 
Nemesis, the goddess of moderation and the implacable enemy of the immoderate.    
A  process  of  thought  which  wanted  to  take  into  account  the  contemporary 
contr adictions of rebellion should seek its inspiration from this goddess.  
         As for the moral contradictions, they too begin to become soluble in the light of 
this conciliatory value.    Virtue cannot separate itself from reality without becoming 
a  principle   of  evil.     Nor  can  it  identify  itself  completely  with  reality  without 
denying itself.    The moral value brought to light by rebellion, finally, is no farther 
above life and history than history and life are above it.    In actual truth, it assumes 
no  reality  in  history  until  man  gives  his  life  for  it  or  dedicates  himself  entirely  to 
it.    Jacobin and bourgeois civilization presumes that values are above history, and 
its  formal  virtues  then  lay  the  foundation  of  a  repugnant  form  of  mystification.    
The  revolution   of  the  twentieth  century  decrees  that  values  are  intermingled  with 
the movement of history and that their historical foundation justify a new form of 
mystification.    Moderation, confronted with this irregularity, teaches us that at least 
one  part  of  reali sm  is  necessary  to  every  ethic:  pure  and  unadulterated  virtue  is 
homicidal.     And  one  part  of  ethics  is  necessary  to  all  realism:  cynicism  is 
homicidal.     That  is  why  humanitarian  cant  has  no  more  basis  than  cynical 
provocation.     Finally,  man  is  not  entirely   to  blame;  it  was  not  he  who  started 
history;  nor  is  he  entirely  innocent,  since  he  continues  it.     Those  who  go  beyond 
this   limit   and   affirm   his   total   innocence   end   in   the   insanity   of   definitive 
culpability.      Rebellion,   on   the   contrary,   sets   us   on   the   path    of   calculated 
  212  

culpability.     Its  sole  but  invincible  hope  is  incarnated,  in  the  final  analysis,  in 
innocent murderers.  
         At this limit, the “We are” paradoxically defines a new form of individualism.    
“We  are”  in  terms  of  history,  and  history  must  rec kon  with  this  “We  are,”  which 
must in its turn keep its place in history.    I have need of others who have need of 
me  and  of  each  other.     Every  collective  action,  every  form  of  society,  supposes  a 
discipline,  and  the  individual,  without  this  discipline,  is  only  a  stranger,  bowed 
down under the weight of an inimical collectivity.    But society and discipline lose 
their  direction  if  they  deny  the  “We  are.”     I  alone,  in  one  sense,  support  the 
common  dignity  that  I  cannot  allow  either  myself  or  others  to  debase.     This 
individualism  is  in  no  sense  pleasure;  it  is  perpetual  struggle,  and,  sometimes, 
unparalleled joy when it reaches the heights of proud compassion.  
   
   
         Thought at the  Meridian  
   
         As  for  knowing  if  such  an  attitude  can  find  express ion  in  the  contemporary 
world,  it  is  easy  to  evoke  –   and  this  is  only  an  example  –   what  is  traditionally 
called  revolutionary  trade - unionism.     Cannot  it  be  said  that  even  this  trade -
unionism  is  ineffectual?     The  answer  is  simple:  it  is  this  movement  alone  that,  in 
one century, is responsible for the enormously improved condition of the workers 
from  the  sixteen - hour  day  to  the  forty - hour  week.     The  ideological  Empire  has 
turned socialism back on its tracks and destroyed the greater part of the conquests 
of  t rade - unionism.     It  is  because  trade - unionism  started  from  a  concrete  basis,  the 
basis  of  professional  employment  (which  is  to  the  economic  order  what  the 
commune  is  to  the  political  order),  the  living  cell  on  which  the  organism  builds 
itself,  while  the  Cæs arian  revolution  starts  from  doctrine  and  forcibly  introduces 
reality into it.    Trade - unionism, like the commune, is the negation, to the benefit of 
reality,  of  bureaucratic  and  abstract  centralism.  [Tolain,  the  future  Communard, 
wrote:   “Human   beings   emanc ipate   themselves   only   on   the   basis   of   natural 
groups.”]    The revolution of the twentieth century, on the contrary, claims to base 
itself on economics, but is primarily political and ideological.    It cannot, by its very 
function,  avoid  terror  and  violence  d one  to  the  real.     Despite  its  pretensions,  it 
begins in the absolute and attempts to mould reality.    Rebellion, inversely, relies on 
reality  to  assist  it  in  its  perpetual  struggle  for  truth.     The  former  tries  to  realize 
itself from top to bottom, the latte r from bottom to top.    Far from being a form of 
romanticism, rebellion, on the contrary, takes the part of true realism.    If it wants a 
revolution, it wants it on behalf of life, not in defiance of it.    That is why it relies 
primarily on the most concrete  realities  –  on occupation, on the village, where the 
living heart of things and of men is to be found.    Politics, to satisfy the demands of 
  213  

rebellion,  must  submit  to  the  eternal  verities.     Finally,  when  it  causes  history  to 
advance  and  alleviates  the  suffe rings  of  mankind,  it  does  so  without  terror,  if  not 
without  violence,  and  in  the  most  dissimilar  political  conditions.  [Scandinavian 
societies   today,   to   give   only   one   example,   demonstrate   how   artificial   and 
destructive are purely political opposites.    The  most fruitful form of trade - unionism 
is reconciled with constitutional monarchy and achieves an approximation of a just 
society.    The first preoccupation of the historical and natural State has been, on the 
contrary, to crush forever the professional nucle us and communal autonomy.]  
         But  this  example  goes  farther  than  it  seems.     On  the  very  day  when  the 
Cæsarian   revolution   triumphed   over   the   syndicalist   and   libertarian   spirit, 
revolutionary  thought  lost,  in  itself,  a  counterpoise  of  which  it  cannot,  wi thout 
decaying,  deprive  itself.     This  counterpoise,  the  spirit  which  takes  the  measure  of 
life, is the same that animates the long tradition that can be called solitary thought, 
in  which,  since  the  time  of  the  Greeks,  nature  has  always  been  weighed  against  
evolution.      The   history   of   the   First   International,   when   German   Socialism 
ceaselessly  fought  against  the  libertarian  thought  of  the  French,  the  Spanish,  and 
the   Italians,   is   the   history   of   the   struggle   of   German   ideology   against   the 
Mediterranean  mind.  [S ee  Marx’s  letter  to  Engels  ( July  20,  1870)  hoping  for  the 
victory  of  Prussia   over  France:  “The  preponderance  of  the  German  proletariat 
would be at the same time the preponderance of ou r theory over Proudhon’s.]    The 
commune  against  the  State,  concrete  society  against  absolutist  society,  deliberate 
freedom   against   rational   tyranny,   finally   altruistic   individualism   against   the 
colonization of the masses, are, then, the contradictions that  express once again the 
endless  opposition  of  moderation  to  excess  which  has  animated  the  history  of  the 
Occident since the time of the ancient world.    The profound conflict of this century 
is  perhaps  not  so  much  between  the  German  ideologies  of  history  an d  Christian 
political  concepts,  which  in  a  certain  way  are  accomplices,  as  between  German 
dreams  and  Mediterranean  traditions,  between  the  violence  of  eternal  adolescence 
and  virile  strength,  between  nostalgia,  rendered  more  acute  by  knowledge  and  by 
books  and courage reinforced and enlightened by the experience of life  –  in other 
words, between history and nature.    But German ideology, in this sense, has come 
into  its  inheritance.     It  consummates  twenty  centuries  of  abortive  struggle  against 
nature,  first  in  the  name  of  a  historic  god  and  then  of  a  deified  history.    
Christianity,  no  doubt,  was  only  able  to  conquer  its  catholicity  by  assimilating  as 
much   as   it   could   of   Greek   thought.      But   when   the   Church   dissipated   its 
Mediterranean  heritage,  it  placed  the  e mphasis  on  history  to  the  detriment  of 
nature,  caused  the  Gothic  to  triumph  over  the  romance,  and,  destroying  a  limit  in 
itself,  has  made  increasing  claims  to  temporal  power  and  historical  dynamism.    
When nature ceases to be an object of contemplation and  admiration, it can then be 
nothing  more  than  material  for  an  action  that  aims  at  transforming  it.     These 
  214  

tendencies  –   and  not  the  concepts  of  mediation,  which  would  have  comprised  the 
real strength of Christianity  –  are triumphing in modern times, to the d etriment of 
Christianity  itself,  by  an  inevitable  turn  of  events.     That  God  should,  in  fact,  be 
expelled from this historical universe and German ideology be born where action is 
no longer a process of perfection but pure conquest, is an expression of tyra nny.  
         But  historical  absolutism,  despite  its  triumphs,  has  never  ceased  to  come  into 
collision   with   an   irrepressible   demand   of   human   nature,   of   which   the 
Mediterranean,  where  intelligence  is  ultimately  related  to  the  blinding  light  of  the 
sun,   guards   the   secret.      Rebellious   thought,   that   of   the   commune   and   of 
revolutionary  trade - unionism,  has  not  ceased  to  deny  this  demand  in  the  presence 
of bourgeois nihilism as well as of Cæsarian socialism.    Authoritarian thought, by 
means o f three wars and thanks to the physical destruction of a revolutionary elite, 
has  succeeded  in  submerging  this  libertarian  tradition.     But  this  barren  victory  is 
only  provisional;  the  battle  still  continues.     Europe   has  never  been  f ree  of  this 
struggle  between  darkness  and  light.     It  has  only  degraded  itself  by  deserting  the 
struggle  and  eclipsing  day  by  night.     The  destruction  of  this  equilibrium  is  today 
bearing  its  bitterest  fruits.     Deprived  of  our  means  of  mediation,  exiled  from  
natural  beauty,  we  are  once  again  in  the  world  of  the  Old  Testament,  crushed 
between a cruel Pharaoh and an implacable heaven.  
         In the common condition of misery, the eternal demand is heard again; nature 
once  more  takes  up  the  fight  against  history .     Naturally,  it  is  not  a  question  of 
despising anything, or of exalting one civilization at the expense of another, but of 
simply saying that it is a thought which the world today cannot do without for very 
much  longer.     There  is,  undoubtedly,  in  the  Russ ian  people  something  to  inspire 
Europe   with  the  potency  of  sacrifice,  and  in  America   a  necessary  power  of 
construction.     But  the  youth  of  the  world  always  find  themselves  standing  on  the 
same shore.    Thrown i nto the unworthy melting - pot of  Europe, deprived of beauty 
and friendship, we Mediterraneans, the proudest of races, live always by the same 
light.    In the depths of the European night, solar thought, the civilization facing two 
way s awaits its dawn.    But it already illuminates the paths of real mastery.  
         Real mastery consists in refuting the prejudices of the time, initially the deepest 
and most malignant of them, which would reduce man, after his deliverance from 
excess,  to  a   barren  wisdom.     It  is  very  true  that  excess  can  be  a  form  of  sanctity 
when it is paid for by the madness of Nietzsche.    But in this intoxication of the soul 
which  is  exhibited  on  the  scene  of  our  culture  always  the  madness  of  excess,  the 
folly of attempti ng the impossible, of which the brand can never be removed from 
him who has, once at least, abandoned himself to it?    Has Prometheus ever had this 
fanatical  or  accusing  aspect?     No,  our  civilization  survives  in  the  complacency  of 
cowardly  or  malignant  mind s  –   a  sacrifice  to  the  vanity  of  aging  adolescents.    
Lucifer  also  has  died  with  God,  and  from  his  ashes  has  arisen  a  spiteful  demon 
  215  

who does not even understand the object of his venture.    In 1950, excess is always 
a  comfort,  and  sometimes  a  career.     Moder ation,  on  the  one  hand,  is  nothing  but 
pure  tension.     It  smiles,  no  doubt,  and  our  Convulsionists,  dedicated  to  elaborate 
apocalypses,   despise   it.      But   its   smile   shines   brightly   at   the   climax   of   an 
interminable effort: it is in itself a supplementary sourc e of strength.    Why do these 
petty - minded  Europeans  who  show  us  an  avaricious  face,  if  they  no  longer  have 
the  strength  to  smile,  claim  that  their  desperate  convulsions  are  examples  of 
superiority?  
         The  real  madness  of  excess  dies  or  creates  its  own  moderation.     It  does  not 
cause the death of others in order to create an alibi for itself.    In its most extreme 
manifestations,  it  finds  its  limit,  on  which,  like  Kaliayev,  it  sacrifices  itself  if 
necessary.     Moderation  is  not  the  opposite  of  rebellion.    R ebellion  in  itself  is 
moderation,  and  it  demands,  defends,  and  re - creates  it  throughout  history  and  its 
eternal disturbances.    The very origin of this value guarantees us that it can only be 
partially destroyed.    Moderation, born of rebellion, can only liv e by rebellion.    It is 
a  perpetual  conflict,  continually  created  and  mastered  by  the  intelligence.     It  does 
not  triumph  either  in  the  impossible  or  in  the  abyss.     It  finds  its  equilibrium 
through them.    Whatever we may do, excess will always keep its place  in the heart 
of man, in the place where solitude is found.    We all carry within us our places of 
exile,  our  crimes  and  our  ravages.     But  our  task  is  not  to  unleash  them  on  the 
world; it is to fight them in ourselves and in others.    Rebellion, the secular  will not 
to  surrender  of  which  Barrès  speaks,  is  still  today  at  the  basis  of  the  struggle.    
Origin of form, source of real life, it keeps us always erect in the savage, formless 
movement of history.  
   
   
   
Beyond Nihilism  
   
*  
   
         There does exist for m an, therefore, a way of acting and of thinking which 
is possible on the level of moderation to which he belongs.    Every undertaking 
that  is  more  ambitious  than  this  proves  to  be  contradiction.     The  absolute  is 
not attained nor, above all, created through h istory.    Politics is not religion, or 
if  it  is,  then  it  is  nothing  but  the  Inquisition.     How  would  society  define  an 
absolute?    Perhaps everyone is looking for this absolute on behalf of all.    But 
society  and  politics  only  have  the  responsibility  of  arrang ing  everyone’s 
affairs  so  that  each  will  have  the  leisure  and  the  freedom  to  pursue  this 
  216  

common  search.     History  can  then  no  longer  be  presented  as  an  object  of 
worship.    It is only an opportunity that must be rendered fruitful by a vigilant 
rebellion.  
         “ Obsession  with  the  harvest  and  indifference  to  history,”  writes  René  Char 
admirably,  “are  two  extremities  of  my  bow.”     If  the  duration  of  history  is  not 
synonymous  with  the  duration  of  the  harvest,  then  history,  in  effect,  is  no  more 
than  a  fleeting  a nd  cruel  shadow  in  which  man  has  no  more  part.     He  who 
dedicates  himself  to  this  history  dedicates  himself  to  nothing  and,  in  his  turn,  is 
nothing.     But  he  who  dedicates  himself  to  the  duration  of  his  life,  to  the  house  he 
builds,  to  the  dignity  of  mankind ,  dedicates  himself  to  the  earth  and  reaps  from  it 
the harvest that sows its seed and sustains the world again and again.    Finally, it is 
those  who  know  how  to  rebel,  at  the  appropriate  moment,  against  history  who 
really  advance  its  interests.     To  rebel  ag ainst  it  supposes  an  interminable  tension 
and  the  agonized  serenity  of  which  René  Char  also  speaks.     But  the  true  life  is 
present  in  the  heart  of  the  dichotomy.     Life  is  this  dichotomy  itself,  the  mind 
soaring   over   volcanoes   of   light,   the   madness   of   justic e,   the   extenuating 
intransigence  of  moderation.     The  words  that  reverberate  for  us  at  the  confines  of 
this long adventure of rebellion are not formulas for optimism, for which we have 
no  possible  us  in  the  extremities  of  our  unhappiness,  but  words  of  coura ge  and 
intelligence  which,  on  the  shores  of  the  eternal  seas,  even  have  the  qualities  of 
virtue.  
         No  possible  form  of  wisdom  today  can  claim  to  give  more.     Rebellion 
indefatigably  confronts  evil,  from  which  it  can  only  derive  a  new  impetus.     Man 
can  master  in  himself  everything  that  should  be  mastered.     He  should  rectify  in 
creation  everything  that  can  be  rectified.     And  after  he  has  done  so,  children  will 
still die unjustly even in a perfect society.    Even by his greatest effort man can only 
propose  to  diminish  arithmetically  the  sufferings  of  the  world.     But  the  injustice 
and  the  suffering  of  the  world  will  remain  and,  no  matter  how  limited  they  are, 
they  will  not  cease  to  be  an  outrage.     Dimitri  Karamazov’s  cry  of  “Why?”  will 
continue to resound; ar t and rebellion will die only with the last man.  
         There  is  an  evil,  undoubtedly,  which  men  accumulate  in  their  fantastic  desire 
for  unity.     But  yet  another  evil  lies  at  the  roots  of  this  inordinate  movement.    
Confronted with this evil, confronted wit h death, man from the very depths of his 
soul  cries  out  for  justice.     Historical  Christianity  has  only  replied  to  this  protest 
against  evil  by  the  annunciation  of  the  kingdom  and  then  of  eternal  life,  which 
demands  faith.     But  suffering  exhausts  hope  and  f aith  and  then  is  left  alone  and 
unexplained.     The  toiling  masses,  worn  out  with  suffering  and  death,  are  masses 
without God.    Our place is henceforth at their side, far from teachers, old and new.    
Historical Christianity postpones to a point beyond the sp an of history the cure of 
evil  and  murder,  which  are  nevertheless  experienced  within  the  span  of  history.    
  217  

Contemporary materialism also believes that it can answer all questions.    But, as a 
slave  to  history,  it  increases  the  domain  of  historic  murder  and  at  the  same  time 
leaves  it  without  any  justification,  except  in  the  future  –   which  again  demands 
faith.     In  both  cases  one  must  wait,  and  meanwhile  the  innocent  continue  to  die.    
For  twenty  centuries  the  sum  total  of  evil  has  not  diminished  in  the  world.     No 
paradise, whether divine or revolutionary, has been realized.    An injustice remains 
inextricably bound to all suffering, even the most deserved in the eyes of men.    The 
long silence of Prometheus before the powers that overwhelmed him still cries out 
in   protest.     But  Prometheus,  meanwhile,  has  seen  men  rail  and  turn  against  him.    
Crushed between human evil and destiny, between terror and the arbitrary, all that 
remains to him is his power to rebel in order to save from murder him who can still 
be saved,  without surrendering to the arrogance of blasphemy.  
         Then we understand that rebellion cannot exist without a strange form of love.    
Those who find no rest in God or in history are condemned to live for those who, 
like themselves, cannot live: in fac t, for the humiliated.    The most pure form of the 
movement of rebellion is thus crowned with the heart - rending cry of Karamazov: if 
all are not saved, what good is the salvation of only one?    Thus Catholic prisoners, 
in  the  prison  cells  of  Spain,  refuse  communion  today  because  the  priests  of  the 
regime  have  made  it  obligatory  in  certain  prisons.     These  lonely  witnesses  to  the 
crucifixion of innocence also refuse salvation if it must be paid for by injustice and 
oppression.      This   insa ne   generosity   is   the   generosity   of   rebellion,   which 
unhesitatingly gives the strength of its love and without a moment’s delay refuses 
injustice.     Its  merit  lies  in  making  no  calculations,  distributing  everything  it 
possesses to life and to living men.    It  is thus that it is prodigal in its gifts to men to 
come.    Real generosity toward the future lies in giving all to the present.  
         Rebellion  proves  in  this  way  that  it  is  the  very  movement  of  life  and  that  it 
cannot  be  denied  without  renouncing  life.     Its  purest  outburst,  on  each  occasion, 
gives  birth  to  existence.     Thus  it  is  love  and  fecundity  or  it  is  nothing  at  all.    
Revolution  without  honour,  calculated  revolution  which,  in  preferring  an  abstract 
concept of man to a man of flesh and blood, denies e xistence as many times as is 
necessary, puts resentment in the place of love.    Immediately rebellion, forgetful of 
its generous origins, allows itself to be contaminated by resentment; it denies life, 
dashes  toward  destruction,  and  raises  up  the  grimacing  cohorts  of  petty  rebels, 
embryo slaves all of them, who end by offering themselves for salve, today, in all 
the  marketplaces  of  Europe,  to  no  matter  what  form  of  servitude.     It  is  no  longer 
either  revolution  or  rebellion  but  rancour,  malice,  and  tyranny.     Then,  when 
revolution  in  the  name  of  power  and  of  history  becomes  a  murderous  and 
immoderate mechanism, a new rebellion is consecrated in the name of moderation 
and  of  life.     We  are  at  that  extremity  now.     At  the  end  of  this  tunnel  of  darkness, 
however,  th ere  is  inevitably  a  light,  which  we  already  divine  and  for  which  we 
  218  

only have to fight to ensure its coming.    All of us, among the ruins, are preparing a 
renaissance beyond the limits of nihilism.    But few of us know it.  
   
         Already,  in  fact,  rebellio n,  without  claiming  to  solve  everything,  can  at  least 
confront  its  problems.     From  this  moment  high  noon  is  borne  away  on  the  fast -
moving stream of history.    Around the devouring flames, shadows writhe in mortal 
combat  for  an  instant  of  time  and  then  as  su ddenly  disappear,  and  the  blind, 
fingering their eyelids, cry out that this is history.    The men of  Europe, abandoned 
to  the  shadows,  have  turned  their  backs  upon  the  fixed  and  radiant  point  of  the 
present.     They  forget  the  present  for  the  future,  the  fate  of  humanity  for  the 
delusion  of  power,  the  misery  of  the  slums  for  the  mirage  of  the  eternal  city, 
ordinary  justice  for  an  empty  promised  land.     They  despair  of  personal  freedom 
and  dream  of  a  strange  freedom  of  the  species;  reject   solitary  death  and  give  the 
name  of  immortality  to  a  vast  collective  agony.     They  no  longer  believe  in  the 
things  that  exist  in  the  world  and  in  living  man;  the  secret  of  Europe   is  that  it  no 
longer  loves  life.     Its  blind  men  enter tain  the  puerile  belief  that  to  love  one  single 
day of life amounts to justifying whole centuries of oppression.    That is why they 
wanted  to  efface  joy  from  the  world  and  to  postpone  it  until  a  much  later  date.    
Impatience  with  limits,  the  rejection  of  the ir  double  life,  despair  at  being  a  man, 
have  finally  driven  them  to  inhuman  excesses.     Denying  the  real  grandeur  of  life, 
they have had to stake all on their own excellence.    For want of something better to 
do, they deified themselves and their misfortunes  began; these gods have had their 
eyes put out.    Kaliayev, and his brothers throughout the entire world, refuse, on the 
contrary,  to  be  deified  in  that  they  refuse  the  unlimited  power  to  inflict  death.    
They choose, and give us as an example the only origi nal rule of life today: to learn 
to live and to die, and, in order to be a man, to refuse to be a god.  
         At  this  meridian  of  thought,  the  rebel  thus  rejects  divinity  in  order  to  share  in 
the  struggles  and  destiny  of  all  men.     We  shall  choose  Ithaca,  the  faithful  land, 
frugal  and  audacious  thought,  lucid  action,  and  the  generosity  of  the  man  who 
understands.     In  the  light,  the  earth  remains  our  first  and  our  last  love.     Our 
brothers are breathing under the same sky as we; justice  is a living thing.    Now is 
born that strange joy which helps one live and die, and which we shall never again 
postpone to a later time.    On the sorrowing earth it is the unresting thorn, the bitter 
brew, the harsh wind off the sea, the old and the new daw n.    With this joy, through 
long  struggle,  we  shall  remake  the  soul  of  our  time,  and  a  Europe   which  will 
exclude nothing.    Not even that phantom Nietzsche, who for twelve years after his 
downfall  was  continually  invoked  by  the  West  a s  the  blasted  image  of  its  loftiest 
knowledge and its nihilism; nor the prophet of justice without mercy who lies, by 
mistake, in the unbelievers’ plot at Highgate Cemetery; nor the deified mummy of 
the  man  of  action  in  his  glass  coffin;  nor  any  part  of  wh at  the  intelligence  and 
  219  

energy of Europe have ceaselessly furnished to the pride of a contemptible period.    
All may indeed live again, side by side with the martyrs of 1905, but on condition 
that  it  is  understood  that  they  correct  one  another,  and  that  a  l imit,  under  the  sun, 
shall  curb  them  all.     Each  tells  the  other  that  he  is  not  God;  this  is  the  end  of 
romanticism.     At  this  moment,  when  each  of  us  must  fit  an  arrow  to  his  bow  and 
enter  the  lists  anew,  to  reconquer,  within  history  and  in  spite  of  it,  tha t  which  he 
owns already, the thin yield of the fields, the brief love of this earth, at this moment 
when at last a man is born, it is time to forsake our age and its adolescent furies.    
The  bow  bends;  the  wood  complains.     At  the  moment  of  supreme  tension,  there 
will leap into flight an unswerving arrow, a shaft that is inflexible and free.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  220  