



NOTEBOOKS
1951-1959
OTHER RUUKS m'  Albert Camas
Awarded the Nobel Prize / r Literature in 1957
NOTEBOOKS 1942-1951 1965
(Carnets, janvier 1942-mars 1951)
NOTEBOOKS 1935-1942 1963
(Carnets, mai 1935-fevrier 1942)
RESIST ANCE, REBELLION,  AND DEA TH 1961
(Actuelles-a selection)
THE POSSESSED (Les Possed(;s) 1960
('ALIGULA  AND THREE OTHER PLA YS 1958
(C(iligula, Le Malentendu, L'Etat de siege, Les Justes)
EXILE  AND THE KINGDOM (L'Exil et le Royaume) 1958
THE FALL (La Chute) 1957
THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS  AND OTHER ESSA YS 1955
(Le Mythe de Sisyphe)
THE REBEL  (L'Homnte revolte) 1954

THE PLAGUE (La Peste) 1948
THE STRANGER (L'Etraoger) 1946

NOTEBOOKS
1 9 5 11 9 5 9
BY Albert Camus
TRANS1,A TE, 1) FROM  TIIE FR ENCE1, \VLI'II  AN INTRODUCTION
AND AFTER WORU, BY  RYAN BLOOM



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MY PROFOUND,  deepest  gratitude  goes to Dr. Hassan  Hodjati  for his
immense  and invaluable  aide with this manuscript:  Je ne saurais jamais
assez vous remercier . To my parents, without  whom:  nothing.  To Herbert
Lottman  and Oliver Todd for their exquisite  biographies  of Camus.  And
to Francine and Keivan  Hodjati,  Ariane  Bernard,  Veronique  de Crom-
brugghe,  Christen  Aragoni,  and Thomas  Field, all of whom have helped
improve this text.  Any existing imperfections are, of course, my own.
R. B.
Paris
June 2007

TRALN'SL,A TOR'S NOTE
A WRITER'S  N(rrEBOOK  is a peculiar  thing. To look at a writer's raw
notebooks,  his unpolished  jottings,  is to see a man, to know his works,
and to watch them grow. It is to get a taste of the life, the human  being,
behind  the books and essays,  even when that person  has seemingly  tried
not to reveal himself.
Some might contend  that Camus  always  intended  to publish  his cahiers
(as he called them),  or, at the very least, that by 1954 the thought  had
crossed  his mind when he began to have formal  typescripts  made of the
first seven volumes. Whether  it proves  intent or not, we do know that
Camus  corrected  these seven typescripts  as they were being prepared.  In
the  United  States,  after  his  death,  the  first  six  of  these  cahiers  were
published  in two volumes,  Notebooks  1935-1942  and Notebooks  1942-
1951. Of the cahiers contained  in those previous  volumes,  some were
fully corrected  by the author and some only partially  corrected  in various
stages and drafts.  In this third and final volume  of Camus'  Notebooks,
only the very first cahier (VII) was made into a typescript  while the author
was still living, and even this one was only partially  corrected by the
author before his death.
As established  in the original  French  edition,  the rest of what follows-
cahiers,  letters,  and notes-was  taken straight  from the original  handwritten
source,  unadulte rated, unaltered  save for a few proper  names.  Thus these
final cahiers presented  a series of translation  challenges  not fully present
in the two earlier volumes.  Throughout  the manuscript,  occasion ally there
occurs  a word or series of words that Camus'  small, tight script renders
completely  illegible; over the years many have joked that only four people
could ever read his handwriting:  his wife, his lover, his daughter , and
Camus  himself  (and sometimes  even they had to use a magnifying glass
to do so). Similarly , in some spots Camus'  script seems decipherable,  but

certainty  is impossible;  these occurrences  have been recorded  with the
note "questionable  reading"  or "unclear  word,"  to indicate  the possibility
of alternative interpretations.  One can assume  what they will about the
earlier Notebooks,  but these last volumes,  as evidenced,  come to us in the
raw.
This being the case, I have gone to great lengths  to try to preserve  the
manner  of these last notebooks  accurately  in their translation  into English.
These entries are not always  solid pieces of polished  prose; they are often
notes  at  the  rudimentary  level,  they  do  not  always  contain  complete
sentences  or thoughts,  and they are indeed  often ambiguous.  Occasionally
an entry will trail off, or words will be dropped  in a sort of shorthand;
sometimes  Camus  has "dinner  with B.M."  and sometimes  just "Dinner
B.M." Sometimes  we read of The Fall or The Possessed,  and sometimes
just of Fall or Possessed.  Occasionally  we get long, complex,  intricate
sentences,  and at other times short, clipped,  elliptical  sentences.  These
differences,  though sometimes  slight, are clearly  present  in the original
French,  and  when  possible  they  have  been  maintained  in  the  English
translation.
Although,  for the sake of clarity, grammar  and punctuation  have been
edited in places,  for the most part, even when an entry appears  less than
grammatically  perfect,  even when a question  mark or quotation  mark is
missing,  as long as this is how Camus  recorded  the original  entry, no
changes  have been made for the English  translation.  The intent of this
precision  is to lend a certain  authenticity  to the true flavor of these last
notebooks,  sometimes  seemingly  composed,  other times apparently only
cryptic notes the author himself would fully understand.
That said, the greatest  liberty  taken with this translation  involves  the
insertion  of commas,  without  which many of these entries  would prove
quite  difficult  to  read  and  decipher .  An  examination  of  Camus'
handwritten  drafts, even of formal  works such as Le Premier  Homme,
reveals  that the author often eschewed  spaces,  commas,  and even periods.
While fidelity has been held as an essential  ingredient  in translating  the

particular  manner  of  these  writings,  in  certain  places  clarity,  at  the
sentence level, seemed just as necessary .
Finally, all the quotations  cited here by Camus  have been translated
from the French  version  that he recorded  in these cahiers,  not from their
original  source  language.  In the case of quotations  originally  appearing  in
English,  often  their  French  counterparts  contain  slight  differences  in
wording  and  structure,  differences  that  have  been  preserved  here  as
Camus wrote them.
Translating  these cahiers  has been an incredible  journey , an incredible
insight  into the final years of one of the French  language's  most enduring
writers,  a voice still so relevant  today, perhaps  even more so than in the
past. My sincere  hope is simply  that you will enjoy these final pages and
final thoughts, this final and most personal glimpse, as much as I did.

EDITORS' NOTE
[from the French edition]
THIS THIRD  VOLUME  of the Notebooks  includes  cahiers  VII, VIII,
and IX, kept by Albert  Camus  from March  1951 until his death. Cahier
VII, from March 1951-July  1954, was typed up while the author was still
living and was partially  corrected  by him. This is undoubtedly  the reason
cahier VII contains  passages  that are not in the original  manuscript.  On
the  other  hand,  certain  pages  of  the  manuscript  were  removed,
undoubtedly by the author , in the typed version.
In the following  notebooks,  a notation  has been made each time one or
more  words  could  not  be  deciphered.  In  addition,  for  understandable
reasons, we have removed some proper names and changed some initials.

INTRODUCTION
AS  THIS  final  volume  of  his  Notebooks  begins,  Albert  Camus  is
completing  what would become  his most controversial  book, L'Homm.e
Revolte  (The Rebel).  Its publication  in October  1951, seven months  after
this volume opens, sets off a polemic  so aggressive  that its effects, both
political  and personal,  reverberate  throughout  the remainder  of Camus'
life.
The most widely  noted result of the publication  of L'Homme  Revolte  is
the quarrel with Sartre,  which rapidly and very publicly  unfolded  in the
pages of Les Temps Modernes  in the summer  of 1952. By September  of
that year, newspapers  such as Le Monde  and Samedi-Soir  were already
labeling the Camus-Sartre break "of ficial."
In December , still reeling  from the Temps Modernes  polemic,  Camus
returned  home to Algeria,  visiting the southern  part of the country  which
he had never before  seen. Although  earlier  in the year he had already
begun  to  sketch  ideas  for  a  short-story  collection  tentatively  titled
Nouvelles  de l'exil, it was undoubtedly  in Laghouat  that the story "La
Femme adultere" took shape.
Before  returning  to Paris, Camus  met with the French  actor Marcel
Herrand  in Nice. Herrand  was again set to direct the Festival  d'Angers, as
he had the year before,  but, terminally  ill with cancer, he died just days
before  the  festival  began,  leaving  Camus  to  take  his  place. Although
thrown  into the experience,  one can assume  Camus  enjoyed  the positive
critical  reaction,  as  four  years  later,  in  June  1957,  he  returned  to  the
festival,  this time directing  his own Caligula  as well as Lope de Vega's Le
Chaevalier d'Olmedo.
It was around  this time, the fall of 1953, that Camus'  wife, Francine,
fell into a serious  and lasting  depression,  probably , at least in part, as a

result of Camus'  infidelity , which was fairly public in France  and not at all
a secret from Francine.  Although,  if by most accounts,  he tried not to
openly  expose  his  wife  to  his  philandering,  he  also  did  little  to
successfully conceal it.
On November  7, 1953, in his own cloud of depression,  Camus  turned
forty. Less than a month  earlier, Actuelles  II, Camus'  latest collection  of
essays,  letters, and speeches,  had been published  by Gallimard,  receiving
generally  warm  yet  unenthusiastic  reviews,  which  did  little  to  lift  his
spirits.  In mid-1954 the last of his "lyrical  essay"  collections,  L'Ete, was
published.
In  October,  over  the  course  of  four  days,  Camus  visited  the
Netherlands,  spending  a day in The Hague  and two days in Amsterdam,
the city that would  become  the setting  of his last completed  novel, La
Chute.  During the final months  of his life, Camus  had been planning  a
return trip to the Netherlands  to scout locations  for a possible  television
adaptation  of the novel, but the trip, and the adaptation,  would never be
made.
In November , as fighting  in Algeria escalated,  Camus  became  more
and more anguished over the state of his homeland,  escaping  to Italy on
the  invitation  of  the  Italian  Cultural  Association,  a  trip  that  is  well
documented  in Notebook  VIII. Not long after this trip, in April 1955,
Camus  took  his  first,  long  awaited,  vacation  to  Greece,  also  well
described  in these pages. Upon his return to Paris in mid May, he accepted
a job with L'Express, a weekly  journal,  but it was short-lived:  in February
1956,  with  tensions  concerning  Algeria  tightening  throughou t  France,
Camus quit the paper and focused on finishing La Chute.
Shortly  before  ceasing  his work for L'Express,  on January  22 Camus
launched  his "Appeal  for a Civil Truce" in Algeria.  As he notes in these
pages,  even  if  he  found  some  peace  in  being  "in  the  struggle,"  the
atmosphere  in Algiers  was nothing  less than hostile,  requiring  him to hire
bodyguards  to prevent  possible  abduction  attempts  and perhaps  to try to
calm his nerves  regarding  reported  death threats.  By May the idea and

possibility  of a civil truce had disintegrated.  At this point, as can be seen
in the letter dated April 3 in the Appendix  of this volume,  Camus  removed
himself from the public arena in regard to the  Algerian question.
In May 1956, La Chute was published  to mixed reviews.  Soon after,
conditions  at home not improving,  Camus  moved  out of the apartment  he
shared  with his wife, an apartme nt that to this day bears the Camus  name
on the buzzer .
In the summer  months, preparing  to stage his adaptation  of Faulkner's
Requiem  for a Nun and unable  to cast Maria Casares-his  longtime  lead
actress  and mistress-for  fear of worsening  his wife's condition,  Camus
was forced to cast a new leading lady: Catherine  Sellers,  one of the four
women with whom he would come to spend his last years.
1957 was a busy year for Camus.  His collection  of short stories,  now
titled L'Exil et le Royaume,  was published,  as was his essay on the death
penalty, "Reflexions  sur la guillotine,"  which was packaged  alongside  an
essay by Arthur  Koestler  in a book titled Reflexions  sur la peine capitale.
But  the  biggest   news  came  in  October ,  when  it  was  announced  that
Camus  had  won  the  Nobel  Prize  for  Literature,  an  award  that  again
opened  him to personal  attacks  from his critics.  In the last months  of
1957,  as  noted  in  Notebook  VIII,  Camus  began  to  suffer  from  acute
respiratory  attacks  coupled  with  severe  claustrophobia  and  depression,
afflictions that would last well into the following year .
In 1958, Camus  ended his silence on the Algerian  question  with the
publication  of Actuelles  III:  Chroniques  al-  geriennes,  a  collection  of
essays and speeches he had composed between  1939 and 1958. He spent a
good bit of the year working  on his stage adaptation  of Dostoye vsky's Les
Possedes,  and  that  October  purchased  a  house  in  Lourmarin,  a  small
village  in  the  south  of  France,  where  he  was  not  able  to  stay  for  an
extended  period of time until 1959, when he finally began work in earnest
on his long-planned novel Le Premier Homme.

The Notebooks  end in the last days of December  1959 with an eerily
final and personal entry, likely a draft of a letter to Catherin e Sellers,
which sees Camus  lamenting  the failures  of his intimate  relationships  and,
consequently , his life.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments  vii
Translator's Note  ix
Editor's Note (from the French edition)  xiii
Introduction  xv
Notebook  VII. March 1951-July 1954  1
Notebook  VIII. August 1954-July 1958 103
Appendix to Notebook  VIII 217
Notebook IX. July 1958-December 1959 227
Afterword  261

March 1951-July 1954
"The one who has conceived what is grand must also live it. "-Nietzsche.
Preface of E. and E.'
"... at this point in time I began to like the art of this violent  passion,
which  aging,  far from decreasing,  made increasingly  exclusive....  This
illness added other obstacles,  and the hardest  ones, to those that were my
own. But in the end, it has fostered this freedom  of heart, this slight
distance  with regard to human  interests,  which has always  kept me from
bitterness  and resentment.  Since I live in Paris, I know that this privilege
(because  it is one) is royal. But the fact is that I have enjoyed  it without
obstacles.  As a writer, I began to live in admiration  of what is, in a sense,
the terrestrial  paradise.  As a man, my passions  have never been `against.'
They have always  been addressed toward  things  bigger  or better than
myself."
Insanity  of the XXth century:  the most dissimilar  of minds confuse  the
taste for the absolute and the taste for logic. Parain and  Aragon.
June 11, 1951. Letter from Regine Junier2  telling me of her suicide.
The creator. His books enriched  him. But he does not like them and he
decides  to  write  his  masterpiece.  He  writes  it  alone  and  reworks  it
endlessly .  And  little  by  little,  embarrassment  then  misery  set  in.
Everything  collapses  and  he  lives  with  an  alarming  happiness.  The
children  are sick. He has to rent an apartment,  but live in only one part of
it. He writes.  His wife becomes  depressed.  The years pass, and in total
abandon,  he proceeds.  The children flee. The day his wife dies at the

hospital,  he  places  the  final  period,  and  what  should  announce  his
misfortune to him only makes him say , "Finally!"
Novel.  "His death was far from romantic.  They were put twelve in a
cell made for two. He choked  and fainted.  He died packed  against the
dirty  wall  while  the  others  straining  toward  the  window ,  turned  their
backs on him."
N.R.F. Curious milieu whose function  it is to create writers,  and where,
however , they lose the joy of writing and creating.
For her, happiness demands everything, even killing.
Naturalness is not a virtue that one has: it is acquired.
Response  to the question  about my ten favorite  words:  "World, pain,
earth, mother , men, desert, honor , poverty , summer , sea.
The eternal  voice: Demeter , Nausicaa,  Eurydice,  Pasiphae,  Penelope,
Helen, Persephone.
O light! In Greek tragedies,  this is the cry of those who are thrown
before death or terrible destiny .'
Man of 1950: he fornicated and read the newspapers.4
I have always  had the impression  of being on the high sea: threatened
in the middle of a royal happiness.
G. or the simulator: Believing  only in what is not of this world,  he
pretends  to be in reality. He plays the game, but openly, so that it is not
believed  that he plays it. He pretends twice. And once again: a part of him
really is attached to the flesh, to pleasures, to power .
The  acceptance   of  what  is-a  sign  of  strength?  No,  this  is  where
servitude  resides.  But the acceptance  of what has been. In the present,  the
struggle.

Truth is not a virtue, but a passion. It is never charitable.
Tics of M.'s language  ...: And all - In all - In all and for all - So much
and more. . . - You know, huh, you know ... - I didn't find her interesting  -
She doubts  everyone,  so it's awkward.  - To say so! You have to see it to
believe  it - It's unique  - When she was to be operated  on. . . - Strewn forks
and spoons  (odd) - It was history  saying,  well hold on, I will make you
pay - Remember , you know, she had a knack - And so on and so forth - In
other words . . . - You are being a fool (to her husband  who leaves without
a sweater).
Id. Augusta,  a civilian,  to whom a soldier, her adopted  godson  of war,
expresses  his gratitude  in these terms: "Mme.  Pellerin,  for me you were
worse  than  a  mother."  She  recounts  the  bombardment  of  Nantes.
Surprised  in the streets,  she sought  shelter  with a friend beneath  the ruins.
"I was wearing  a fox fur and a new outfit. When it was over, I was in
underwear ." Her friend disappeared  beneath  the ruins. "I pulled her by the
hair, only a few strands  remaining."  "In the meantime  my husband  was
behaving  in a perfectly  loving manner , not even wondering  if I came out
of the ruins....  The day before  I had an ID card made. I had checked  no
special indications.  The following day , I had a hangover ."
A Baptist who passes fifty (lays and fifty nights in Buchenwald 's black
dungeon:  "When  I got out, the concentration  camp appeared  as beautiful
to me as freedom."
"They live as one sole being, those who at any given time, by their own
will, choose separation." Holderlin.5  The Death of Empedocles.
Id. "But you, you were born for a limpid day ."t'
Id. "Before  him, at the happy hour of death, on a sacred day, the Divine
casts of f the veil."
These are the atrocities  of Admiral  Kolchak7  who, according  to Victor
Serge,"  gave the Cheka  in the Russian  C.P. the advantage  over all those
who desired greater humanity .

1920.  Abolition   of  the  death  penalty.  In  the  night  precedi ng  the
promulgation  of  the  decree,  the  Cheka  massacred  the  prisoners.`'  The
penalty, by the way, was reestablished  a few months  later. Gorki:  "When
will we stop the killing and the bleeding?"
Victor Serge. "Everything  that was done in the U.S.S.R.  would  have
been done far better by a Soviet democracy ."
Preface  of E. and E.I  - My uncle - "Voltarian,  as one was in his time, he
professed  the  stiffest  contempt   for  men  in  general  and  his  bourgeois
clients  in particular . In satire and anathema,  he was sparkling . He had
character , too, and his compan y struck me as difficult. Now that he is
dead, I am bored in Paris when I think of him."
How the XXth century's  socialism expands  by war: The war of 1914
ignites  the revolution  of 1917. Foreign  wars, in addition  to the civil war in
China,  give us Mao Tse Toung - 1939 Sovietize  the Polish Ukraine and
Bielorussia,  the Baltic States,  and Bessarabia.  The war of 1941 - 45 brings
Russia  over the Elbe. The war against  Japan gives them Sakhalin,  the
Kuriles, North Korea.  Also watch Finland and South Korea.
Novel  character . Ravanel.2  Pure intelligence.  Accounts  of terrorism.
Mundane ennui. Militancy . Police.  Attorney . See new attorney above.
One  must  place  one's  principles  in  big  things.  For  the  small,
graciousness will suf fice.
The cynical and realistic  positions  make it possible  to reach a decision
and be contemptuous  about it. The others force us to seek understanding.
Hence the prestige of the first over the intellectuals.
We  work  in  our  time  without  hope  of  true  reward.  They  work
courageously for their personal eternity .
No matter what it claims,  the century  is in search of an aristocracy . But
it does not realize that for this it must renounce  the goal it so proudly
assigns  itself: well-being.  There is no aristocracy  without  sacrifice.  An

aristocrat  is, first, one who gives without  receiving,  one who obligates
oneself.  The Ancient Regime is dead for having for gotten this.
Wilde.'  He wanted to place art above all else. But the grandeur  of art is
not to rise above all. On the contrary, it must blend with all. Wilde finally
understood  this, thanks to sorrow. But it is the culpability  of this era that it
always  needed sorrow  and constraint  in order to catch a glimpse  of a truth
also found in happiness, when the heart is worthy . Servile century .
Id. There is not one talent for living and another  for creating.  The same
suffices  for  both. And  one  can  be  sure  that  the  talent  that  could  not
produce but an artificial work could not sustain but a frivolous life.
Novel. C. and her flowery dress. Evening prairies. Oblique light.
I  began  with  works  in  which  time  was  denied.  Little  by  little  I
rediscovered  the source  of time-and  maturing.  The work itself will be a
long maturing.
They wanted  to repudiate  beauty  and nature  simply  for the profit of
intelligence  and its conquering  powers.  Faust wanted  to have Euphorion
without  Helen.  The marvelous  child is no more than a deformed  monster ,
the homunculus  of a glass jar. In order for Euphorion  to be born, neither
Faust without Helen nor Helen without Faust.4
Revolt, true crucible of the gods. But it also forms idols.
Revolting  death. The history  of mankind  is the history  of the myths
with which it covers  up reality. For two centuries,  the disappearance  of
traditional  myths has shook history  as death has become  without  hope.
And yet there is no human  reality if in the end there is no acceptance  of
death  without  hope.  It  is  the  acceptance  of  this  limit,  without  blind
resignation, in the tension of all one's being that coincides with balance.
Novel.  A nice (lay. "Along  the Croisette,  she staggered  on her high
heels. She looked  at herself  in the mirror again and again before she left
the room. Of course  her soft flannel pants were a bit too tight. And her

hips were visibly wider than her shoulders.  So what, real women are that
way. Too much chest also, yet, this was not a problem,  and really, all in
all, it was more feminine.  These bodies  that were playing  volleyball  on
the beach, their lower halves  had to be observed  carefully  in order to
figure out whether they belonged to a man or a woman."
"The small black silhouette  paced before  the sea. Between  scarf and
sunglasses,  one could barely make out two lines drawn on by a paintbrush
in the spot where there had formerly been eyebrows,  and the white and
oily space of the forehead that tried in vain to frown at the sun's glare."
Short act about the seducer .
No, I don't drink water - Eat - I don't eat much. If I drink occasionally
it's because of hygiene.
What does love add to desire? One thing inestimable: friendship.
I don't seduce, I surrender .
Why women? I cannot  stand the company  of men. They flatter or they
judge. I can stand neither of the two.
At midnight,  nothing:  the commander  doesn't  come. The seducer  is sad.
He is leaving.  "Come  on," Anna says. "No, one cannot  be right and be
happy the same day . . ." (he changes  his mind).  "And yet if you are right,
there remains only happiness-ac tually there remains  nothing  but the love
in which you never believed,  never having  ceased  to believe  in your own
dreams  that you call God." He looks at her. "Then is this love, what I feel
rising  up  in  me?  -  It  is  undoubtedly  that.  But  gently  spread  apart
everything  that  remains  around  this  fragile  plant.  Gently,  gently  make
room for happiness at last."
Novel.  One of B's secrets  ... is that she could never accept nor stand, or
even forget, illness  or death. Hence, her major distraction.  She becomes

exhausted,  already having  to live alone like the others,  having  to simulate
the little nonchalance  and innocence  that is necessary  to continue  living.
But deep inside her she never forgets. She does not even have enough
innocence  for sin. Life for her is nothing  more than time, which itself is
disease  and death. She does not accept  time. She is engaged  in a battle
already  lost. When she gives up, she is there with the waves of water, with
the face of a drowned  girl. She is not of this world because  she refuses  it
with all her being. Everything starts from there.
Dordogne.'  Here  the  ground  is  pink,  pebbles  the  color  of  flesh,
mornings  red and crowned  by pure songs. A flower  dies in one day and is
already  reborn  beneath  the  oblique  sun.  In  the  night,  the  sleepy  carp
descend  the massive  river; ephemeral  torches  burn in the lamps on the
bridge,  leaving  a vibrant  plumage  on the hands and covering  the ground
with wings and wax from where will arise a fugitive  life. What dies here
cannot  pass. Asylum,  faithful  ground,  it is here that a traveler  must return,
in the house where hints and memories  are kept, and whatever  else in man
that does not die with him but is reborn in his sons.
It is not true that the heart wears out-but the body creates this illusion.
Those who prefer their principles  over their happiness,  they refuse to
be  happy  outside  the  conditions  they  seem  to  have  attached  to  their
happiness.  If they are happy by surprise,  they find themselves  disabled,
unhappy to be deprived of their unhappiness.
A tragedy about chastity .
Novel.  V. (and at the same time she was translating  my truth): I do not
desire  anything  other  than  what  I  have.  My  misfortune,  and  my
punishment, is to be unable to enjoy what I have.
Id. In adolescence  and even a long time afterward,  the only thing that
interested  him in love was the unknown,  hence knowledge.  And hence,
affairs.  But  an  affair  is  never  completely  sudden:  there  is  always  a
beginning,  no matter  how brief. Very often this beginning  was sufficient

for knowledge, when there was little to know, and he therefore  accepted
the liaison, certain that it would bring him nothing more.
Like this they confuse  love and knowledge,  those who have enough
arrogance  to believe  in self-suf ficiency , truly or falsely, for themselves.
Others  recognize  their limits, and their love is therefore  unique  because  it
demands everything, and being rather than knowledge.
Novel.  A.W., a young American  who came to Paris after having fought
in  the  war  (into  which  he  had  been  thrown,  a  happy  student  and
conformist).  He lives in Paris, cursing  America  and passionately  pursuing
reflections  of greatness  and wisdom, which he still reads on the face of
Old Europe.  He lives a bohemian  life. He has lost the luster of American
faces.  He  does  not  look  well-his  eyes  have  circles  under  them.  He
becomes  ill and, dying in a filthy hotel, cries out then toward  this America
that he never stopped loving,  the lawns of Harvard  University  in Boston,
the sounds of bats shouting in the dying evening around the river .
Novel. First part: soccer match. Second part: bullfight.
Certain  nights whose  gentlenes s is prolonged,  this helps one to die,
knowing that such evenings will return on the earth after us.'i
A woman who loves truly, with all her soul, in total benefaction , grows
then so dispropo rtionately  that there is no man who, by comparison,  does
not become mediocre, pathetic, and without generosity .
Novel.  In an unlit room, nose near the luminous  dial of the radio set, a
child listens to the music.
Novel.  Two characters: the German friend. - Marcel H.
Even  though  the  absurd  is  not  in  the  world  or  in  us  but  in  this
contradiction  between  the world and our experiences,  likewise  moderation
is neither in reality  nor in desire, but ... Moderation  is a movement,  a
transposition of the absurd ef fort.

Countess  Tolstoy's Jout-nal7
P. 45 on  T.'s work methods.
T. : "How annoying it is to write."
The Countess, October  9, 1862 (the marriage  was on Sept. 23): "All
carnal relationships  are repugnant" and in December , the true feminine
cry: "If I could kill him and create another  person  very similar  to him, I
would do it with pleasure."
April 63. "The physical  aspect of love plays an important  role for him,
whereas for me it plays none."
63. "What remains of the man who I was?"  T says.
Sept. 67. "I am nothing  but a miserable  reptile that has been crushed,  I
am good for nothing,  nobody  loves me, I am nauseous,  two rotten teeth,
bad breath, I am pregnant ... etc."
78. We learn that  Tolstoy read at the table.
87. He howls that he is haunted by the thought of leaving his family .
90. In hiding,  she reads her husband's  journal,  which he keeps under
lock and key .
Dec. 90. She writes: "Love does not exist. There is the sensual  need to
unite  oneself  with  another  being  and  the  reasonable  need  to  have  a
companion for life."
91. "`It is torture for me,' he says, `to be surrounded by servants."'
91. The countes s reports  that she cannot  get used to the count's  filth
and stench. Id. p. 283 (97).
92. The countess  reveals  that L.T. is happy only because  of physical
love.

Everybody , according to her , pities her and considers her "a victim."
Then, quarrels over the royalties p. 81 and 97, 131-137, 216, 145.
P. 88. Confession of double love.
"People  who have taken the wrong  path in life, the weak and foolish
people who throw themselves on the brochures of Leon Nicolaievitch."
"These stilts on which he climbs in the presence of shadows."
97. He leaves the house and does not return until morning.
97. He plays tennis every morning.
At 70 years of age, after 35 versts on horse, in the snow, he attests his
passion for the countess, who notes it with astonishment.
Stalin nicknamed by his comrades (in 1917): the grey blur .
At the summit of happiness-and night came to find me.
Nobody , more than I, desired  harmony , abandon,  a definitive  balance,
but  I've  always  had  to  reach  across  the  most  rigid  paths,  disorders,
struggles.
"`Certainly ,' he says, 'I fear not being dead enough  in death and lacking
air in the ground. But I reason  with myself.  If I fear lacking  air, it is
because  I fear dying from it. There are two possibilities,  one where I will
not die from it and I will continue  to lack air but without  feeling  anguish.
Or I will die, and why the anguish then?"'
Novel. Jeanne P . and her mechanical gestures.
Id. Military cemeteries  of the East. At age 35 the son goes to the grave
of his father and finds out that he died at the age of 30. He has become the
elder."

The Arabs lying here.  And for gotten by all.
Novel. Daydreams in the car on the road to Berard.
V. I realized  that it was true that there were people  greater  and more
genuine  than others and that throughout  the world they made an invisible
and visible society that justified living.
M. Laughable  death at the end of a laughable  life. Only the death of
great hearts is not unjust.
The  Spanish  refugees.  Domenech  (civil  war  -  WWII  resistance,
Buchenwald  - unemployed)  Garcia (to whom A.B. makes a remittance  of
a debt of 140,000 F. "Ah, you, you are like me, you will never be rich.")
Gonzales  (there are classes-and  they cannot  collaborate  - Rejects  all of the
boss's kindness  - He wants to be treated  harshly)  Bertomeu:  The choir
(and then he grills sardines in the of fice).
James (The Ambassadors).  "It is myself  whom I hate when I think of
all the things one has to take out of the lives of others in order to be
happy, and that, even then, one is not happy ."
Mauriac.  Admirable  proof of the power  of his religion:  he arrives  at
charity  without  passing  by  generosity.  He  is  mistaken  to  continuously
send me back to Christ's  anguish. It seems to me that I have a higher
reverence  than he does, never having believed  myself  to be permitted  to
expose  the torment of my savior, twice a week, upon the first page of a
newspaper  for bankers.  He calls himself  a temperamental  writer. Indeed.
But he has an invincible  disposition in his temperament  to use the cross
like a missile.  Which  makes him a journalist  of the first order, and a writer
of the second. Dostoyevsky of the Gironde.
Novel.  "At  these  moments,  eyes  closed,  he  receives  the  shock  of
pleasure  like a sudden  collision  with a sailboat  in the fog, struck from hull
to keel, every part reverberating  with the shock, from deck to foresail, and
with the thousand  ropes and veins of the vessel's  extremities  trembling
until the moment it slowly turns over on its flank.  Then, the foundering."

Novel.  What struck him then was how few objects  there were in his
house.  The necessary-never  had a word been better illustrated.  When his
mother  lived in one of the rooms, she left no trace, except,  if anything,  a
handkerchief.
"I desired,  I called for the highest  sufferings,  certain  that from now on I
was to find the happiness  they contained  (to be able to taste the happiness
... )."
To  start  giving  is  to  condemn   oneself  for  not  giving  enough ,  even
though one gives everything.  And do we ever give everything-
Don't  ever  tell  a  man  that  he  is  dishonored.  Actions,  groups,
civilizations  can  be.  Not  the  individual.  For  if  he  does  not  have  the
awareness  of dishonor , he cannot  lose an honor that he has never had. And
if he has it, the terrible  burn that this represents  is like a red iron on wax.
People  melt, break beneath  the fire of an intolerable  pain in which they, at
the  same  time,  are  also  regenerated.  This  fire  is  that  of  honor  that
justifiably  resists and asserts  itself by the very limits of its pain. This is at
least  what  I  felt  the  day,  more  precisely  the  second,  when  after  a
misunderstanding  I believed  myself to be guilty of a truly low action.  It
was not true, but within that single second  I learned  to understand  all the
humiliated.
December  '51.
I await with patience a catastrophe that is slow in coming.
My  statements  on  the  radio  -  Listening  to  myself,  I  find  myself
exasperating.  Paris makes  me like this, despite  all my efforts. Since the
disappearance  of Combat,`'  I am too often continuously  lonely, having
nothing  to articulate,  defend,  expose, or even occasionally  justify. Never
having  been relieved by the warmth of others,  and by the spectacle  of
their generosity  even less, I finally freeze,  and in fact this frozen  voice
comes  to  me,  too  dismissive   to  really  express  condescension,  but

exasperating  to hear. If I felt true confidence,  for only one second, I would
laugh and everything would be settled.
I owe the idea I have of vulgarity  to some very bourgeois people, proud
of their culture  and of their privileges,  like Mauriac,  from the moment
they  display  the  spectacle  of  their  wounded  vanity.  They  then  try  to
wound  at the exact level where they were wounded,  and in that moment
discover  the exact height where they really are. Then, for the first time,
the virtue of humility  triumphs  over them. Poor little people,  indeed,  but
in spite.
I  was  never  very  submissive  to  the  world,  to  opinion.  Yet  I  was,
however , as little as it may have been. But I have just made the final
effort. I do believe  that in this regard, my freedom  is total. Free, therefore
benevolent.
I have the most dreadful opinion of myself, for days on end.
Velasquez's life. Commentary on  Velasquez.
Moderation.  They consider  it the resolution  of contradiction.  It cannot
be anything other than the affirmation  of contradiction  and the heroic
decision to stay with it and to survive it.
The  u.s.s.R.'s  best  protection   against  the  atomic  bomb  is  the
international  morale  that  is  bound  to  develop  through  public
condemnations.  Thus, it compen sates for its only inferiority  by an appeal
to moral judgment which, however , it denies in its of ficial philosophy .
Hypocritical injustice leads to wars.  Violent justice precipitates them.
Marxism  makes the same reproach  of Jacobin  and Bourgeoisie  society
that it made of Christianity and Hellenism: intellectualism and formalism.
Play. He returns from the war. Nothing  has changed  except that he only
speaks poetically .

Emerson: Every wall is a door .
Never attack anybody , especiall y not in writing.  The time of criticism
and polemics is over - Creation.
Totally eliminating  criticism  and polemics  - From now on, the single
and constant af firmation.
Understand them all. Love and admire but a few .
The  worst  of  fortunes  is  a  bad  temperament.  I  know  this  from
experience.  And this was my true temptation  after years of brilliance  and
strength.  I surrendered  to it, enough  to be informed  from now on, and then
I got out.
Overbeck  had the impression  that Nietzsche's  madness  was a sham.
The impression  always  given to me by any demented  person.  Perhaps
love is also like this. For half, a sham.
The "limit" must be everyone's  truth. It is mine as long as I am for
everyone. But for me alone: the truth one cannot say .
Guilloux of Chamson: "For him, the other is but a potential switch."
Over the entire world,  the arrival of millions  of marvelous  machines,
torrents of sad music.
Judas sets up treason  and hatred in order to testify in principle,  at least
indirectly ,  for  Christ.  Result:  the  XXth  century .  For  lack  of  love,  the
camps.
Journalism,  according to Tolstoy:  an intellectual  mess. He wanted  to
write  a  novel  "where  there  were  none  guilty."  Letter  from  a  dying
Turgenev to  Tolstoy: "I have been happy to be your contemporary ."
Novel (or play) - Character: Ellan - Fur . Cf. Heliosang.

The  myth  of  Euphorion.  The  child  of  contemporary  titanism  and
ancient beauty . Goethe makes him die. But he can live.'
Met P. Vianney"  yesterday , never seen since the occupation  and the
marvelous  days  of  the  Liberation  of  Paris. And  suddenly  an  immense
nostalgia, to the point of tears, for our comrades.
Man of Aran.'  The terrible life of these fishermen.  And far from feeling
sorry for them, one admires  and respects  them. It is not poverty  or endless
work that makes for the degradation  of mankind,  but the filthy servitude
of the factory and the life of the suburbs.
Two o'clock  in the morning.  For years, two favorite  dreams,  one of
which,  in different forms,  is always of the execution.  Tonight,  awakened
suddenly , I can recall many of the details.
I walk in torment.  Scotto  Lavina  (a friend from Algiers  whom I very
rarely see, but like very much)  accompanies  me. He whispers  in my ear
(the group's pace quickens):  "My wife spoke to me yesterday  of X. and
X." And  I:  "No  proper  names,  above  all  no  proper  names."  He,  very
softly, as to a sick person,  "Oh! Forgive me." Someone  in the group (there
are guards whose presence  is not very noticeable  to me, and A., present
and absent in turn) asks me why and, reaching  the bottom  of an immense
staircase,  I say: "I want to remain  at the heart of the common  noun,"  a
sentence  that I repeat to myself,  with a sort of peace. My children4  are at
the top of the staircase,  which I climb, always  surrounded,  always  rapidly,
and hands bound, I believe.  (The idea, too, of being pushed,  all of us
pushed-we  all walk bent forward .) Jean moves toward  a corner, and while
looking  at him, I say: "And then it will begin again"  (but this feeling  is
not entirely in me, rather, like a sunrise,  it is a sort of delightful and
anguishing  discovery). I kiss them and, for the first time, cry. They say
goodbye  to me as usual, it seems. We leave the staircase  and pass by a
sort  of  railway  station,  which  I  exit  with  only  A.  and  Vera.  Vera
accompanies  me for a while-I  do not know her during  the dream, but
when I awaken  I think of her as of S. She is dressed  as a peasant,  vaguely
Central  European,  like  everyone  around  me.  The  scenery  is  modern:

railways,  construction  sites, the night filled with a light wind. Exiting  the
railway  station,  I move-decisively  still, and without  guards-toward  the
place of torment,  with an increased  anguish  which becomes  unbearable.
But I sense that Vera is carrying  a pistol, old style, which she had hidden
in the railway  station  (whose?).  As soon as I am sure of it, I cry out in joy.
"Ah! Vera I knew ... (insinuation:  that you would  do everything  that is
necessary  for this). How I love you." I take the pistol and the march
resumes.  We approach  a group of men who are working.  It seems to me
that I hesitate  some, as if I wanted  to wait longer, live longer. But the
others have passed  me a little. The pistol is too long and I have difficulty
straightening  it against  my temple.  I shoot rapidly, thinking  that I have not
said goodbye to A. nor to anyone  else. A terrible  burst in my head. And I
hear a sentence,  a sort of protestation  spoken  by one of the workers  (the
boss, I believe)  and whom  I have forgotten  at the moment  when this
dream ends.
Picaresque novel. Journalist - From  Africa to the entire world.
Play of love.
Your morals are not mine.  Your conscience is not mine anymore.
V. "If today one were to find a remedy  for death, I would not take it.
My pain (the death of his father and his mother)  my happiness  (his love)
has meaning only if I myself must also go there."
Emerson.  "Sometimes even the one who supported  these doctrines  (that
man has one soul) flees in the face of a journal  composed  in the night by
some dark scoundrel who knows not what he writes and drenches  his quill
in the mud and shadows."
Id. "What  is left for us if not to hold for certain  that it is by avoiding
lies and anger that we acquire the voice and language of man."
Id. "It is not with scruples  that a man grows tall. Like a beautiful  day,
height is given according to God's will."

Novel.  The train from St. Etienne-Dunieres  under the occupation,  one
winter  evening.  The  train  is  packed,  two  compartments  having  been
reserved  for  the  German  army.  Shortly  before  the  stop  at  Firminy ,  a
German  soldier  notices  that his bayonet  was stolen while he was in the
toilet. Howls of rage. Two workmen who were preparing  to get off and
return home at the end of their day are grabbed,  held in the corridor  while
the train departs.  They protest,  feebly, their innocence  obvious.  At the
following  stop, the soldiers  let them go. They are seen moving  away in
the frozen fog, resigned to the worst.
The witness also goes, unhappy . He cannot  follow  them. He does not
know  how  to  save  them.  He  spends  the  night  in  the  waiting  room,
thinking  of them. Nothing  to do but con tinue on so that this does not
happen again. But by then they will be beaten, and will possibly die.
Thoreau.  "As  long  as  a  man  remains  himself,  everything  is  in
agreement  with him: governme nts, society, even the sun, the moon,  and
the stars."
Id. Emerson. "A  man's obedience to his genius is faith par excellence."
Nietzsche  to his sister, with regard  to the Lou55  affair: "No I am not
made for hostility and hatred....  Hitherto  I have never hated anyone.  It is
only now that I feel humiliated."
According  to him, the necessit y "against  Alexander"  of those "who
would  again  link  the  Gordian  knot  of  Greek  civilization  after  it  was
severed."
What I have said, I have said it for the good of all and from that part of
me that is always  visible.  But another  part of me knows  the secret that is
not meant to be revealedand with which one will have to die.
"A  labyrinthine  man  never  seeks  the  truth,  but  always  and  only
Ariane."

During  long moments  at Iena's clinic,  Nietzsche  speaks  lucidly  with
Overbeck about everything-except about his own works.
Genius  is health, superior  style, and good temperamentbut  on top of the
chasm.
Creation.  The more it gives, the more it receives-Giving  generously  to
grow richer .
The only immortal is the one for whom all things are immortal (E.6).
According  to Emerson,  Americans  are prodigious  mechanics  because
they fear fatigue and pain: out of laziness.
Every writer, big or small, needs to say or write that the genius is
always  hissed  at  by  his  contemporaries.  Naturally ,  this  is  not  true,  it
happens  only occasionally  and often by chance.  But this need within  the
writer is enlightening.
Emerson  1848.  "How  then  did  we  manage  for  the  progress  of
mechanization  to serve everyon e, aside from the worker. He was fatally
wounded from this."
Id. "It is every man's right to see himself  judged  and characterized
according to his leading influence."
The Ancients  and the Classics  feminized  nature.  We entered  there. Our
painters virilize nature, and it enters into our eyes, pierces them even.
"No psychology  in art." "That's  what you're missing."  "Perhaps,  but
such is the law of creation:  make do with what you have. Then you will
have to judge not what I have, but what I have done."
To remain  a man in today's  world,  one must have not only unfailing
energy and unwavering intensity , one must also have a little luck.

Novel.  "It can now no longer be a question  of love between  us. It has
never been a question.  Deep down, I cried for years after your love - And
then I cried only after your attention. I obtained neither one nor the other ."
Play. D. Haughty , contemptuous, desperate, blunt.
G. is stopped  in his novel by the distraction  that his wife is causing
him. He comes  to Paris to work, but gets nowhere.  In truth, he does not
want to regain  the thread,  to hold on to the argument  and preserve  his
resentment intact.
He executed them with his own hands:  "`It is necessary ,' he said, `to
pay with one's own flesh.'"
To the few men who allowed  my admiration,  I owe a debt of gratitude,
the highest of my life.
Sexual  liberty has brought  us at least this: that chastity  and superiority
of will are now possible.  All the experiences,  the women  kept or free,
passionate  or  nonchalant,  and  he,  wild  or  circumspect,  exultant  or
incapable  of desire,  the circle is complete.  There is no more mystery or
inhibition.  Intellectual  freedom  is then almost  complete,  control  almost
always possible.
Project.  Perpetual  dictionary  (for  Chronicles).  Write  Caprices  (a  la
Goya).
Deep inside me, the Spanish  solitude. Man does not escape  from it but
for a few "instants,"  then he returns  to his island.  Later (since 1939) I tried
to reconnect, I repeated  all the steps of the era. But double-time,  on the
wings of clamor, beneath  the lashes of wars and revolutions.  Today, I am
through-and  my solitude  overflows  with shadows  and works that belong
only to me.
Iguape.  A man at the front of the ferryboat.  The city, the procession.
The man and the stone collapse.  The visitor takes the stone but passes the

church  and walks toward  the river. He loads the stone onto a long rowboat
and rides up the river toward the primeval forest where he disappears.?
Even my death will be contested.  And yet what I desire most today is a
quiet death, which would bring peace to those whom I love.
One evening,  absently  turning  the pages of an agreeable  book, I read
without  reaction:  "As with many passionate  souls, the moment  had come
when his faith in life was faltering."  A second  later, the sentence  again
resounded in me, and I burst into tears.
A part of me has despised  this era without  measure.  Even amid my
worst failures,  I could never lose the taste of honor, and my heart has
often sunk before  the extreme  decay that this century  has reached.  But
another  part of me has wanted  to assume  the decay and the common
struggle....
Comedy about the press.
- Moderate?  If I find in your vocabulary  even one word such as that
one, I will kick you out the door .
(On the drama critic) this author has no friends  here. You will then try
to say this is because  of his ideas. In France  today, the simple  suspicion  of
intelligence  is enough  to sink a man. But on all occasions  you write that
we are the most intelligent  people  on Earth. The public no longer accepts
intelligence except within idiotic commentaries.
The End.  The next clay he writes the article that reveals all.
The public does not have a memory -  We are its memory .
Scene with the reader .
Review  of the newspapers:  the one that parades  Christ on the first page
of the broadsheet of the satisfied. Progressive friend of the camps etc.

3rd act at his place.  Ascetic.
To the idealistic copy editor .
- Your newspaper is not seen.
- It's read.
- A newspaper is made to be read, but at some distance.
One must be able to read a neighbor's copy on the metro.
- Those who read the neighbor's don't buy it.
- No, but they talk about it.
February  28, 1952. The discovery of Brazil,  of VillaLobos-with  him
greatness returns in music. Masterpiece - I can only see Falla as that great.
If  I  were  to  die  this  evening,  I  would  die  with  an  awful  feeling
previously  unknown  to  me,  which,  nonetheless,  causes  me  pain  this
evening.  The feeling  that I have helped  and continue  to help many people-
and yet nobody comes to help me.... Not proud of myself.
Medea-by  the  Antique  theatre  group.  I  cannot  hear  this  language
without  crying,  like the person  who has finally found his homeland.  These
words are mine, these feelings mine, this belief mine.
"What a misfortune  is the one of the man without  a city." "Oh make it
so that I will not be without a city ," the choir said. I am without a city .
Nemesis.  Drunkenness  of the soul and body is not madness  but comfort
and numbness.  True madness blazes atop an interminable lucidity .
The press is not true because  it's revolutionary . It is revolutionary  only
because it's true.

Ibsen. (Emperor  and Galilean)."  After Mount  Olympus  and Calvary ,
the Third Empire.
Polemic  against  The  Rebel.  It's  a  mass  collection  of  darkness  and
gloom.  I read "Tenebrion"  in Littre9  1) friend of intellectual  darknes s. 2)
Type of coleopteran,  a species  that, in its larval state, lives in flour. Also
called the cockroach.  Amusing.
Our cursed poets have two rules: imprecation and intrigue.
The love of god is apparently  the only one that we stand since we
always want to be loved in spite of ourselves.
Cf. Romain Rolland.'  Vie de Tolstoi. P . 69. "Life" in the novel.
Id. "It is dif ficult to love a woman and make anything good."
The  Bacchantes.2  Pentheus  should  have  said:  "I  do  not  want  your
excessiveness. But it is of mine that I wish to die."
They are rebellio n, pride, the inflexible  wall that is drawn up in front of
rising servitude.  They will not leave this role to anyone  else-and  whoever
pretends to rebel otherwise will be excommunicated.
What is it then? One man is waiting  to see the most honest  newspaper
these times have known,  created  by the sacrifice  and labor of hundreds  of
men, he is waiting,  I say, for this newspaper  to pass into the hands of a
fly-by-night  financier, so that he can go lease his services  to this merchant
as soon as the free men have left the place.'  The other, at the same time in
which he supports  and applauds  his old friend against  me, writes to me
that one should  not believe  much of what is said by these old poets, and,
suddenly  frightened,  writes  again  to  beg  me  not  to  make  a  public
statement  about  his  letter  and  his  little  treason.  Yet  another  comes  to
solicit  my  services,  he  receives  them  and,  returning  to  his  home,
composes  an article that is insulting  to me and about which he writes to
me, incidentally , to soften the effect of it. Yet another , who fears being
judged  badly for having  long represented  a publisher  who abused  my

trust, asks to explain himself  before  me, receives  a letter that declines
purely  out of generosity  of not having  confused  him with his employer
and then, without  wasting  a second,  he grinds  out an essay explaining
how  he  is  saddened  that  moralists  of  my  kind  must  one  day  end  as
policemen.
They  are  our  champions,  our  cursed  withdrawn  beneath  the
comfortable  tents  of  maledicti on  which  they  do  not  leave  except  in
stealth.  It is they who ensure  our freedom  and who announce  that they
will hold the battle flag firm in the advancing  storm. Let us go, the first
strike from the policeman on duty will push them to their knees!
Fragment of a letter  on The Rebel.
We are very few. But truth comes before efficacy. We must define the
latter before worrying  about the former. What would be the use of being
millions  if the first commandment  of our "church"  were: You will lie?
This doesn't mean at all that efficacy has no significance.  It has a second
meaning.  The survival  of truth is a problem  no less important  than the
truth itself. It is a problem  that comes  later. That is all. Yet it must be
resolved.... Christians began by being twelve-Marxists two.
Letter to A. Maquet.
I advance  with the same steps, it seems to me, as an artist and as a man.
And this is not preconceived.  It is a faith I have, in all humility, in my
vocation....  My future books won't turn away from the problem  of the
hour. But I would like them to subjugate  it rather than be subjugated by it.
In other words,  I dream of a freer creation,  with the same contents.... Then
I will know if I am a true artist.
According  to Melville,  the remora,  a fish of the South Seas, swims
poorly.  That  is  why  their  only  chance  to  move  forward  consists  of
attaching  themselves to the back of a big fish. They then plunge a kind of
tube into the stomach  of a shark, where they suck up their nourishment,

and propagate without  doing anything,  living off the hunting  and efforts
of the beast.  These are the Parisian mores.
A certain race of men knows  with whom it can take it easy-primarily ,
those who practice  as much generosity  and loyalty  as they can-and  whom
decency inhibits from taking advantage of them.
Bacchantes.  Two Dionysus:  1) God of the earth. Black God, virile God.
Iacchus, a cry personified.4
2) The decaden t Asian:  wine and sensual
pleasure, babbling.  What Pentheus refuses.
At Eleusis the murderers  were not initiated  (Nero didn't dare) nor were
those "whose voices were not just."
Second day of mysteries: "T o the sea, Mystes.'
To cross through Hell, Dionysus has to row himself.
3 gods in Eleusis: Iacchus, Demeter (the mother),  Trip- tolemus.6
Meaning:  death is not painful.  It is the terrestrial  life that is death;
death is liberation.
Rendition  in Luke: Let the deceased bury the deceased  and you go
announce the Kingdom of God.
1st Dionysus  will reconstitute  Pentheus7:
"Here is your God, rejoice,  but the only one worthy  of worshipping  me is
he who has demonstrated  that he won't ever succumb  to debauchery  of the
soul and of the body, to the false god who I am always  made to precede.
Wisdom now opens up to you.
- Ah! I burn to know it.
- Here it is: you have now won the right to madness...."

Pentheus and the Bacchantes howl endlessly as the curtain falls.
Also . . . "But wait until everyone quiets down.  Listen.  Everything
becomes  silent. It is now that you have the right to madness . For you
alone. In solitude. So that it kills only you."
Enter  Dionysus   II,  followed  by  Dionysus  I  disguised  as  a  skeptic
dilettante (Silene?) "Enjoy , enjoy!"
Debut: the old men run to the bacchantes.
A philosopher (Does he kill? How does he kill? Does one kill well, etc.
He  who  kills  so  well  and  I  who  reason  so  powerfully ....  We  will  do
wonders. I will lend him my reasoning and he will kill for me).
A poet.
A priest: what are you going to do with those?
A shopkeeper .
Nihilists.
Bacchante:  She wants to go there. Pentheus  is opposed  to it. "The city
must be maintained.  She does not have to be sacrificed  out of love." "She
does not have to sacrifice love."
Dionysus  I and Pentheus:  Who are you to proclaim  so much virtue. - I
have no virtue.  - Haven't  you coveted  women.  - Yes. - Haven't  you taken
them - Yes - Aren't you violent? (He hits him.)
Pentheus  is quartered.  Dionysus  II and the Bacchantes  celebrate  the
sacrifice.
Dionysus I arrives unexpectedly .
II - Who can silence the cries of madness?

I - The one who recognizes madness and keeps it controlled.
Id. A man like me, enslaved,  if you only knew the thoughts  he bears. I
have enough  rage to smack the gods' faces, enough  desire ... to force my
best friend's  wife....  But these dogs who run one after the other disgust
me, each one asking  for the desire of the other while only intending  to
relieve  his own desire.  Me, virtuous!  (He bursts out in laughter)  I would
like to be the one telling  the truth, but my blood is inflame d and my
intellect, having all the might, can conceive of all.
At the age of forty, one consents  to the annihilation  of a part of himself.
I wish the heavens would,  at the least, rectify  all of this unemployed  love
and make resplendent  the work for which,  at this moment,  I have no more
strength.
... Every man and woman  on me, to destroy  me, seeking  their share
without  respite,  without  ever, ever lending  a hand, coming  to my aid,
loving  me finally  for what I am so that I may remain  what I am. They
think my energy has no limits and that I should  distribute  it to them and
make them live. But I have put all my strength  in the exhaustin g passion
to create, and for the rest, I am the most deprived and needy of beings.
Novel.  "He had no more strength to love her. Alive in him was solely
the capacity  to suffer because  of her, the only thing remaining  of love
being deprivation  and want. She could no longer  give him anything  but
suffering. As for joy , it was dead."
Id. "One could believe  that she was all insubordination  and it is true
that this being, crowned  with flames,  burned  as rebellion  itself. But she
was above all acceptance.  I'll accept dying today (at age 30) since I've had
enough  joy. And if I were to live again, I would  want the same life,
despite its extreme misfortunes."
I don't believe  those who say we should  rush into pleasure  through
despair. True despair never leads to anything but sorrow or inertia.
Ah! well, here you are, a whore like the others.

Whoever  gives nothing  has nothing. The greatest  misfortune  is not to
be unloved, but not to love.8
Divided  between  a person  who refuses  death completely  and a person
who accepts it completely .
Too  many  white  cells,  not  enough  red  cells,  and  just  like  the  ones
eating the others, France  too is in a state of leukemia.  France  is no longer
in the position  of leading  a war nor producing  a revolution.  Reforms,  yes.
But it is a lie to promise France anything else. First refresh its blood.
Style. Prudence  before  rules. They are sometimes  like thunder:  they
strike but do not light.
Boghari-Djelfa`'  - The small erg. The poverty  extreme  and dry-and  yet
it is royal here. The black tents of the nomads.  On the dry and hard soil-
and I-who own nothing  and will never be able to own anything,  similar  to
them.
Laghouat  and in front of the rock hill covered  in folded sheets of flint-
the vast expanse -night comes  like a black wave from the bottom  of the
horizon while the west turns red, turns pink, turns green.
The dogs of night untiring.
In the oasis, mud walls above which golden  fruits sparkle.  Silence and
solitude.  And then one emerges on a plaza. Swarms  of children  whirling
like little dervishes, laughing so all their teeth show .
Perhaps  it is time then to speak of the desert where I found the same
escape  - From the bottom  of the horizon.  ... I also wait to see the fabulous
beasts emerge and to find there, quite simply, a silence  no less fabulous
and this fascination....
Mme V.R. on Malraux  going to Japan:  "He goes only to come back."
But we are all a little like this.

Naivete  of the 1950s intellectua l who believes  that he must harden  in
order to grow .
Summer solstice. Short story that occurs on the longest day of the year .
Flowers  above the high walls of the neighborhood  villas in Algiers.
Another world from which I felt exiled.
Death of the concier ge.'  His wife is ill, lying in a large bed. Beside  her
in the single room, on a small folding  bed, the dead body is laid out,
which one can see twice a day while getting the mail.
"`Goodbye,'  she says, 'my dear, my darling.  How big he is! Oh, how
big he was. . . .'" We passed  the coffin "narrow  side first," and upright.
Only the neighbors  followed  the procession.  "To think that only three
days ago I was drinking  mint lemonade  with him." "I actually  wanted  to
make him change the gas pipe."
At the cemetery  there are four of us. A garbage  man gives us each a
carnation which we will soon cast over the fair unmoved one.
At Buchenwald,  a small Frenchman  asks to speak privately  with the
functionary , a prisoner  himself,  who accommodates  the man: "Well you
see, my case is special, I am in- nocent."2
Short story occurring on a day of terrible heat, in Paris.
Novel - Deportee.  His wife and children  are also deported.  Because of
this, they die. When he returns,  the man, superbly  intelligent  and gentle,
dedicates  himself  to searching  for the murderers....  He pushes  them into a
room. He says: I learned  this over there-you  don't kill someone  in the
same  place  where  you  humiliate  them.  This  is  cleaner.  There's  the
telephone. Call.  You have time.
Play about Returning and  Truth.
Scene I -  Wife and friend wait for him.

Scene II - He returns  and in front of the friend reveals  to his wife that
the latter was his mistress.
Short story, Brazil.33  An Urubu snorted,  opened  its beak, prepared  to
fly  away,  flapped  its  dusty  wings  twice  against  its  body,  rose  two
centimeters  above the ridge of the roof and, almost  at once, dropped back
down to go to sleep.
One by one the stars fell into the sea, the sky drained of its last lights.
Finally  he carries  the stone into the most pathetic  of huts. Without
saying  a word, the natives  squeeze  themselves  together  to make room for
him. In the silence, one hears nothing but the sounds  of the river.-Here we
are the last, the last place among the last.
- Europe.... Dogs.
- Me, too, I'm a dog. I've snif fed and fornicated.
- There is no dif ference.
- A little. I'm ashamed.
- Ah! You are rich!
- No, not very . But even when very poor , I've always lived richly .
- And it is because of this that you are ashamed.
- Of that.  And of having lied, snif fed, and fornicated.
- Good.  There is nothing to be done.
- No.
Id. - One cannot refrain.  One cannot refrain.  And then comes a moment
where one can do no more.

Short story, High Plateaus.-'  The man arrives  and his crime explains
itself.
"Here. This is the road to Djelfa. You'll find a car. You'll stop. In Djelfa,
one finds the Gendarmerie  and the train. That track, on the other hand,
crosses  the High Plateaus.  From there, after a day of walking,  you'll find
the first pastures  and nomads.  They'll  welcome  you. They're  poor and
meager , but they give all to a guest.
The man who kept silent since the previous night says only:
- They are kings?
- Yes, Pierre says.  They are kings."
Short story , The Silent Men.
Workmen  return to the factory  (cooperage)  after a failed strike. They
keep silent.  The day at the workshop.
In the afternoon,  the boss's hemiplegia.  The foreman  announc es it to
one of the workers.  He doesn't  speak. Shortly  after work, his arms on the
table, he cries. "Even that, even that."
Short story in a single fierce run.
On the Pacific.  Little mute woman.  She didn't know to tell him she was
pregnant. He runs with her in his arms. She dies.
Short stories under the title: Short Stories of Exile.5
1) Laghouat.  The adulterous woman.
2) Iguape-human warmth, friendship of the black cook.
3) The high plateaus and the condemned.

4) The artist who entrenches himself (title: Jonas).
Then he does not paint anymore.  Hands on his knees, he waits. Now I
am happy .
5) The intellectual and the jailer .
6) A  confused  mind-the  progressive  missionary  goes  to  civilize  the
barbarians  who cut off his tongue and ears and reduce  him to slavery. He
waits for the next missionary and, with hatred, kills him.
7) Short story about madness.
A confused  mind.';  "Oh liars, oh liars! Me, I know him. He tripped  the
blind, called the beggars  filthy bums. He was nailed against  a wall, oh
liar, and the earth trembled.  It is a righteous  one that we killed." Morals
were safe. Here he is, head in the wall. When they nailed him up, there
was a nail in the wall behind  his head, and it entered,  like in mine now.
What mush! What mush! And then, finally, they cut out his tongue.  It is
after he had said, "Why have you abandoned  me?" They weren't  going to
let him continue,  no one was going to let him sit down at the table, make
confessions....
Hatred,  I've discovered  it. Hatred makes  me think of a mint lozenge,
mouth  frozen, stomach  slightly  burned.  One must be evil, one must be
evil. Me, I am a slave, it's under stood. But if I am evil, I am no more
enslaved. I spit over their kindness.
... There he is. In the desert,  the detonation  explodes,  immense.  He has
fallen,  nose in the stones,  head mushy  but shriveled.  Arms out like the
cross,  arms  out  like  the  cross,  I've  howled.  But  at  the  same  moment,
geysers  of grey and black birds rise into an inalterably  blue sky. Far away,
very far , a jackal inhales the wind and jogs in the direction of his death.
Finally he is crucified. Our father who is in ...

How to be forgiven, if one lies, since the other doesn't  even know there
is something  to forgive. One must therefore  tell the truth at least one time
before  dying-or  accept  dying without  ever being forgiven.  What death
more lonely, though,  than that of the one who disappears,  wrapped  in his
lies and his crimes?
Anti-Europe.  On the coast of the Pacific  in Chile. A little girl of 15
years follows  him everywhere  with her eyes. She is alone in a sort of
shack.  He questions her. She doesn't answer, but looks at him. She is
mute. Their silent love before the sea.
Novel.  "I  had  long  believed,   seeing  her  abandon,  that  we  were
complicit  in desire.  It took me many years to understand  that she, and the
majority of women, never had any other complicity than that of love."
I've  always  loved  the  sea  on  the  beaches.  And  then  the  shops
proliferated  on the deserted  beaches of my youth.  Now I love only the
middle  of the ocean, where the shore's  existence  seems improbable.  But
one day, afresh,  on the beaches  of Brazil,  I understood  that there is no
greater  joy for me than to tread on the virgin sand in the clear light, full
with the whistling of waves.
Novel.  Under  the occupation,  he realizes  the extent to which he has
become  a nationalist  by his bitterness at seeing a wandering  dog joyfully
following a German soldier .?
G. Difficult to guess his susceptibility  due to his extreme  kindness. It
takes time.  And the whole time one risks of fending him.
Novel.  Difference  of rhythms  between  people  and also difference  of
rhythms  within  the same person. D. dawdles  in an ongoing  seduction.
Then, suddenly  he phones,  travels  1500 km, takes her to dinner, and takes
her in the evening.
Indeed solitary from now on, but by my own fault.

We want to live our feelings  before putting  them to the test. We know
that they exist. Tradition  and our contemporaries  draw up incessant,  and
by the way fallacious, reports  for us. But then we live them by proxy. And
we use them up without having felt them.
Novel.  "Because  of the very same immense  wrong he was doing to her,
he searched  for every little occasion where she seemed  lacking  attention,
if not love. And then he would give her a hard time, not because  he could
ever  hope  to  alleviate  his  guilt,  but  to  drag  her  along  with  him  in  a
common  condition  and still make her live by his side, but this time on an
earth deserted and deprived of love."
The one thing that has always  saved me amid all my prostrations  is that
I have never stopped believing  in what, for lack of anything  better, I will
call "my star ." But today , I no longer believe in it.8
Sachs  (Derriere  einq  barreaux).9  "One  can  well  live  without
Catholicism: I can hardly live without thinking of Christ."
Montesquieu  quote: "If men were perfectly  virtuous,  they would  not
have friends."
Balzac  quote:  "The genius  resembles  everybody  and none resemble
him."
"One only betrays those that one loves."
"One gets the death that one deserves."
"It is not with the people  to whom we do harm that we have the most
difficulty, but with the witness es of the affair who pose as benevolent
judges."
The tragedy  is not that we are alone, but that we cannot  be. At times I
would give anything  in the world to no longer be connected  by anything
to this universe  of men. But I am a part of this universe,  and the most
courageous thing to do is to accept it and the tragedy at the same time.

Write a stage adaptation of Moliere's Don Juan.
Play. A man who cannot hate.
Men learn little by little to live. And I, for whom  life has been so
natural,  I've little by little unlearned  how to live until the moment where
each of my actions and my thoughts adds to the suffering or uneasiness  of
others or to myself,  to the unbearable  weights  of this world that I had,
however , originally enjoyed so much.
Tribes of dogs assemble in the city and eat away at the ideas.
Vaucluse.  The evening  light becomes  fine and golden  like liquor, and
comes  to  slowly  dissolve  these  painful  crystals  by  which  the  heart  is
sometimes wounded.
Couple.  There is nothing  but demand that controls  demand.  She only
demanded not to die, and me, I screamed toward life.
As he limped, he usually placed his hat askew .
The Russian  Critic Rasoumnik  in regard  to Mayakovsky's  Mystery-
Bouffel:  "In the future,  historical  Socialism  and historical  Christianity  will
come together ."
As a motto, Char proposes: Liberte, Inegalite, Fraternite.
Progress  of the material  condition  improves  more than necessary , and
for a very large measure,  human  nature.  But beyond  this measure,  with
wealth,  progress  hurts human  nature. On the line between  the two rests
the true balance of morality .
Century  of serenity . The danger of catastrophe  is so widespread  at this
point that it blends  with the mortal  future of every condition.  This is why
to settle oneself  with his time today is only to put oneself  right with death.
This  century  of  the  most  extreme  danger  is  also  one  of  the  highest
serenity .

Temps  Modern es.2  They  admit  sin  and  refuse  grace.  Thirst  for
martyrdom.
Hell is paradise plus death.
Hell is here, to be lived. Only those who remove  themselves  from life
escape.
Who  will  testify  for  us?  Our  works.  Alas!  So  who,  then?  Nobody,
nobody  if not those friends  of ours who have seen us at the second  of
sacrifice  when all our heart has dedicated  itself to another . Those who
then love us. But love is silence: Every man dies unknown.
September  '52.  Polemic  with  T.M.3  Attacks  "Arts,"  "Carrefour ,"
"Rivarol." Paris is a jungle, and there the wild beasts are seedy .
The newly achieved  revolutionary  spirit, nouveau  riche, and Pharisees
of justice. Sartre, the man and the mind, disloyal.
The Best friend. Act one. X. at Z.'s home. They speak of Y., X's best
friend,  who is late. His virtues  built up by X. Z. reports  certain  reserves  Y.
has about X. The same virtues are little by little denounced  by X. as
faults. To X., Z. displays  a favorable  judgment  of Y. X. begins to disagree.
Y. arrives. X. rushes forward  to embrace  him. "Ah," Y says, "it's good to
be among friends again."
The Doukhobor s.4  Christianity  is within.  It dies and resurrects  in us.
Every Christian  has two names-one  corporal,  the other spiritual-which
God gives to him at the spiritua l birth, according  to his actions.  The latter
name is not known to anyone here below; it will be known in eternity .
No, our brother is not dead, but our brother is changed.
Doukhobors. In Russian: those who wrestle the spirit.
Property is murder .5

Practical Morality .
Never make appeals to tribunals.
Give money , or lose it. Never make it fructify , nor seek it, nor crave it.
Title: Short Treatise of Practical  Morality-or  (to provoke)  of Everyday
Aristocracy .
T.M.11  polemic  - Knavery . Their sole excuse  is in this terrible  era.
Finally, somethi ng in them aspires  to servitude.  They dreamt  of going
there by some noble pathway , full of thoughts.  But there is no royal path
to servitude.  There is cheating,  insult, denunciation  of the brother. After
that, the sound of thirty deniers.'
Fresh water in Oran. African  light: voracious  blaze that burns the heart.
I was too young.
Sometimes,  late in these nights of celebration,  when alcohol,  dance,
and  everyone's  violent  abandon  led  very  quickly  to  a  sort  of  happy
lassitude,  it seemed  to me, at least for a second,  at the edge of fatigue,  that
I finally underst ood the secret of beings  and that I would one day be able
to tell of it. But the fatigue disappeared, and with it, the secret.8
Brunetiere9  already  pled like Sartre for the theatre  of situations  over
the  theatre  of  characters.  Then  Copeau1  settled  the  question  with  one
sentence: "The situation is worth whatever the characters are worth."
Id. Copeau on the "metier ," on the "well made play." Not to confuse
"revenue" and "metier ." Cf. Speech on Corneille's Dramatic Poem.
Every society, and particularly  its literature,  aims to shame its members
with their extreme virtues.
"Love  of  the  distant"  in  Commedia  dell'arte.  Princess  of  Cleves,2
romantic.

Novel.  "In those days it was not her that he hated. There was nothing  in
her that one could hate and nearly every thing one could love. It was
himself  whom he hated in herand  his own insufficiency , his poverty , his
inability  to  love  what  should  be  loved,  to  live  the  way  he  knew  was
worthy of her and of him......
The race that has money troubles and ennui of the heart.
"Wandering  in  love,  loving  in  various  places,  is  as  monstrous  as
injustice in the mind." I  Pascal.
Id. "Love and reason are but the same thing."
To the beggar  who displays  his insistence,  the owner of the restaurant,
pointing  out the people  eating lobster:  "Put yourself  in the place of these
ladies and gentlemen." 4
Novel.  Mother sick. So he threw himself  on the breast of this crippled
woman  and  cried  against  her.  For  years,  he  had  not  let  himself  press
against  a  person  like  thishad  not  asked  anyone  for  protection.  Some
people  had allowed  themselves  to move toward  him in this way. But as
for him, he had never known  how to consent  to abandonment.  And for this
he chose weakness itself and misfortune.
Play: Lespinasse Elisa.5
Act  1:  1)  Elisa  and  d'Alember t  (she  speaks  to  him  of  her  love  for
Gonzalve).
2) Elisa and Guibert (love at first sight).
3) Guibert's declaration to Elisa (in a cold tone).
4) Someone announces the return of Gonzalve.
5) Gonzalve and Elisa.

Act II:
1) D'Alembert and Gonzalve.
2) Elisa and Gonzalve (receives letter and must leavefarewell scene).
3) D'Alembert and Elisa.
4) Guibert and Elisa. She gives in to the love that carries her away:
"Have you lost your mind? - Do you actually  think?"  She turns around,
hears him running toward her , and topples onto him.
Act III. Love torn apart - Death of Gonzalve.  She is in Guibert's  arms;
d'Alembert  returns with a letter: "He is dead."  She reads and cries: "Do
you know what he tells me?  That he is happy to die certain of my love."
Scene with Guibert-Elisa: "Ah! It is now that I love you," she says.
Act IV. Love misunderstood.  She wants to be loved by Guibert  as by
Gonzalve.  You don't love me. Marriage of Guibert.
Act V.  D'Alembert  and  Guibert.  Sick.  Forbidden  to  see  her.  She  is
deformed.  He confesses  his love for Elisa. D'A.: "You arrive too late. As
do those who are not capable  of lov ing. The end of their passion  consists
of loving uselessly at the moment when it is pointless."
Last scene: Death of Elisa. "Did he not also deserve to be loved?
- Yes, Elisa: But you deserved to be loved as you have been.
- Have I been? Have I really been?"
Guibert enters. "Gonzalve!" she says.
Furthermore, I am going to die without him having for given me.
Who, Guibert?

No. Guibert  made known  to me this love where one has something  to
forgive.  But  the  other  didn't  know,  never  knew.  How  could  he  have
forgiven me?
When my mother's eyes were turned away from me, I could never look
at her without having tears in my eyes.
R: Marries  a woman  who has had a lover (her fiance).  She loyally
confesses  it to him. He says that he loves her and that this is nothing.
Retrospective  jealousy . Nights  of interrogations  and questions.  The day
after  their  marriage,  he  picks  up  travel  tickets  to  the  town  where  her
former  fiance lives in order to "mark his face" (razor blades pushed into a
cork). Like this the years go on. He writes insulting  letters (Mme X at
Mme A's home). Then he forces her to ask a friend to sleep with him. "I'm
hurt," she says, then he forces her to ask the same service  of her sister, etc.
(forbidding  her from the country  of her childhood  where she knew X) etc.
etc. Until she is at the edge of madness.
Poems on missing  Algeria.
That first morning,  more humid  than rainy, gave Marseille  a Parisian-
like pavement  upon which a mixed crowd  called to mind that another
world  began  here.  But  all  of  a  sudden,  at  the  flower  market  on  the
Canebiere,  the displays  cave in under the December  flowers  beaded  with
water, thick, lustrous.  Anemones, marigolds, narcissuses, irises ...
At sea.6  The sea silently  outstretched  beneath the moon. Yes, it is here
that. I feel the right to die peacefully , here that I can say: "I was weak, yet
I have done what I could."
Tipasa. See notes.?
From Laghouat  to Ghardaia.8  The daias and their ghostly  trees. The
tormented  Chebkas.  Kingdom  of  stones  that  burn  during  the  day  and
freeze at night-and  beneath  these terrible  weights  end up bursting into
sand. Even the cemetery  of Laghouat  is covered  with shards of schist, and
there the dead intermingle  beneath  the confusion  of stones.  Even these

meager  plowing s, which one occasionally  encounters  in the desert,  only
lead to finding  a certain  stone suitable  for construction.  When one plows
in this country , it is to gather  stones.  The soil is so precious  that one
scrapes  from it the few chips that accumulate  in the hollows  and then
carries  them in baskets  like the viaticum.  Water. Soil ground  to the bone,
to its schistose  skeleton.  Ghardaia and the Holy Cities in their circle of
ochre hills, themselves garnished with high red walls.
How  these  stones  in  the  desert,  suddenly  piled  one  atop  the  other,
hardly  different  from  other  accumulations,  teach  those  informed  by
poverty the mysterious roads leading to water or dry grass.
Drought  in the South-and  it's a famine-eighty  thousand  sheep die. An
entire populace  scrapes  the soil in search of roots. Buchenwald  under the
sun.
In Vienna, the doves perch on the gallows.
In  every  job  in  France,  the  proportion  of  foreign  workers  is
intentionally  set. This is how the proportion  gradually  grows in the mines
as one gets closer to the bottom. Land of asylum,  but asking  first for
slaves.
A.B. Lucifer depressed about Oran.
Don't  forget  -  At  Laghouat,  singular  impression  of  power  and
invulnerability . In order with death, therefore invulnerable.
Explanation  of modern  horrors  through  fear. Atom,  Soviet  trials, etc.
The treason of the intellectual left.
Actuelles')  - 10 French  physicians,  half of whom are Jewish,  without
any information  beyond  the communique  of the government  in Moscow ,
have signed  a declaration  applauding  the arrest of their Soviet colleagues,
9/10  of  whom  are  Jewish.  The  scientific  spirit  triumphs.  The  same
government,  a little later, declares the innocence  of these still imprisoned
physicians.

The desert and the hour glass.
Actuelles.  The delegates  have refused  to give for housing  the billions
granted  to the alcohol  producers.  Double  blow: the slums increase  along
with the production  of alcohol.  Six hundred  Jacobins,  giants of freedom,
on their knees in front of the bars.
Humanism.  I  do  not  like  humanity  in  general.  In  myself  I  sense
primarily  solidarity  with it, which is not the same thing. And then I love
some  men,  alive  or  dead,  with  so  much  admiration  that  I  am  always
jealous  or anxious  to protect  or defend  in all the others that which,  by
chance  or on some day that I cannot  foresee,  has made or will make them
like the former .
Insanity  of Fabre,'  administrator  of the Francaise.  He believed  that only
the world of mirrors was true.  The rest was a reflection.
Benjamin  Constant  - Diary.'  "The precision of material  descriptions  of
life has some attraction  for the one to whom everything  has become  of
equal indif ference."
On Goethe's Faust, damning judgment p. 59.
.. all people  (like the Ancients)  who have possessed  that which gives
value to life, glory, and freedom , have at the same time sensed  that it was
necessary  to  despise  life  and  to  renounce  it. Those  who  preach  to  us
against  suicide  are  precisely  the  men  whose  opinions  render  life  a
contemptuous  thing,  and  they  are  liars,  partisans  of  slavery  and
baseness...."
"And I am the only one I know who can feel more for others than for
myself, because pity pursues me...."
Cf. p. 81. "The men who pass as tough .."
"Literature  and glory disturb  life while obliging  in the demonstration
and defense of opinions."

"Stroll  with Simonde.  He reproached  me for paying  little attention  to
him and to everyone  else. The fact that no one knows ... that I am not in a
natural  situation,  that my bonds with Biondetta  deprive  me any thoughts
of freely disposing of my life...."
Cf. 133-131.
"Ambition  is much less intereste d than one believes,  because  to live in
peace, one must exert almost as much ef fort as to govern the world."
"My life runs away like water ."
"At the same time, I have such an opposing  sense of the brevity of life,
that  I  cannot  attach  enough  importance  to  things  to  make  a  strong
resolution, no matter which one."
P. 201. On the uselessness  of discussion  with the French  litterate urs: "It
would be necessary to begin by explaining  each point in order to discuss  a
question;  without this one encounters  people  who reproach  only what one
did not say, and this is senseless ly tiring....  It is necessary  to write and not
to dispute."
"In irreligion  there is something  coarse and shabby  that is repulsive  to
me."
When a man is generous  without affecting  those same people  whom he
enriches with his generosity , he finds that he is doing nothing but his duty .
Cf. p. 226. One conceals  one's contempt  in vain-it  is always  felt and
never for given.
245 - Death of Mme  Talma.
- . . . And all these people  who call themselves  sensible  are not worthy
of being my companion in adversity , in misfortune, in death.

... When one supports  a situatio n that one hates in spite of oneself, the
slightest increase in inconvenience puts one into rage.
Cf. 348. My curse is in not loving  anything,  and that makes  even the
simplest things dif ficult.
My soul lives alone. I love only in absence  of recognition  or pity. Let
us not do harm, but remember  also that I cannot  live from the depths  of
my heart with anyone.
When it rallies today for the cause of the people,  the Church  gives the
impression that it does not yield to pity , but to force.
Novel.  She did not believe  in love and affection;  she felt ridiculous
expressing love.
Cada vez que considero
Que me tengo de morir
Tiendo la capa en el suelo
Y no me harto de dormir .:l
Play about  Albigeois.
Someone  writes to me: "In the evening  of our life, we will be judged
on love."  Then condemnation is certain.
She wore chaste dresses and yet her body burned.
Socialism,  according to Zochtchenko,4  will be when violets  grow on
the asphalt.
Jews, alive as a culture for 4,000 years.  The only ones.
Tolstoy writes:  "Of life and death." He advances  and decides  that death
does not exist. Thus, his essay is called "Of Life." See Tatiana Tolstoy's

journals,  p 131: Account of three committed volunteers who are executed.
Tolstoy  admits  that  the  initial  feeling  experienced  when  a  beggar
approaches your home is unpleasant.6
Uttering insults, he leaves a performance by Siegfried.
He  detested  ignorant  and  arrogant  revolutionaries  "who  seek  to
transform the world without knowing where true happiness lies."
February 15, 1953
Dear PB.7
I'll begin with the excuses  that I owe you for Friday. It was not because
of a lecture  on Holland,  but because  I was summoned  at the last moment
to sign books for the benefit  of those refugees.  This exercise,  which I was
doing for the first time, appeare d to me to be something  that I could not
refuse,  and I trusted that you would forgive me this snag. But this is not
the  question,  the  question  concerns  these  relationships  that  you  call
difficult. On this point, what I have to say is expressed  simply: if you
knew a quarter  of my life, and its obligations,  you would not have written
a single line of your letter. But you cannot  know it, and I neither  can nor
should  explain it to you. The "haughty  solitude,"  of which you, along with
many others who don't all have your virtues,  complain,  would be, after all,
if it existed,  a blessing  for me. But this paradise  is attributed  to me quite
mistakenly . The truth is that I contend  with time and people  every hour
that I work, most often without  accomplishing  anything.  I don't complain,
though.  My life is what I've made of it and I'm the first one responsible
for its dispersion  and rhythm.  But when I receive  a letter like yours, then
yes,  I  feel  like  complaining  or  at  least  asking  not  to  be  so  easily
condemned.  To appease  everybody today, I would  need three lives and
several  hearts, but I have only one, which can be judged  and which I often
judge to be of average  quality. I don't have the material  time, nor the inner
leisure  time, to see my friends  as often as I would like to (ask Char, whom
I love like a brother, how many times a month we see each other). I don't

have time to write for the reviews,  neither  on Jaspers  nor on Tunisia, not
even to clear up an argument  with Sartre.  You believe  me if you want to,
but I don't have the time, nor the inner leisure,  to be ill. When I am ill, my
life is turned upside down and I lag for weeks trying to catch up. But most
serious  of all is that I no longer have the time, nor the recreation,  to write
my books,  and I spend four years to write what, in freedom,  would have
cost me one or two. Incidentally , for some years now, my work has not
freed me, it has enslaved  me. And if I pursue  it, it is because  I prefer it
above all else, even freedom,  even wisdom  or true creativity , and even,
yes, even friendship.  It's true that I try to organize  myself,  to double my
strength  and  my  "presence"  by  utilizing  time,  organizing  my  days,
increasing  efficiency . I hope to be up to it, one day. For the moment,  I am
not-each  letter brings three others,  each person  ten, each book a hundred
letters and twenty  corresponden ts, while life continues,  and there is work,
those whom I love, and those who need me. Life continues  and, some
mornings,  tired of the noise, discouraged  by the interminable  work to be
done, sick of this crazy world which assails  you even as you pick up the
newspaper , finally sure that I will not be up to it and that I will disappoint
everyone,  I want only to sit and wait until evening  arrives.  I have this
desire, and sometimes I give in to it.
Can you understand  that, B.? Of course,  you deserve  to be respected
and spoken to. Of course your friends are as good as mine (who are not as
grammarian  as you believe).  Although  I have trouble  imagining  (and this
is not a pose) that my respect  could truly matter to someone,  it is true that
you  have  mine.  But  in  order  to  transform  this  respect  into  an  active
friendship,  a true inner leisure  would in fact be needed,  many meetings.  It
is the luck of my life that I have met many quality  people.  But it is not
possible  to have so many friends,  and unfortunately  this condem ns me to
disappoint,  I know. I understan d that this is intolerable  to others;  it is
intolerable  to me. But it is so, and if they cannot  love me like this, it is
normal  that they leave me to a solitude  that, you see, is not as haughty  as
you say .
In any case, I reply to your bitterness  without  bitterness.  Coming  from
someone  like you, letters like yours can only make me sad, and add to all

the reasons  I have to escape  from this city and from the life I lead here.
For the moment,  even though  this is what I want most in the world,  it is
not possible. Therefore  I must continue  this strange  existence,  and I have
to count whatever  you tell me as the price-a  little too expensive in my
opinion-that  I  have  to  pay  for  having  let  myself  be  driven  into  this
existence.
In any case, forgive me for having  disappointed  you, and believe  in my
faithful thoughts.
On the theatr e.
"Laws"  of  the  theatre.  Action.  Life.  Action  and  life  in  great
performances.  Theatre  is  persona,  character  pushed  to  the  extreme.
Whatever  the situations  are worth is what the characters  are worth. Errors
of conception, of production,  and of interpretation  result from ignorance
of this re ality. Relation  of style and theatrical  convention.  Toward great
theatre.
Novel.  A  coward  who  believed  himself  courageous.  And  then  one
occasion suf fices for him to see the contrary-and he must change his life.
Id. He decides  to fight against  moral temptation.  He voluntarily  gives
in to his instincts, which are strong.
Nernesis.8  Sometimes  love kills with no justification  other than itself.
There is even a limit where loving a person  amounts  to killing  all others.
In certain ways, there is no love without  personal  and absolute  guilt. But
this guilt is solitary. Deprived  of the alibis of reason,  it is heavy to carry. It
is alone that one must decide  if he loves, and it is all alone that one must
respond  to  the  incalculable  consequences  of  true  love.  With  this
adventurous  solitude, man prefers  a tepid heart and ethic. He is afraid of
himself  and  for  himself.  He  wants  to  spare  himself,  refusing   then  his
condition.  And his first concern  is to seek a justification  which relieves  a
little of the weight  of his guilt. Since one must be guilty, at least he is not
guilty alone. Militant.

In love, hold on to what is.
Novel.  Theme of ener gy.
Pasiphae  wants the bull by chastity . What it represents  is clean, sensual
pleasure,  a flash of sensual  pleasure  and not this series of repeated  and
polished  acts,  these  shrieks,  these  gasps  of  pleasure,  these  pleasures
pursued  for years in order to accomplish  an impossible  union. The bull is
swift and searing like a god. - Pasiphae (when it enters): 0 purity!
Martyrs must choose to be for gotten or to be used.
To add to State of Siege. Ministry of Suicide.  "Impossible  this year.
The staf f is already full. Fill out a card for next year ."
Sex, strange, stranger, solitary , which without  stopping  is determined  to
move  forward,  irresistible  then,  it  must  be  followed  blindly  until,
suddenly , after years of furious passion,  before  more years of sensual
madness,  it  refuses  and  becomes  silent-thriving  in  routine,  becoming
impatient  with novelty , and not giving  in until the last minute  when one
consents  to gratify  it fully. Who, mildly  demanding,  could ever from the
bottom of his heart consent to this tyranny? Chastity , oh liberty!
Honor holds on by a thread. If it is maintained, it is often by luck.
Fear of my trade and my vocation. Faithful,  there is ruin; faithless,
there is nothing.
A courageous cravat.
Novel.  The two sons turn away when their mother, sick, removes  her
dentures  before  leaving  for the operating  room. They knew she always
displayed some shame in revealing that her teeth were false.
I have found no other justification  for my life except  this effort to
create.  For almost all the rest, I have failed. And if this doesn't  justify me,
my life won't deserve absolution.

One tolerates  oneself  thanks  to the body-to  beauty. But the body ages.
When  beauty  deteriorates,  then  psychologies  alone  remain  present-and
they clash, without intermediary .
There  are  people  who  suffer  stiffly  and  others  who  suffer  flexibly:
acrobats, (established) virtuosos of sorrow .
Two common  errors:  existence  precedes  essence  or essence  existence.
Both march and rise with the same step.
Letter from Green.  Each time someone  tells me that they admire  the
man in me, I have the impression of having lied all my life.
For Nemesis. Paris, July 9, '53.
Dear Sir, I've taken time responding to your pleasant  letter. But these
last weeks passed for me like the wind. I, however , have been more than
sensitive  to your sympathy  and the manner  in which you wish to clearly
express  it to me. I had liked the veiled luster of your poems,  their "lagoon
and sun" aspect.  And I am happy to sense, moreover , your accord.
Excess  in love, indeed  the only desirable,  belongs  to saints. Societies,
they exude excess only in hatred. This is why one must preach  to them an
intransigent  moderation.  Excess,  madness,  ruin,  they  are  secrets,  and
risks, for some, and one must say nothing  of them or, at most, barely
suggest.
For this reason  poetry  is the eternal  nutrient.  One must entrust  it to
guard the secrets.  As for us, who write in the language  of all, we must
know that there are two kinds of wisdom,  and sometimes  pretend to be
unaware  that  one  is  higher.  Accept  all  my  best  wishes  and  cordial
greetings.
If I have always  refused  to lie (unfit even when I made an effort) it is
because  I could never accept  solitude.  But solitude  should  now also be
accepted.

Like after a long illness when someone  whom you love dies. And even
though  there was nothing  to do but wait, it is as though  one had struggled
long and hard, and then all of a sudden, defeat.
For certain  men it requires  more courage  to face a simple  street fight
than to jump in the line of fire. Hardest  is to strike a man and particularly
to feel the physical hostility of another man.
V. "Two values for me: tenderness and glory ."
To bring divine grace down on a B.O.F.,`'  or a ruthless  businessman-
that is an accomplishment. On a criminal, it is easy .
Van Gogh admired Millet,  Tolstoy, Sully Prudhomme.
Tolstoy,  as  a  young  man,  "goes  in  search  of  happiness"  in  Saint-
Petersbur g.  Result:  cards,  gypsies,  debts,  etc.  "I  live  like  an  animal."
(Tolstoy by  Tolstoy, correspondence - 1879.)
Tolstoy's  brother:  "He lacked  the necessary  defects  needed  in order to
be a great writer" (according to  Turgenev).
Id. Corr. May 3, '59: "To whom do I do any good? Whom  do I love?
Nobody .  I  have  neither  tears  nor  sorrow  for  myself,  but  only  a  cold
regret...."
Id. Oct. 17, '60, after the death of his brother:  "And I've learned  from
thirty-two  years of experience  that in truth our situation  is dreadful....
Arriving  at his highest degree  of development,  man realizes  very clearly
that everything is a lie, senseless,  and that the truth that he loves still more
than anything in the world is terrible...."
Id. 61. Tolstoy  challenges  Turgenev to a duel, but Turgenev makes
excuses.
Id.  62.  Searching  Tolstoy's  residence:  A  colonel  reads  his  diary.  T.
writes  to Alexandra  Tolstoy,  who  is  familiar  with  the  imperial  court:

"Fortunately  for me and for your friend I was not there, because I would
have  killed  him."  Response  from Alexandra  to  calm  him:  "Have  pity.
Nothing  in reality  is more merciless  than a man who strongly  feels his
innocence and who is unfairly mistreated."
62. Meeting  Sophie  Bers: "I love as I never believed  one could love. I
will kill myself if it continues like this...."
65. "I am happy that you love my wife. Although  I love her less than
my novel, she is my wife all the same, you know ."
Cf. p. 285.  Andrey Bolkonsky's outlook in  War and Peace.
65.  On  one  of Turgenev's  short  stories  that  he  does  not  like:  "The
personal  and subjective  side is good only when it is filled with life and
with passion, whereas  here subjectivity  is full of suffering without  one
feeling life" (apply to Rilke, Kafka, etc.).
65.  His  indifference  to  politics-continuous-and  stubborn.  "I  am
indifferent to knowing who oppresses the Poles."
At 50 years old he still maintains  that no one should  read the diaries  (p.
405).
"During  the  summer  ...  I  dream  then  of  death  more  and  more  and
always with a new pleasure."
69. He discovers Schopenhauer with admiration.
70. Insomniac.
71. On the death of a friend.  He does not miss him, he "rather  envies
him."
72. On Strakhov . "Abandon the depraved activity of journalists."
Cf. p. 320. On a curve where Pushkin  would  be at the top, Tolstoy
places himself on the downward slope.

72. "Ennui visits me quite rarely, but I welcome  it with joy. It always
forewarns the arrival of a great intellectual ener gy."
73. To a friend:  "Don't  stay in Moscow . Two dangers:  journali sm and
conversation."
Cf. p. 366. On the desert and primitive life.
To put an end to her life, without respect for it, is painful.
"We cannot live without religion and yet we cannot believe."
78. He prays every day for Providence  to accord  him "peace  in work."
Alas!
Cf. p. 396.  Against progress.
What  they  prefer,  what  makes  them  tender  and  melancholy ,  what
makes them sentimental,  is hatred.  For each work one has to measure the
sum of hatred and the sum of love that it contains-and  then one is appalled
in the face of the times.
Lope de Vega, five or six times a widower . Today people  die less often.
The result is that we no longer  need to preserve  in ourselves  a force of
rejuvenating  love, but, on the contrary , we need to extinguish  it in order to
elicit another force of infinite adaptation.
If concern for duty diminishes,  it is because  there are fewer and fewer
rights. Whoever  is uncompromising  with regard to his rights alone has the
force of duty .
Nihilism.  Little  demolishing  dunces,  contentious,  thinking  of
everything  in order to deny all, feeling  nothing  and relying  on others-
parties or leaders-to feel for them.
All their effort is to discourage  one from being. To prevent  the writer
from writing, in literature for example, is their constant concern.

Cf. D.M. Hatred of writers,  like what one can catch in a publishing
house.
Virtue is not hateful.  But speeches  on virtue are. Without a doubt, no
mouth in the world, much less mine, can utter them. Likewise,  every time
somebody  interjects  to speak of my honesty  (Roy's  declaration')  there is
someone who quivers inside me.
Title: The Hatred of  Art.
The artist and his time. Read Tolstoy's  marvelous  page about the artist
(What do we have to do? 378-9 and R.R.2  p. 113). . . "the artist ... he is
the one who would be happy not to think and not to say what is set in his
soul, but he cannot be exempted from doing so...."
Facing  this, "The sentiments  of our current  society  come down to three
things: conceit, sensuality , and ennui."
Admirable letters about his remorse (R.R. p. 189-190).
Don  Giovanni.  At  the  summit   of  all  arts.  When  one  has  finished
listening to him, one has toured the world and its beings.
Focused.  Sharpened  -  I  ask  only  one  thing,  and  I  ask  it  humbly ,
although I know that it is exorbitant: to be read with attention.
Too much security  for the child's heart and the adult will spend his life
demanding  this  security  from  peopleeven  though  people  are  only
opportunities for risk and freedom.
Novel.  Jealousy . "I took care not to let my imagination  wander. I kept it
on a leash."
"The adulterer  is indicted  in front of the one or ones whom  he has
betrayed.  But  he  is  not  convicted.  Or  perhaps  the  most  unbearable
conviction is to be eternally accused."

Faust. Endymion.:3  The king's death. The ritual - Pandora4  and the end
of the golden age.
Ferrero.  "Finally  to pick from the tree of life is this small exquisite
fruit, so rare from now on, which, over many years, flowers  only one
time: rest without remorse."
In France, talent always asserts itself against.
From Columbus,  the horizontal  civilization-that  of space and quantity-
replaces  the vertical  civilization  of quality. Columbus  kills Mediterranean
civilization.
Ferrero.  Contradiction  of the mechanized  world:  it creates  abundance
by its speed of manufacture, and it needs drought to prosper .
Before all else, the natural.
Ferrero.  A civilization  such as ours, which tends to always  increase  the
quantity  of objects  and therefore  has to always  decrease  quality, must end
in an enormous  and brutal orgy. And it is true. The end of the history that
our progressive men speak of is debauchery .
Hegel. Moderation: synthesis of quality and quantity .
Without tradition the artist has the illusion  of creating  his own rule.
Here he is God.
Antaeus  is buried at the foot of Cape Spartel,  on the Atlantic  Coast of
what is now Morocco.
Ferrero.  From  Hercules'  doors,  the  Atlantic  is  an  infinite  beauty
flowing  within  the narrow  human spirit and taking  a provisional form
there.
Ferrero.  The eternal  voice that shouts at the artist: "Create  works of art
and do not make aesthetics;  discover  new truths and do not make theories

of  knowledge;  just  act  and  do  not  preoccupy  yourself  with  verifying
whether  or not  history  has been mistaken."  Id. "Believe  in the principles
that you profess  and don't compromise.  But if the principle  falls, resign
yourself. It will have only been one moment of universal truth.';
Cf. p. :354: the power  of Society  has limits.  It has acquired  solely
through  the result of concentration  and discipline:  the epic Greek tragedy
and sculpture,  the aesthetics  and morals  of Plato and Aristotle,  Roman
law, the art of the Italian  Middle  Ages and Romanesque  art in general,
Galileo, Pascal, Racine, Moliere ...
Then the discovery  of America,  the French  Revolution,  the machine,
the era of production.
But  finally  it  was  necessary   to  nourish  the  enormous  starving
multitudes  who wander  or vegetate on the globe (verify  the growth  of the
human  race  since  the  XIIIth  century).  Perhaps  we  must  pay  for  this
through sterility .
France,  which  had  the  audacity  and  genius  to  produce  that
extraordinary  French Revolution , is at the same time the country  that has
yielded the least, out of disquiet, to the madness of production.
Ferrero.  "One  of  these  days  the  act  of  restrained  will  is  going  to
explode."
With certain  people  we maintai n the rapport  of truth. With others,  the
rapport of lies.  The latter are not the least durable.
Novel.  "I have nothing  to do close to you. I did not love you enough
and you did not love me enough  for me to set tle my final accounts  with
you. I must manage  alone and die alone. I waited  for years for you to
forgive my faults and accept me as I was. You never did. I therefore kept
my faults, I remained  guilty, and today I must put myself  in order with
these faults alone. Leave me.

Forgive me, then, the pain that I have caused  you. And if you can,
forgive me from the bottom  of your heart. That is what I need most,
though,  the privation  that for years has prevented  me from living. If your
heart remembers  nothing  but the love it has for me, this would  be the
salvation in death that I could not have in life."
Tocqueville  (From  Democracy  in  America):  "It  seems  as  if  the
sovereigns  of our time seek only to have men make things great. I would
like them to think a little more of making great men."
"Russia  is  the  angular  stone  of  despotism  in  the  world
(Correspondance7)."
Napoleon  delivers  the Revolutio n's bastard  child: despotism.  According
to T, the natural check for despotism is aristocracy .
These  minds  "who  seem  to  make  the  taste  for  servitude,  a  sort  of
ingredient of virtue."  Applies to Sartre and the progressives.
"What are these people  lacking  in order to remain  free? What? the very
taste for being free."
Id. Tocqueville.  Ancient Regime and the French Revolution.  T. I.
The  general  idea:  it  is  royalty  that  created  the  instrument  of  the
Revolution-centralism-by  cutting  down  the  aristocracy  and  provincial
freedoms.
"It must always  be rued that, instead of bending  the nobility  under the
influence  of law, it was uprooted  and cut down. By doing so they have . . .
inflicted on freedom a wound which will never heal."
"Democratic  societies that are not free can be rich, refined,  gentle,  even
magnificent,  powerful  by the weight  of their bourgeois mass; they can
encounter  private  virtues  there, good family  fathers,  honest  merchants,
and quite estimable landlords  ... but what will never be seen in similar
societies,  I dare to say, are great citizens  and, above all, a great populace,

and I do not fear to affirm that the common  level of hearts and minds will
never cease to lower itself as long as equality  and despotism  are joined
there."
Id. for our progressives.  "We have seen men who thought  to atone for
their  servility  toward  the  lowest  officials  of  political  power  by  their
insolence  toward God, and who, while they abandoned  all that was most
free,  most  noble,  most  proud  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Revolution,  still
flattered  themselves to have remained  faithful  to its spirit while remaining
irreligious."
Id. "They  seemed  to love freedom;  it turns out they only hated the
master."
Cf. p. 233. The main idea of modern socialism-that  after the last audit,
land  ownership  belongs  to  the  State-was  taught  by  Louis  XIV  in  his
edicts.
Cf.  p.  244.  In  '89  the  French  were  proud  enough  of  themselves  to
believe that they could live equally in freedom.  Then ...
Cf. p. 245, portrait of France.
The Notebooks  of the nobility  of Paris and elsewhere  asked for the
demolition of the Bastille.
Chopin  (born  in  1810).  Excellent  actor.  Refuses  the  Opera  out  of
certainty  of what he is. Congratulates  Tallberg who played  a nocturne,
deforming  it as usual: "But by whom was it then?" Prodigal  and generous.
But pitiless in his dealings with his editors.
In Valdemosa, gulls lost in the fog knock against  every pane of the
cloister.
Dying,  Tolstoy wrote in the air .

According  to Montherlant,  all true creators  dream  of a life without
friends.
In  the  Broadmoor  asylum,  where  the  criminally  insane  are
rehabilitated, bloody ar guments over an empty bottle of aspirin.
Theatre  idea (still at Broadmoor ): when the wicked  one takes the stage,
a sign: "Boo."  When the hero does: "Applaud."
"The  union  of  three  people  bound  by  a  gentle  conformity  of
inclinations,  virtues  and  temperaments,  represents  in  the  eyes  of  the
Chinese the highest form of terrestrial beatitude...."  Abel Remusat.8
Id. "The Island Complex."  Two women  are needed.  Because  the man
has three souls and the woman  four. This triangle  is imbalanced  on this
square. But on two squares, it makes a complete and solid pyramid.
The winter ends in El Kantara  when the eternal  summer  begins. Black
and pink mountain.  According to Fro- mentin.'
Again Fromentin: small-minded people prefer the details in art.
"Until the last minute  of the day, the Sahara  remains  in full light. Ilere,
night comes like a blackout."
Read Daumas' "Le grand desert."
One cannot live all that one writes. But one tries to.
Kaliayev is wintry love.  Victoria solar love.'
St. John. "The one who says that he loves God and does not love his
brother  is a liar; because  how can he say that he loves God, whom he does
not see, if he does not love his brother, whom  he does see?" Compare
with the Confused  Mind which  says: "If I do not love God, me, it is
because  I do not love men, and in truth why love them?"  Id. John. "If I

had not come, and if I did not speak with them, they would have no sin;
but now they have no excuse."
Altruism is a temptation, like pleasure.
Tolstoy:  "One  can  live  only  so  long  as  one  is  drunk  with  life"
Confession (79).
At  the  same  time:  "I  am  crazy  about  life....  It's  the  summer ,  the
delicious summer ...."
Guilloux.  At the beginning  of the Occupation  in SaintBrieuc,  the city is
cold and rainy, the stores empty. It's morning;  he walks in the drizzly  and
deserted  streets. Over the empty  plaza a German  passes,  covered in a
linen oilskin  glistening  with rain. Then under the low sky, in the dreadful
sadness  of  the  hour,  G.  enters  the  church  and  prays,  he,  the  declared
atheist  (prays to Mary, I believe). And he reemerges. Every time he had
tried to write this moment  of abandonment  or of cowardice  (he says he
does not know which it is) he could not, or dared not.
Roger Martin du Gard and his mother's  death. They hide her cancer
from her. They change  the labels of the medications,  etc. But after her
death,  the  memory  of  this  terrible  agony  pursues  M.  du  G.  who  tells
himself  he will not be able to bear it. The only possible  hope would be to
kill himself. But will he have the courage?  He attempts  it, goes through
several  "rehearsals"  with a revolver , but at the last moment  (pressing  on
the trigger)  he feels his courage  lacking.  Thus the anguish  grows,  he feels
stuck, until he finds the "way." He takes a taxi, brings the revolver  to his
forehead.  "When I arrive at the level of the third lamppost,  I will press on
the trigger." He gets to the third lamppost  and feels ready to press on in
this manner . Consequently , an immense feeling of freedom.
The  same  person  tells  me  that  he  suffers  from  wanting  nothing
anymore,  not even to live (see his letter).  The anorexia  about which Gide
spoke. In Nice, suddenly  a hope. He sees a sign for "Bouillabaisse"  at the
door of a restaurant  and wants to have some. It is his first want in months.

He enters, eats with joy. Since then, nothing  more. He is in the waiting
room when he writes to me.
Of all the men I have met, he is the most human,  which is to say the
most worthy of tenderness.
Stendhal.  "What  is  the  self?  I  know  nothing  of  it.  One  day  I  am
awakened  on this Earth, I find myself  tied to my body, to a character, to a
fortune.  Shall I vainly enjoy myself  by trying to change  these things,  all
the while forgetting  to live. Deception!  I subject  myself  to their defects.  I
subject  myself  to my aristocrat ic tendencies  after having  railed for ten
years, and in good faith, against any aristocracy ."
L'Impromptu des Philosophes2  as commedia dell'arte.
A "modern" title:  The Hatred of  Art.
Write  naturally .  Publish  naturally  and  pay  the  price  for  all  this,
naturally .
Criticism  is to the creator  what the merchant  is to the produce r. Thus,
the commercial  age sees an asphyxiating  multiplication  of commentators,
intermediaries,  between  the producer  and the public.  Thus, it is not that
we are lacking  creators  today, it is that there are too many commentators
who drown the exquisite and elusive fish in their muddy waters.
Novel.  See Weissberg's notes.3  At the interroga tion, the chekists  put a
golden  paper  crown  decorated   with  swastikas  on  his  head,  a  large
swastika on his chest, and then they hit him.
Id. The old anarchist tailor explains  his point of view clearly. The judge
insults  him: "You have offended  me, your honor, I will not answer  any
more of your questions."  Record  of the interrogation:  thirty-one  days and
thirty-one nights. Madhouse!
Novel.  1st part. Search  for a father or the unknown  father. Poverty  does
not have a past. "Day in the provincial  cemetery . . . . X. discovered  that

his father had died at a younger age than he himself  was at that very
moment  ... that the person  lying there had already  been his junior for 2
years, even though  he was 35 years old when he was laid there....  He
realized he knew nothing of this father and decided to look for him4  . . . "
Birth during relocation.
2nd part. Childhood (or weave this with the first part)  Who am I?
3rd part. The education  of a man. Incapable  of tearing  himself  away
from bodies. Ah! The innocence  of first acts! But the years pass, people
bond and each act of the flesh binds, prostitutes, engages more and more.
He does not want to be judged  (to tell the truth, he judges  little) but
there is no way to avoid it.
Two characters:
1) The indifferent one: raised without  a familial  environment.  Without
a father. A single mother. He manages  alone. A little haughty , although
polite.  Always  walks alone. Goes to boxing  and soccer  matches. Likes
only the peak moment.  Forgets the rest. At the same time begs of others
the tenderness  of which he is incapable.  Lies easily but has terrible urges
to tell the truth. A little monstrous. Secrecy  until the end, because  he
forgets major parts of his life, since few things interest  him - An artist by
his very shortcomings.
2) The other , sensitive and generous.
They meet. at the end (and it is the same) next to the mother .
O father! I have searched  madly for this father whom I never had and
here I discovered  what I have always  had: my mother  and her silence. The
five movements of Mozart's Quintet in G Minor .
Love and Paris.  Algeria. "W e did not know love."

Id.  Poor  childhood.  Life  without  love  (not  without  pleasures).  The
mother  is not a source  of love. Consequently , what takes longest  in the
world is learning to love.
Two people  are brought  together  purely by looks (let's say the cashier
and the custome r). When the opportunity  presents  itself, they tackle each
other. What does he say?  "Do you have time?"  What does she say, how
does she respond?
"I'll say that I went somewhere."
In two forces of equal tension,  progress  is an optimum  balance.  It takes
account  of the limits and subjugates  them to a greater  good. And not in a
vertical arrow , which would suppose that progress is limitless.
Play. We wait for him. He returns  from the camp. He speaks  the truth
about love (because he has failed: he now knows what a man is).
Scene with his wife, and in front of her, Philinte  and G., Philinte's  wife.
"For example,  I slept with G.... Moreover , I am not sure that you and
Philinte."  - Philinte:  "No. It's not that G. is not delectable.  And although  I
do not like the truth, I will speak it by way of exception.  When I saw that
you and G...." - "How"  - "Yes, I knew it. From that moment  everything
became  impossible  between  your wife and me. So finally  this continual
coming  and going-ugh!  You agree with me don't you? Then come for
dinner  tomorro w?  G.  will  make  her  chaud-froid5  for  you.  She  is
unbeatable when it comes to chaud-froid." End of the act.
But your feelings? - Well what about my feelings?  They existed like all
things,  intermittingly  - And the rest of the time? - I was lying, of course.  -
I preferred your lie - Of course,  you've  always  loved napping  - But you're
a monster! -  And you, my angel?
Id. For example,  my son is an imbecile  - Ah! that, the son says - You
see.  You  protest.  It's  the  reaction  of  an  imbecile.  An  intelligent  man
always  admits  the  possibility-I   should  say  the  probability-of  being  an
imbecile  in some ways. Thus my son is an imbecile  (he looks at him). Not

completely , however. Rather, he plays stupid.  He is cunning  and he knows
that stupidity  has its advantages,  that it is the hearth around  which society
warms itself.
Id. The son becomes  social.  "When  the social plan coincides  with the
private  plan . . . - Your mother will become  intelligent?  No, but ... One
does not covet another's  wife? - Surely - Why, yours will be perfect'?  - No
... - You, I see you coming.  You want to use the social force of others to
sort out the small problems  of your private  life. Leave that, my boy. The
misery  of others is their private  life. They will sort out this little affair,
nothing to fear . But don't touch.  Ali! don't touch.
Id. But he falls in love with Dominique.  And again he lies.
The intellectual who asks for giveness.
"Worst was the Gospel.  Yes, I read the Gospel,  initially  because  I only
had that in hand and then because I realized  by its usage that there were
more common  points between  Jesus and me than between  a policeman
and me. And today's  world is composed  for the three-quarters  that are po-
licenien or for the policemen's admirers."
A man whose  life is full refuses many advances.  Then, for the same
reason,  he forgets his refusal.  But those advances  were made by people
whose  lives were not full and who, for this same reason,  remember . The
first later finds he has en- enmies  and is astonished  by it. Like this, almost
all artists imagine  they were persecuted.  But no, one responded  to  their
refusal  and one punished  them for their excess  of riches.  There is no
injustice.6
The First Man
Plan?
1) Search for a father .

2) Childhood.
3)  The  years  of  happiness  (sick  in  1938).  Action  as  a  happy
overabundance. Powerful feeling of liberation when it's over .
4)  War  and  resistance  (Bir  Hakeirn  and  the  alternative  clandestine
newspaper).
5) Women.
6) Mother .
The indifferent one. A complet e man. A high-caliber  mind, a skillful
body broken  by pleasures.  He refuses  to be loved out of impatience,  and
out of the exact feeling  of what he is. Sweet and kind in illegitimacy .
Cynical and terrible in virtue.
He can do anything  because  he has decided  to kill himself.  Cyanide.
Thus he enters the resistance,  whence  extraordinary  audacity . But the day
when he has to help himself to the cyanide, he abstains from it.
The First Man
Search for a father .
The hospital. The mother  (and this paper from the town hall which is
brought  to the two illiterate  women  peeling  potatoes  on the floor; he must
help the deputy  mayor in and hand him the paper so that he can read it),
the press, Cher-  agas,7  etc. He sees the father begin to take shape. Then
everything fades. Ultimately there is nothing.
It is always so on this earth, where there are 50, 70 years ...1 1
At 40, Maillol`'  meets V. B., a Jewish  Romanian  painter  who took
refuge  at Collioure  in order to elude the Germans.  He meets him in the
street, recognizes  the painter  in him, invites  him to come show him his

pictures.  The following  day V.B. goes, is received  with open arms, and
explains  his situation.  "This house is yours,"  M. says, his only response.
He provides  a cup of coffee. He opens the carton while smiling  at V.B.
and finally  looks at the first picture,  distinctly  surrealist:  A woman  who
ends as a tree. Maillol  bursts out: "No, no, not that, it's not possible.  Out
of here!"
Nietzsche. "They all talk about me.... But none think about me."
Le  Pilot-i.  "He  must  be  blamed.  It  is  necessary  to  blame  his  ugly
manner  of  appearing  honest  and  not  being  so."  In  the  first  person.
Incapable of loving, he forces himself to, etc.
What the collaborationist  left approves  of, passes  over in silence  or
considers inevitable; in no particular order:
1) The deportation of tens of thousands of Greek children.
2) The physical disposal of the Russian peasant class.
3) The millions of people in concentration camps.
4) The political abductions.
5) The near daily political executions behind the iron curtain.
6) Anti-Semitism.
7) Stupidity .
8) Cruelty .
The list is open. But, this is enough for me.
Tolstoy's Journal.  Three demons:
1) the play (possible struggle)

2) sensuality (very dif ficult struggle)
3) vanity (the most terrible of all).
"`I consider,' he says in a letter to his aunt, `that without  religion  man
can be neither good nor happy .... But I do not believe."'
Id. "The truth is horrible."
October  '53. Noble trade where one must, without  budging,  let oneself
be insulted  by a lackey  of letters or of the party! In other times, which
were  said  to  be  degrading,  one  at  least  retained  the  right  to  provoke
without  ridicule  and to kill. Idiotic,  for sure, but this made the insult less
comfortable.
There are people  whose religion  consists  of always  forgiving offenses,
but who never forget them. For me, I don't have what it takes to forgive
the offense, but I always for get it.'
Those who have been fertilized  both by Dostoyevsky  and Tolstoy, who
understand  both of them equally, with the same facility, these sorts are
always formidable to themselves and to others.
October  '53. Publication  of Actuelles  11.2  The inventory is complete-
the commentary and polemic. From now on, creation.
Shortly  after great historical  crises one finds oneself  as dissatisfied  and
sick as on the morning  following  a night of excess.  But there is no aspirin
for the historical hangover .
These thoughts  that you do not speak and that put you above all things,
in a free and brisk air .
It is said that Nietzsche,  after breaking  with Lou, entered  into a final
solitude,  walked  at  night  in  the  mountains  that  dominate  the  Gulf  of
Genoa  and lit immense  fires there that he watched  smolder . I've often
thought  of  these  fires  and  their  gleam  has  danced  behind  my  entire

intellectual  life.  So  even  though  I've  sometimes  been  unjust  toward
certain  thoughts  and  certain  men  whom  I've  met  in  this  century ,  it  is
because  I've unwillingly  put them in front of these fires and they were
promptly reduced to ashes.
In a letter to Hawthorne,  Melville speaks  of Moby Dick: "Here is the
book's secret epigraph: Ego non baptiso to in nominee ..."
Id.  "When  I  was  writing  this  book  I  was  aware  of  an  allegorical
construction  on which the entire book, as well as each one of its parts,
rested."
Id.  After  having  finished  M.B.  and  having  read  Hawthorne's
appreciative  letter:  "I  experien ce  a  strange  feeling  of  satisfaction  and
irresponsibility; no desire for debauchery ."
And then "I feel that I will leave this world with less bitterness  after
having known you."
Cf. The theme of the story "The Happy  Failure"~3:  praise God for this
failure.
Nietzsche. One could classify religious men as top-notch artists.
Nietzsche:  Dawn.  "Never  keep silent, never conceal  what one can think
against  your own thoughts.  Swear it solemnly . It is the first act of loyalty
that you owe to your thought."
Beyond  ...: "If one has character , one has in his life a characteristic
experience  that eternally  recurs."  Question  then: to find the event and give
it its name.
Genealogy  ...: "Whoever  has ever built a new heaven  has found the
necessary power for this endeavor only at the bottom of his own hell."
"Polyphony" of certain natures.

Nietzsche  (Human,  All Too Human):  "A little while after I fell ill, more
than ill, tired by the continual  disillusion  caused  by all that enthused  us
modern men ..."
... "Here a man who speaks  suffers and is deprived,  but he expresses
himself as if he did not suf fer and did not deprive himself."
... "From now on solitary , I take the side against  myself  and everything
that, in fact, opposed me and made me suf fer."
Unique and gigantic goal: the recognition of truth.
Eternal  recurrence:  Exalt what is and adore that it returns.  (Without
metaphysics, it indeed remains only that.)
Note to Lou (1882). "In bed.  Acute crisis. I despise life."
Necessity  of an aristocracy . In the present,  one can imagine  only two of
them: the one of intelligence  and the one of work. But intellige nce alone
is not an aristocr acy. Nor work (the examples,  in both cases, are obvious).
Aristocracy  is not primarily  the enjoyment  of certain  rights, but primarily
the  acceptance  of  certain  duties  that  alone  legitimize  the  rights.  The
aristocracy  is asserting  itself and at the same time stepping  aside. To leave
oneself  (the  definition  of  duty),  intelligence  cannot  move  toward
privileges.  Some  take  part  of  intelligence,  others  are  the  opposite  of
intelligence.  And  duty  consists  neither  of  asserting  oneself  nor  of
suppressing  oneself  but of making  sure one serves what one claims.  Thus,
intelligence  can move only toward  the work that is its duty and its limit.
Work,  for  its  part,  cannot  move  toward  stultification,  unconscious  or
conscious  (generalized  humiliation  of intelligence),  which is either itself
or  its  opposite   (see  above).  Thus,  work  can  only  move  toward
intelligence.  Finally,  in  the  present,  the  aristocracies  of  work  and
intelligence  are not possible  until they recognize  one another  and begin to
walk one toward  the other in order to one day establish  a single superior
image of man.
Obligation to hide a part of his life gave him the appearance of virtue.

The only source  of aristocracy  is the people.  Between  the two there's
nothing.  This nothing,  which for 150 years has been the bourgeoisie,  tries
to give shape to the world and obtains  nil, a chaos that survives  only
because of its past roots.
Walpole. "His good sense went as far as genius."
Utilize his vices, be wary of his virtues.
Brupbacher .4  "Nobody  should produce  more philanthropy  nor morality
than he naturally  secretes."  He thought  that the mission  of the militant
philosopher consisted of supporting all factors of freedom in all classes.
W. Whitman.  "When  liberty  goes out of a place, it is not the first thing
to go. It waits for all the rest to go, it is the very last."
Van Gogh, stuck with a common woman,  Christine,  then abandoned
her when she was in the maternity  ward. Gau guin, waking  in the night,
saw Van Gogh leaning  over him and looking  at him fixedly. At the Saint-
Remy asylum, the count of G. beats his chest with a piece of wood while
repeating: "my mistress, my mistress!"
Salacrou,5  in  the  notes  that  accompany  his  Theatre,  Volume  VI,
recounts  the  following  story:  "A  little  girl  about  to  turn  10  declares:
`When  I grow up, I'll register  with the cruelest  party.' Questioned, she
explains:  `If my party is in power, I'll have nothing  to fear and if it is the
other, I'll suffer less since the party which will persecute  me will be the
less cruel one.'" I don't much believe in this little girl's story. But I know
this  reasoning  very  well.  It's  the  shameful,  but  effective  reasoning  of
1954's French intellectuals.
Dostoyevsky's  father made him whip both the peasants  who bowed to
him and those who did not bow to him. In both cases they appeared,
according  to him, audacious.''  After the wife whom he tormented  dies, he
gets drunk at night and talks to her, taking in turn a woman's  voice and
then  a  man's  voice.  He  is  murdered.  Head  shattered,  genitals  crushed

between  two stones.  Two months later, D., who hated his father, sees an
interment, collapses, and groans.
Id. Spechniov  (the petrashevskis t7-"The  man of irony, of liberty, and of
power")  and "each one is guilty of all, for all." Etym. root of Stavrogin:
stauros: the cross.
The Russian's  hatred  for the form that limits.  They have pushed the
revolution  to its end. Berdyaev 8  notes somewher e that they have never
had  a  Renaissance.  Anxiety ,  always,  Id.  According  to  Berdyaev ,  the
absence  of  chivalry  has  had  disastrous  consequences  for  the  Russian
moral culture.
Carlyle,  Nietzsche,  Dostoyevsky , are they revolutionaries?  They are
called counterrevolutionaries, though.
Adaptation of  The Possessed.
Cf.  Berdyaev .  "Shatov ,  Verkhovensky ,  Kirilov,  these  are  the  many
disaggregated  fragments  of  Stavrogin's  personality ,  emanations  of  this
extraordinary  personality  that  becomes  exhausted  as  it  dissipates.  The
enigma  of Stavrogin,  the secret of Stavrogin,  such is the unique  theme of
The Possessed."
Dostoyevsky's  Thesis:  The same paths that lead the individual  to crime
lead the society to revolution.
Verkhovensky:  "The  most  important  force  of  the  revolution  is  the
shame of having one's own opinion."
Cf. Guardini,9  pp. 40-41 and 202.
A priest who regrets  having  to leave his books when dying? Which
proves  that the intense  pleasure  of eternal  life does not infinitely  exceed
the gentle company of books.

May 8. Fall of Dien Bien Phu. As in '40, mixed feelings  of shame and
rage.
The evening of the massacre,  the result is clear. Rightwing  politicians
have placed  the unfortunate  ones in an indefensible  situation  and, at the
same time, the leftists shoot them in the back.
According  to Johnson  (Boswell)'  the perfect courtesy  consists  of not
carrying  the imprint  of any profession  whatsoever , but on the contrary ,
having a general ease in all manners and in all circumstances.
Id. Remarrying: "The triumph of hope over experience."
Id. J.'s friend:  "I have tried, in my time, to be a philosopher  but I do not
know why , I was always interrupted by cheerfulness."
Id. "When we are reunited  for some time, you will see that my brother
is quite entertaining.
- I will be waiting, Sir , J. says."
Socrates learned to dance at an advanced age.
Johnson: "No man is a hypocrite in his pleasures."2
Before  dying he thinks a "curious  thought":  we do not receive  letters in
our grave.
Don Juan Faust"
1) To be right
2) Nothing is allowed
3) He consents to the stratagem of the Franciscans who kill him.4
Aix-en-Provence? Romanticism?

Sgnarelle,  would  be  M.  Nothingness  from  l'Impromptu  des
Philosophes.6  It is he who announces  "He will not come" (he reprimands
Dona  Anna's  father  who  interrogates  Don  Juan  about  his  vices.  See
Impromptu).
Don Juan is Faust without the pact-(develop).
Act III, in Brazil with the slaves.  Act IV, Act V becomes  man and
solitary . Solitary with all.
D.J. Pact with the devil but without the devil. To bet for the world, the
sensation  and the pleasure,  is to make a pact with the devil. To bet for
justice is also to make a pact.
At the request  of Massignon,  I write to the President  of the Republic  to
request  pardon  for those condemned  to death at Moknine.7  A few days
later, I find a response  in the newspaper:  three of the condemned  have
been shot. Fifteen  days after the execution,  the director  of the cabinet
informs  me that my letter "held the attention"  of the President  and was
transmitted  to  the  higher  council  of  the  magistracy .  Bureaucracy  of
dreamers.
Two million union members  out of eleven  million  employees.  In 1947,
there were seven million union members.
Play. A happy man.  And nobody can put up with him.
In the water, the turtle becomes  a bird. The large turtle of the warm
seas glides within the tepid waters like a handsome albatross.
Atonal  music,  music for the voices, for the feverish  voice of modern
man.
Letter to M. "Do not curse the West. For me, I cursed  it at the time of
its splendor . But today, while it succumbs  under the weight  of its faults
and its long-past  glory, I will not add to its weight....  Do not envy those of
the East, the sacrifice  of intelligence and of heart to the gods of history.

History  has no gods, and intelligence,  enlightened  by the heart, is the only
god, under a thousand forms, who has ever been saluted in this world."
('hekhov:  "It is not glory that is essential  for the writer . . . it is the
patience to endure." "T o carry his cross and keep hope."
The School of Critics: the "laws" of the theatre.
- If I have understood  well, Sir, I must follow with punctuality  the laws
that neither  Aeschylus,  nor Shakespeare,  nor Calderon,  nor Corneille,  nor
any  of  the  other  great  dramatic  geniuses  could  keep  themselves  from
breaking.
- It would be more accurate  to say that only Shakespeare,  Aeschylus,
and the others could allow themselves to break these laws.
- By taking your advice,  though, I will be neither  one of these great
creators.
- Would you claim to be?
- To be, no. But to become.  And if not, why write? I will fail, that is
almost  certain.  But to have tried, it will give to my life a taste that you
strip away from me in advance.  And Shakespeare,  after all, was born from
a hundred pretentious  and desperate fools who wanted  to be Shakespeare.
As for Feydeau,  it could have only come from Feydeau  (I laugh, note it
well, but rarely beyond one act).
Play. Today, King Lear is a patrician dispossessed by the Socialists.
Id. A Caligula who no longer accuses the world, but himself.
Death of Marcel Herrand.8
Virtuous  men often make the citizens  pusillanimous.  At the root of true
courage, imbalance.

According  to our existentialists , every man is responsible  for what he
is. What can possibly explain  the total disappearance  of compassion  in
their universe of pushy old men. Yet they claim to fight against  social
injustice.  Then there are people  who are not responsible  for what they are;
the cur is innocent  of his misery. So? the disabled,  the ugly, the timid. . . .
And to conclude, compassion, again?
Pericles  before  the  grave  of  a  young  man:  "The  year  has  lost  its
spring."
When  they  spoke  of  me  as  a  "director"  (somebody  who,  in  short,
showed  good  direction)  a  part  of  me,  of  course,  swelled  with  idiotic
vanity. But during  all these years, another  part of me has never ceased
dying of shame.
M.H.`'  The terribly sad air of the dying-and  the stubborn  and provincial
air of those who assist in the death throes.  He, so urbane,  and then all of a
sudden almost encircled in this alcove, where only ...
There are moments  when letting yourself  go to sincerity  is equivalent
to an inexcusable laxity .
The First Man: Stages  of Jessica:  the sensual  girl. The young  lover
infatuated  with the absolute.  The true lover. Accomplishment  regardless
of ambiguous beginnings.
"When  I loved her the most, someone  inside of me hated her for what
she had done, seen, and suffered. Especially  suffered. I hated her for not
having  waited  for me, dead, until the early morning  hour. And I hated her
in  the  presence  of  someone  else  inside  of  me  who  laughed  at  this
ridiculous pretension."
Jonas.'  There is a housing shortage.  And then the paintings  accumulate
and take his place. Hence, the closet.
At the moment when he does nothing more - "He heard them running
through  the rooms ... life, the noise that men make, how beautiful. The

girl laughed. How he loved them! How he loved them!"
Play. The Liar .
1) He lies.  Two women enter .
2) He tells the truth.
3) Facing catastrophe, he lies again. (She tears up the paper that would get
her out of the lie.)
A play about the impossibility of solitude.  They are always there.'
Novel. Best wishes (to my son who will start again).
What man accepts  with the most difficulty  is being judged.  Hence,  the
attachment  to the mother, or the blinded  lover, or the love of animals  as
well.
Thermonuclear  bomb: to some extent,  generalized  death coincides  with
the  human  condition  on  this  point  of  view.  It  suffices  then  to  settle
oneself.  We  rediscover  the  first,  and  oldest,  of  problems.  Arriving  at
infinity, we begin again at zero. 2nd displacement  of the problem:  the
universal  curse no longer  has God as author, but men. Men have finally
become  equals with God, but only in his cruelty. We must therefore  begin
again  the  revolt  of  ancient  times,  but  this  time  against  humanity .  We
demand a new Satan to deny the power of men.
Bizarre.  "Dirty kike," the elder says. And the little one hits him. Ile had
to hit him. But he did not want to do it. He did not hate the head that he
hit.... And the other one did not want to do it either. He did not want to
call this likable  little one a kike, did not want to hit him. But he had to
respond and therefore he hit him.
Fantastic tales.
Christ-Pan.

Aesthetics.  Sometimes  when one moves  away from emotion,  the cry
bursts forth. Other times, one moves to meet emotion,  still alive in the
memory , by a long turning  of sentences  and words that finally  guide us
there and, in fact, resuscitate  the emotion,  no longer like a cry, but rather
like a lar ge wave of which the magnitude....
Id. If I say, "He has a nose like a pumpkin,"  that does not mean, "like a
peach," does it?  Thus, art is a calculated exaggeration.
Char and the lioness'  love in the Jardin des Plantes.  He puts his head
through the bars. She rolls over . She opens her little paws....
On all the paths of the world,  millions  of men have preceded  us and
their traces are visible.  But on the oldest sea, our silence  is always  the
first.
Nobody  deserves  to  be  loved-nobody  measures  up  to  that
immeasurable gift.  Those who receive love then discover injustice.
If I had not given in to my passions  perhaps  I would have had the tools
to intervene in the world,  to change  something.  But I have given in to
them and this is why I am an artist, and this alone.
Somebody  inside of me has always  tried, with all his strength,  to be
nobody .
At the boundary  of this long burning  thought,  far off in the distance,
total acceptance.
At the very moment  when after so much effort I laid down the limits,
believing  to be able to reconcile  the irreconcilable,  the limits burst and I
was hurried into a silent unhappiness.



August 1954-July 1 9 5 8
8.15.1954
Mahler's  4th  symphony  in  G  major  for  sopranos  and  orchestra.  At
times, Mahler, by contrast,  makes  one appreciate  Wagner, showing  how
much  the  latter  remained  master  of  his  fog.  Other  times,  Mahler  is
excellent.
8.16.1954
X. says to me: "Why don't we accept the idea of eternal  life? Because  it
is, in the end, a private  beatitude  of consciousness-and  we want to be,
which is to say we want to know that we are. But then why reproach the
world for precisely what gives us consciousness,  which is to say pain and
suffering (this is indeed  the contradiction  of modern  atheism).  Me, I have
always  accepted  suffering with a sort of joy, the joy of being." I say to
him that therein  lies the genius.  The genius?  Yes, the genius of life, which
she alone, among all the beings I have met, carries with natural pride.
17. Berl.'
It is easier for intellectuals  to say no than to say yes. At the end of his
life,  looking  at  volumes  of  his  work,  Doctor  Reclus,  who  sided  with
Dreyfus,  realized  that there were two years when he produced  nothing.
Ah! yes, Dreyfus: he devoted  those two years to studying  files of the
affair. Today one takes a side based on a single reading  of an article.2
Wasted afternoon.

18.
No way out of it. Suicide.  Those who are already  dead, what then do
they expect? Cemetery of  Anet where the ivy has split an old flagstone.
For many years I've lived cloistered  in her love. Never having  ceased to
love her, today it is necessary  that I flee, to at least have her concern,
which is dif ficult.
19.
Terrible  morning.  Afternoon  exhibition  of Cezanne:  the first mad and
morbid  paintings  (sexual  obsession in particular).  A madness  of this sort
required  the terrible  discipline  that Cezanne  had. The demented  alone are
classic  because  they are that or nothing.  C. pushed  demand  to the limit of
his disorder and chose still-life  and landscape  painting  because  he found
in them an architecture,  a geometry . Toward the end he returned  to bodies
and faces and rediscovered  madness,  the madness  that he mastered.  Here,
Cubism is ordered (foretold).'
Mail.
20.
Mail. Dead day .
25.
Dead day. N.A. (Derain,  crazy after hemiplegia,  hit by an automobile.
His wife and his former  mistress4  protect  the paintings  with official seals
while he is delirious in a clinic.)
The Gate of Hell.  A Japanese film that feels a bit American.  But next to
this art, the barbarity of ours.

22.
Sad and wise nature of the Ile-de-France.
2:3-24.
Dead days. Lunch with Berl.
25.
Work except in the morning.  Museum  of Man. I leave there with a
mouth  full  of  ashes,  the  osseous  ashes  of  skeletons  and  mummies.
Peruvian mummy: [. . .]6  of history . Who was she?
Action  and writing:  they are not certain  about being right, but this
uncertainty  gives them a guilty conscience.  They write then to get rid of
this guilty conscience.  With this intention  they will seek new arguments,
which they will find, and then assert a little further. The opposition  will do
the same. Thus, the positions  will stiffen. So many repeated  assertions
will  be  equivalent  to  actions.  Will  soon  provoke  them.  Thus,  the
victorious  party will have enough  charges on the day of victory. By means
of continually fleeing  their guilty consciences,  the losers will have found
true guilt and will answer  for it, never having  wanted  that. Another day,
the victors, in turn, will be vanquished  and will respond,  never having
wanted that. History is a long crime perpetrated by the innocent.
September  7.
The children  return.  Catherine  cannot  fall asleep  as she is scared of
dying (due to the pain in her chest).  That this anxiety  already  tortures
these small beings, is this not truly the final outrage?
September  8.

N.A.  calls  me:  Derain  just  died.  Paralyzed  on  one  side,  crazy,
persecuted  by his wife who put seals on his paintings.  N.A. is desperate.
Nothing  to do. Poor Derain  whose gruff intensity  I loved. Too alive for his
own life.
9.
For X. (and her family)  love mixes with suffering,  anguish.  To love is
to suffer from or for. For me, love has never been separate  from a certain
state  of  joyful  innocence.  Hardly  had  I  experienced  that  when  I  was
plunged into guilt and could no longer truly love.
20.
It's not dying that I fear , but living in death.
Annihilation is nothing to fear for those who have lived long.
God is not needed  to create guilt or to punish.  Human  beings  Suffice.;
He could, if worse comes to worst, establish innocence.
21.
flow could he preach  justice,  he who has not even managed  to make it
reign over his own life?
In  the  night,  the  murderer  undressed  himself  and  with  axe  blows
slaughtered his family .
M.: "You are secretive,  kind, and (to compensate  for what is repulsive
in kindness) you are passionate and at times unfair ."
October  5."

Scenery  in  Rotterdam  at  night:  all  of  its  luminous  carcasses  raised
above its canals.
The Hague.
This entire world gathered  in a small space of houses  and waters,  one
silently  stuck  to  another ,  and  it  rained  at  length  over  the  entire  city,
without  a moment  to breathe,  while ugly, sulky little children  directed  the
traffic of placid cars and beautiful  [. . . ]"  railings  of the royal museum  to
wash the pediment's  opulent  decorations  while it was still raining and a
pianist  on a tricycle  [. . .]'  played  Chopin's  Tristesse  accompanied  by a [
...J 2  violinist  and a distinguished  beggar  who collected  kindly  donated
copper  coins,  meager  offerings  that  made  a  soft  sound  and  that  were
meant for the grimacing  gods of Indonesia  whom one sees in the windows
and who wander  invisible  in the air of Holland,  manning  the dispossessed
colonist's  nostalgia. 0 Java, distant  island whose  sons serve coffee here
while it still rains and where in the wet air hangs the marvelou s memory
of the girl at the door of inexhau stible beginnings,  the tubercula r light and
silence  of Rembrandt's  old brother  whose eyes look without  desire at the
eternal country .
October  6.
It  rains  for  days  and  the  cold  wind  [...].3  That  was  over  there  in
Rotterdam,  all freshly  nickel-pla ted, and Amsterdam  always  wet; and here
in  The  Hague  perched  on  bicycles  with  high  handlebars,  like  funeral
swans circling  the cold Vigver, between  the live eels of the fish market
and the marvelo us jewels of unattractive  windows,  the same color as the
dead leaves stuck all over the ground  and the smoked  herrings,  which,  for
a long time, swam in the old gold seas.  O Cipango,  over there and here [. .
.]4  Holland,  mildmannered  Holland, where one learns the patience5  to
die.
Conversion  to  the  serious.  Seriousness  is  an  accepted  lie  and
recognized infirmity . For all the rest, quiet sincerity .

Don Juan.''
She: I always knew that you didn't love me.
But I loved you.
You spoke to me and occasionally looked at me over my head.
He: I don't seduce, I adapt.
October  26.
The opposite of reaction  is not revolution,  but creation.  The world is in
an unending  state of reaction  and thus unendingly  in danger  of revolution.
What defines  progress,  if it is such, is that without  compromise,  creators
of all kinds triumph  over the mind, over reaction,  and over inactivity
without  revolution  being  necessary. When  there  are  no  more  of  these
creators, revolution is inevitable.
According  to Koestler , old Turkish law considered  a crime committed
by [.]7  an extenuating circumstance.
Honeysuckle-for  me, its scent is tied to Algiers.  It floated  in the streets
that led toward  the high gardens  where the girls awaited  us. Vines, youth
...
The white rose of morning carries the scent of pepper and water .
Julia.8
Last act: J. I am ugly .
d'Al yes.
Everything, in me and in people, draws me downward.

November  1st.
I often read that I am atheistic;  I hear people  speak of my atheism.  Yet
these words say nothing  to me; for me they have no meaning.  I do not
believe in God and I am not an atheist.
As a creator  I have given life to death itself. That is all that I had to do
before dying.
Pavese:  "We are idiots. The little bit of freedom  that the government
leaves us, we allow it to be gobbled up by women."
Rembrandt:  glory until 1642, at 36 years of age. From this date on, the
march  of  solitude  and  poverty.  An  infrequent  experience  and  more
significant  than  the  banal  one  of  the  ignored  artist.  About  such  an
experience, nothing has been said.
B.C.: "Nature  does not give this spiritual  force to man so that he can
enjoy it for himself. She entrusts it to him for a use beyond his person."
Id.:  "An  authentic  creator  is  organically  subjected  to  the  law  of
pleasure."
Spengler  says that the soul of Russia is a revolt against  Antiqui ty. True
enough. See Berdyaev also: Russia never had the Renaissance.
Text about llebertot.`)  In the middle  of the grotto is a large white sperm
whale.  Between  his teeth he filters everything,  allowing  only the plankton
of tasty authors to reach him.
Realism.  Everybody  is realistic.  Nobody  is. Finally, it is not aesthetics
that matter but personal demeanor .
The literature  of totalitarian  countries  does not die so much because  it
is controlled as because  it is cut off from other literatures.  Any artist who,
from the beginning, is not open to the whole of reality is incomplete.

November  7, 1954.
41 years old.
The Bacchae.I
In Sicily. Now. A small village  in the Palermo  region.  And everything
has the same pleasantness.
Very important  works in view. In any case, there remains  something  of
it. Ex: Don Juan, Faust, they're all part of it.2
Correct  The Rebel, p. 225, 6th line (workmen  instead  of monks)  and p.
229, 1st line.
Duperray3  letter. "The revolutionary  trade-unionists  continue  to devote
themselves  to their essential  activity: searching  for reasons  to separate
over common principles."
New title:  A Puritan of Our  Time.4
November  24. 10:00.
Arrival  in Turin this morning.5  For several  days, joy at the thought  of
rediscovering  Italy. I have not seen it since my last stay in 1938. The war,
the  resistance,  Combat,  and  all  these  years  of  revolting  seriousness.
Travels,  but instructive  and where the heart falls silent. It seemed  to me
that my youth,  a renewed  strength, and a lost light awaited  me in Italy.
Also, I was going to flee this universe (my home),  which for a year now
has destroyed me cell by cell; perhaps  this escape  would save me forever.
Actually , yesterday  when the train started  moving,  I was no happier . Tired
at first, and then there was the meeting  with Grenier  where I wished we
could have spoken  freely, but we could not; even X. could not help me to
leave contented.  During  the night, however , between  brief slumbers,  a
happiness came, yet still remote.

At 7 o' clock this morning,  the realization  that we are in Italy. I shake
myself  and open the blind: a landscape  covered  in snow and fog. It is
snowing  over all of northern  Italy. Alone in my compartment,  a laughing
fit took hold of me. It is not cold. Yet I.A., who waits for me at the train
station,  claims  she is freezing  to death. With her pretty, wavering  French
and  her  small,  calm,  gracious   gestures  (she  reminds  me  of  Maman),
blushed  from the cold like a little snow flower, she returns  a little bit of
Italy to me. Already  the Italians  on the train, and soon those of the hotel as
well, have warmed my heart. People whom I have always  liked and who
make me feel my exile in the French people's perpetual bad mood.
From my hotel room I can see the snow continue  to fall over Turin.
Still I laugh at my disillusion. But courage returns to me.
Turin beneath the snow and fog. At the Egyptian  gallery, the mummies,
which have been pulled  from the sand without  wrappings,  shrivel  from
the cold. I like the grand streets,  paved and well spaced.  This city is built
as much of space as of walls. I am going to see the house at 6 Piazza
Carlo Alberto,  where Nietzsche  worked  before  plunging  into madness.  I
have never been able to read the account  of Overbeck's  arrival without
crying:  his entrance  into the room where Nietzsche,  insane  now, raves,
and then crying,  throws  himself  into Overbeck's  arms. In front of the
house I tried to think of he whom I have always  loved with as much
affection  as admiration,  but it was in vain. I find him better in the city-
which I understa nd he loved, despite the low sky-and  I understa nd why he
loved it.
Short Story. The camp prisoners  elect a pope, choosing  from those
among  them who have suffered most, denying  the other-the Roman-who
lives in the luxurious  Vatican.  They call theirs Father  even though  he is
one of the youngest  there, they obey him in all, and will die for him until
he himself  dies defending  his sons (or better yet he refuses  to die and
protects  himself  because  he  has  others  to  defend  and  this  is  the
beginning).6
November  25.

Grey  misty  day.  I  wander  in  Turin.  Crowned  skulls  on  the  hill.
Downtown,  at the heart of an immense  view, bronze  horses rise up in the
fog. Turin, a city of horses  frozen  in the same elan in the place where
Nietzsche  became insane,  stopped  a horse from being beaten by its driver,
and then madly embraced its muzzle. Dinner -villa Camerana.
November  26.
Long walk in the hills of Turin. In the surrounding  sky, the snowy Alps
appear  and disappear in the fog. The air is fresh, humid,  and smells  like
autumn.  The city below is covered  in fog. Far from everything,  tired, and
strangely happy . Evening, lecture.

November  27.
Depart  for Genoa  in the mornin g with I.A.; strange  little being, clean,
rich in heart and will, with a sort of reflective  renouncement  that seems
surprising  for such a young person.  She wants to "laugh  and regret."  In
the case of religion,  she believes in "detached  love." Obviously  many
aspects  of Maman,  whom  I dream  of with sadness.  I always  have this
grave, unbelievable death on my heart....
Rain  and  fog  all  over  Piedmont  and  Liguria.  In  the  middle  of  the
snowfields,  we cross the mountains bordering  the Ligurian  coast. Four
tunnels  later and the snow disappears  whereas  the rain redoubles on the
slopes  descending  toward  the  sea.  Two  hours  after  arrival,  a  lecture.
Dinner  at  the  Palais  Doria.  The  old  marquise  appears  emaciated,
everything  except her eyes and heart. As I leave, I walk in a Genoa finally
rediscovered,  washed  by voluminous  waters.  Black and white marbles
shine, lights fuse in the streets, lar ge arteries, banal.
From the VIth century  to the year 1800, the population  of Europe never
exceeded 180 million.
From  1800  to  1914,  the  population  went  from  180  million  to  460
million!
Ortega y Gasset.7  Who wants to know to whom he speaks-to write-
Distinguishes society from association.
Freedom and pluralism are the two dominant components in Europe.
Philosopher  and philosophy  professor , see p. 26-on the true aristocracy:
passion.
Humboldt.8  In order for the human  being to enrich and perfect  himself,
a variety of positions  are necessary . Maintenance  of this variety is the

central ef fort of true liberalism.
Today's Russia sees the triumph of individualism in its cynical form.
Ortega  y Gasset.  History:  the eternal struggle  between  paralytics  and
epileptics.
Every society is based on aristocracy, because  this one, the true one, is
demanding  with regard  to itself, and without  this demand  every society
would die.
Ortega  y  Gasset.  The  creative  life  supposes  a  regimen  of  elevated
hygiene,  great nobility , and constant stimuli,  which excite the conscience,
and more, the creative life is an ener getic life.
How the alleys teem with shadows. Content and fatigued.
November  28.
Long walk in Genoa. A fascinating  city and quite similar  to the one I
remembered.`'  Superb  monume nts erupt in a tight corset of small streets
crawling  with life. Beauty  is made on the spot here, radiating  in the life of
everyday . A singer on the corner  of the street improvises  the scandals  of
current events.  A singing newspaper .
The small cloister of San Matteo. The wind drives the rain in bursts
across  the large leaves  of medlar trees. Brief instant  of happiness.  Life
must now be changed.
Evening:  departure for Milan,  in the rain. Arrived  in the rain. What
Stendhal loved here is quite dead.
Novernber  29.
Last Supper'  - Vinci is definitely at the beginning of the Italian decline.
Cloister  of San Ambrogio.  Lecture. In the evening  I travel by train to

Rome,  exasperated  by the stupid  society  life that follows  the lectures.
Incapable  of  putting  up  with  more  than  half  an  hour  of  these  antics.
Sleepless night.
.10.
Finally, in the morning,  pale but determined  sunshine  over the Roman
countryside.  Stupidly , tears come to my eyes. Rome. Another  one of these
luxurious  hotels,  stupid  like the society  that maintains  them. I'll move
tomorrow . With N., I look at the Birth of Venus. Walk along the villas
Borghese and Pincio:  everything  is painted  on the sky with a brush of rare
bristles.  I sleep. Last lecture.  Free at last.  Dinner  with N., Silone,2  and
Carlo Levi.3  Tomorrow will be good.
December  1st to the 3rd.
There are cities like Florence,  small Tuscan or Spanish  cities, which
carry the traveler , support  his every step, and render  those steps lighter.
Others,  like New York, weigh on his shoulders  and crush him such that he
must learn little by little to stand up and to see.
This is how Rome weighs,  but with a sensitive  and light weight:  one
carries  it on the heart like a corpus of fountains,  gardens,  and cupolas,  one
breathes  beneath  it,  a  little  oppressed  but  strangely  happy.  This  is  a
relatively  small city, but from an aerial perspective  it occasionally  breaks
out at the turning  of a street, this sensitive  and limited  space breathes
together with the traveler and lives with him.
Left the hotel for lodgings  on the Villa Borghese. I have a balcony  that
extends  over the gardens,  and the view I found there warms  my heart
every time I see it. After so many years of a city without  light, of rising in
the fog, among  the walls, I am ceaselessly  nourished  by this sky and these
lines of trees that extend  from Porta Pinciana  to Trinity dei Monti and
behind which Rome rolls out its cupolas and disorder .

Each morning  when I go out on this balcony , still a little drunk with
sleep, the birds' song surprises  me, comes to find me at the bottom  of my
slumber , and comes to touch a precise place that in a single stroke releases
a sort of mysterious  joy. For two days the weather  has been nice and the
beautiful  December  light before me outlines  the curled-up  cypresses  and
pines.
Here I regret the dark and derisory years I have lived in Paris. There is
a reason  of heart that I no longer want because  it is useful to no one and
puts me a hair's breadth from my own loss.
The day before yesterday , on the Forum-in  the part that is badly ruined
(close to the Coliseum),  not in this extravagant  flea market  of pretentious
columns  found under Campidoglio-then  on the admirable  Palatine  Hill
where nothing  exhausts  the silence, the peace, the world always emerging
and always perfect,  I began to rediscover  myself.  It is this that the great
images  of  the  past  serve,  when  nature  can  accommodate  them  and
extinguish  the sound that lies dormant  in them, to gather the hearts and
forces that will then better serve the present  and the future.  It is felt on the
Via Appia where,  even though  I arrived  at the end of the afternoon,  I felt
inside of me, while I was walking,  a heart so full that life could have left
me then. But I knew that it would continue,  that there is a force in me that
moves forward,  and that this stopover  would yet serve progress.  (One year
I did not work, I could not work even though  ten topics were waiting,
which I know were exceptional  and I still could not tackle.  About a year
since, and I have not gone insane.)  One could live well in this cloister , this
room where  Tasso4  died.
Places in Rome.  Piazza  Navona . Sant' Ignazio  and the others.  They are
yellow. The fountain  basins are a little pink beneath  the baroque  gushing
of water and stones.  When one has beheld  all, or beheld  in any case all
that one could behold,  strolling  without  seeking  knowledge  is a perfect
happiness.
Yesterday , during the night, in front of San Pietro in Montorio,  Rome,
beneath  its fires, was like a harbor whose restlessness  and noise had come

to die at the foot of this silent embankment where we were.
It's  a  strange  and  insufferable  certainty  to  know  that  monumental
beauty  always supposes  servitude,  that, however , servitude  is beauty  and
one  cannot  help  but  desire  beauty  and  one  cannot,  desire  servitude;
servitude  remains no less intolerable. Perhaps  it's for this that I put the
beauty  of a landscape  above all else-it's  not paid for by any injustice  and
my heart is free there.
December  3.
Superb  morning  in the Villa Borghese. The light of Algerian  mornings
flows between  fine pine needles  and carves them out one by one. And in
the Gallery ,5  full with a fairblond light, Bernini  amuses  me, gorgeous and
disconcerting  when  grace  triumphs,  as  it  does  in  the  highly  surrealist
Apollo  and Daphne  (as an art, surrealism  was initially  a counterof fensive
to the baroque),  hideous  when grace disappears,  as in the disconcerting
Truth Unveiled by  Time. A vibrant painter also (Portraits).
Correggio's  Danae,  and especially  Venus Blindfolding  Cupid,  by Titian,
painted at age 90 and of timeless youth.
The Caravaggios,  not those in St. Louis of the French,6  seen in the
afternoon,  definitely  superb  with the contrast  of  the violence and the mute
layer of light. Before Rembrand t. Especially  The Calling  of St. Matthew:
superb.  C.7  points out to me the constancy  of the themes  of youth and
maturity .  Moravia"  had  already  spoken  to  me  of  the  type  of  man
Caravaggio  had been: he committed several  crimes,  was robbed  fleeing
Tuscany, and then was thrown  on a beach where he died, insane (1573-
1610). Moravia also told me the true story of Cenci,`'  on whom he wants
to base a play. Beatrice  is buried  beneath  the altar of St. Louis of the
French.  Riots  in  Rome,  the  French  Revolution.  A  French  sans-culotte
painter  takes  part  in  sacking  St.  Louis  of  the  French.  The  tombs  are
opened.  Beatrice's  skeleton  is there, the skull split, resting  in the center of

the body. The painter  takes the skull and leaves,  playing  with it like a ball.
This is the last image related to the terrible story of Beatrice Cenci.
At  the  end  of  the  afternoon,  I  return  to  Janiculum.  San  Pietro  in
Montorio.  Yes, this hill is my favorite  place in Rome.  High in the tender
sky, groups of starlings,  light as smoke,  turn in all directions,  crossing
each other, scattering, and then gathering  to plunge  over the pines, which
they graze before returning  to the sky. When we go back down with N.,
we find them exhausted  in the trees, the plane trees of Trastevere's  Viale
del  Re,  their  numbers  so  enormous  that  each  tree  hums  and  crackles,
covered  with more birds than leaves.  When evening  falls, a deafening
chirping  covers  the noises of this populated  neighborhood,  merges with
the  sputtering  trolleys,  and  keeps  all  of  the  laughing  heads  turned  up
toward these enormous swarms of leaves and feathers.
The  large  brown  Roman  with  the  gentle  and  noble  face,  with  a
demeanor  so simple  and so proud, takes care of me at the lodging house.
Short story . Love with the painter . And all the nobility on his side.
Write a BAROQUE text about Rome.
December  4.
Morning.  Barberini Palace.  Caravaggio's  Narcissus,  and especia lly this
Madonna  attributed  to P. della Francesca,  appears  to me to belong  rather
to the wispier manner of Signorelli.  Admirable in any case.
Lunch with Moravia and N. at Tivoli, and a long afternoon  in Hadrian's
Villa, the perfect  location.  Superb  day, it's true, free of clouds  and with a
round  sky  whose  sections  disperse  an  even  amount  of  light  on  the
magnificent  cypresses and the tall pines of the villa. Its sections  of tall,
ruined  wall receive  this even light on their honeycomb  sheathing and in
turn let escape  secretions  of honeyed light from their cement  hives. Here,
I can better see the difference  between  Roman  light and others,  that of
Florence  for example,  more diffuse, silvery, spiritual,  in short. Rome's
light, on the contrary , is round,  gleaming,  and supple.  It makes one think

of  bodies,  with  the  opulence  of  felicitous  flesh,  the  successful  life.
Backgrounds  even more succulent.  Birdsong  among  the ruins. In the face
of this curious and happy perfection, the feeling that all is said.
Dinner, Piovene.1  At the conclusion  of thirty conversations,  I begin to
get an idea of the true situation  here. Not of opinions  but of factions.  Few
liberals, misery , its purpose, and little by little a certain inertia.
At  forty  years  of  age,  one  no  longer  complains  of  the  bad,  one
recognizes  it and struggles  according  to what one owes. One can then
occupy oneself with creating without for getting anything.
In The Last Judgment's moveme nt of ascension,  on the right side of the
altar, Michelangelo's  bodies had to be heavily  muscled  in order to give the
impression  of irresistible  lightness.  Light yet heavy. This is the intricacy
of art.
In the Bor gia apartments, Pinturicchio's Rhetoric carries a sword.
One's heart aches a little at the thought  that Julius II destroyed  Piero
della Francesca's  (and others)  frescoes  so that Raphael  could paint his
chambers; what have they paid for the superb Liberation of St. Peter?
Caravaggio's  Deposition  from  the  Cross.  The  Cross  is  not  seen;
definitely an exceptional painter .
December  6.
Grey day . Fever. I keep the room. Saw Moravia in the evening.
Novel.
The First Man repeats  the entire journey  in order to discover  his secret:
he is not the first. Every man is the first man, nobody  is. This is why he
throws himself at his mother's feet.

December  7.
Departing  with Nicola  and Francesco.  The Roman  countryside.  F. is so
beautiful  and so removed  from everything  without  ceasing  to be present
and human. The village  of Circe.2  Arrival  in Naples. Lunch in Pozzuoli at
a restaurant that is Padovani's  twin. It is pouring  rain in Naples, which
increases my fever . In the evening the sky clears.
December  8.
I awaken  with a serious  fever. Last night I could not finish these notes.
Despite  that, a long walk in the "Barrios"  behind  the rue Santa Lucia.
These are the slums behind  the Champs-Elysees.  The door is open and
one sees three children  in the same bed, occasionally  with their father, not
at all embarrassed  to let themselves  be exposed.  All of this flapping linen
gives Naples an air of perpetual  festivity  that comes,  after all, from what
the linen lacks and from the need to wash it day after day. These are the
flags of misery. N.F. tonight.  Then we leave in a damp carriage  that smells
of leather and dung. The friendships  of men always  taste good. N. takes
us to a neighborhood  in Porta Capuana.  Main street climbs  upward.  On
every balcony lamps are posed with their lampshades,  and this gives to
that misery  an extraordinarily  festive  air. There is a kind of procession  in
front of the church.  Flags wave above the packed  crowd that tramples  in
the  thick  mud  of  cabbage  debris  left  by  the  morning  market.  And
especially  the firecrackers  in all the saints' behinds;  the Virgin announces
herself  by  backfiring.  In  one  window,  a  demented  person,  eyes  fixed,
ignites  dozens of firecrackers  with the same mechanical  gestureone  after
the  other-which  he  then  hurls  into  the  crowd  and  around  which  the
children  dance in a ring, like the Sioux,  until they explode.  The hostelry
of the poor . They have outdone themselves.  This is the Escurial of misery .
December  8.

In bed all day with a fever that won't let up. Ultimately  I will not be
able to go to Paestum.  Return  to Rome at the first sign of improvement,
then Paris, that's all. There's  something  between  the Greek temples  and
me: at the last moment  something  always  intervenes  that prevents  me
from going to them.'
Incidentally , this time there is no mystery . This exhausting  year has
brought  me  to  my  knees.  The  hope  of  recovering  my  strength  and
returning  to work was purely  sentimental.  Instead  of running  toward  a
light that I can barely taste, I would do better, after all, to spend a year
rebuilding  my health and willpower . But for that I would  have to free
myself  a little from all that weighs  down on me. Those are the thoughts  of
bed and fever and of a traveler  cloistered  with Naples  surroun ding him.
But they are true thoughts. Fortunately , I see the sea from my bed.
F's  painter  friend,  extremely  ignorant  and  having  to  illustrate  the
Passion  of St. Matthew  for a radio program,  makes a saint surrounded by
pretty women and mocking angels.
I)ereniber 9.
Upon waking,  the fever has disappeared.  But stiff in the joints and
punch-drunk.  However, I decide  to go (as every time, I draw energy from
recognizing  worse  situations:  prisoners,  etc.).  We  leave  in  a  beautiful
sunshine.  Sorrento (and the delectable Cocumella  garden),  Amalfi a little
too decorative  where we lunch, then I drive to relieve  F. who is tired, and
the sun sets when, after having  crossed  an industrial  region  and then a
curious  ground  that makes  me think of Limbo  (large reeds, skeletal  and
bare), we arrive at Paestum. Here the heart falls silent.
(Later.) At the end of the afternoon,  I want to try to relive this arrival.
We are welcomed  at an inn close to the ruins by a nice old room with
three  beds  and  enormous  bleached  walls,  rustic  but  of  unquestionable
cleanliness.  A dog sticks close to me. The sun sets as, the gates being
closed,  we climb the ramparts  to enter the field of ruins. Light still comes

from the quite close blue sea, but the hills that face the sea are already
black. When we arrive before the temple  of Poseidon  the already  sleeping
crows  rise  up  in  an  extraordinary  tumult  of  wings  and  cries,  then  fly
around  the temple,  fall to the four corners  and set out again like a salute to
the  admirable  being  of  stone,  nonetheless  alive  and  unforgettable,
appearing  before our eyes. The hour, the black flight of crows,  the birds'
rare songs, the space between  the sea and the hills, and one retains  these
exact and warm wonders;  all of this in my fatigue  and emotion  puts me a
hair's  breadth  away  from  tears.  Then  the  interminable  rapture,  when
everything falls silent.
Evening,  silence,  crows,  like the birds of Lourmarin  and the cat, my
tears, music.
In  the  morning,  in  Tipasa,  there  is  dew  on  the  ruins.  The  world's
youngest  freshness on what is most ancient.  Therein  lies my faith and, in
my opinion, the principle of art and life.
December  10.
Last night, walk toward  the beach,  among  the reeds, ramparts,  and
buffaloes.  The immense  and muted sound of the sea, which intensifies
little by little. The beach, tepid water under the night's  grey and luminous
sky. On the way back it rains a little and the sound of the sea dies down
behind  us. The buffaloes move gently, lowering  their heads,  still as the
night. Gentleness.
I fall asleep after having  gazed through  my window  at the temples in
the night. The room with the thick and naked walls that I like so much is
freezing  cold. Cold all night. I open my windows;  it is raining  on the
ruins. An hour later, at the time we are to leave, the sky is blue, the light
fresh  and  magnificent.  Endless  amazement  before  this  temple  of
enormous  sponge  pink columns , golden  cork, its ethereal  impression,  its
inexhaustible  presence.  Other birds have mixed  with the crows but the
latter still cover the temple  with a black veil flapping  in all directions,

emitting  raucous  cries. The fresh smell of the small heliotropes,  which
cover the temple's surroundings.
Noises: the sound of water , dogs, a distant  Vespa.
It is not the melancholy  of ruined  things that breaks  the heart, but the
desperate love of what lasts eternally in eternal youth: love of the future.
Still in the ruins between  the hills and the sea. Difficult to pull myself
away from these places,  the first since Tipasa where I have known  an
abandonment of all being.
December  10.
Follow-up.  We  leave,  nevertheless,  and  a  few  hours  later,  Pompeii.
Interested  of  course,  but  never  touched.  The  Romans  are  sometimes
refined,  never civilized.  Lawyers and soldiers  whom  we confuse,  God
knows  why, with the Greeks.  They are the first, the true burglars of the
Greek mind. Alas, conquered  Greece  did not conquer  them in turn. Even
though  they borrowed the themes  and forms of the grand art, they never
understood  the cold approximat ions that they would have been better off
not  making,  such  that  the  Greek  naivete  and  splendor  would  have
appeared  to us without  interme diary. Compared  with Hera of Paestum's
temple,  all the antiquity  that covers  Rome and Italy shatters  to pieces and
with  it  a  comedy  of  false  grandeur .  By  instinct,  my  heart  has  always
known  this, my heart which has never beaten for a single Latin poem (not
even Virgil is admired,  nor loved)  and which has always  ached for the
flash of a tragic stanza or lyric hailing from Greece.
Returning  to this precious  Buchenwald  that is Pompeii,  the taste of ash
and fatigue  grows.  We drive, alternating  with F., and at 9:00 P.M. I arrive
in Rome exhausted.
December  11.

Almost  the  entire  day  in  bed.  Continuous  state  of  fever  makes
everything  taste bland to me. Regain health at all cost. I need my strength.
I do not need life to be easy for me but I want to be able to match myself
up to it if it is difficult, being in command  of whether  I want to go where I
am going.  Will leave  Tuesday.
December  12
A  newspaper  falls  into  my  hands.  The  Parisian  comedy  that  I  had
forgotten.  The joke of Goncour t. This time, The Mandarins.4  It appears
that I am the hero. In fact, the author has taken a situation  (the director  of
a  newspaper  originally  from  the  Resistance)  and  all  the  rest  is  false:
thoughts,  feelings, and actions.  Better:  the questionable  acts of Sartre's
life  are  liberally  heaped  on  my  back.  Garbage  anyway .  But  not
intentionally , just sort of as one breathes.
Improved  state. Grey day. It rains on Rome whose wellwashed  cupolas
sparkle slightly . Lunch at F .G. Evening, alone, fever past.
December  13.
More Caravaggio.  Santa Maria del Popolo.  Rome's  sadness  is also with
its streets,  which are too high and too tight. This is why places there are so
beautiful:  they deliver;  the baroque  then triumphs  over the Roman.  Like
its Roman  couples  frozen  in stone who have nothing  in common  except
that they stand very straight.  The twilight  hour that slips into the palace
and  collapses  the  proud  facade.  In  the  evening  M.  talks  to  me  about
Brancati5  and his death. Dinner alone.
December  14. Departur e.
Existentialism.  When they accuse  themselves  one can be sure that it is
always to crush others. Judge-penitents.6

With  Luke  true  treason  begins,  causing  the  disappearance  of  Jesus'
desperate dying cries.
M., to whom I say that there are certain  roles that ask of the actor only
virtuosity  and  in  which  the  actor  can  experience  his  metier  and  his
mastery , tells me that this does not interest  her, that she does not like to
play characters  she cannot  marry and live and feel herself  then living
another  life through.  And she concludes:  "I like to perform  because  I am
romantic."
Morals. Not to take what one does not desire (dif ficult).?
I have always  hoped to become  better. I have always  decided  to do
whatever  is  necessary  to  this  end. Whether  I  have  actually  done  it  is
another question.
For me, was marriage  not a more civilized  sensual  adventure?  It was
that.
If I bloom, she wilts. She cannot  live without  leaning  on my blossom.
Thus, we are two opposing poles of psychology .
The opposite  of the subterranean  man: the man without  resentment.  But
the catastrophe is the same.
This world wiggles quite a bit because,  like a cut worm,  it has lost its
head. It searches for its aristocrats.
La Martiniere, the white boat that transported  the prisoners  to Cayenne-
and  made  a  stopover  in  Algiers  to  load  new  cargo  on  board  (my
reportage"  on  a  day  of  pouring  rain-the   boat  covered  with  shaven
convicts-the  interior, two cages, etc. - The same trip that I made but in a
comfortable cabin) -  A story?
The First Man. Ambition  made him laugh. He did not want to have, he
did not want to possess, he wanted to be. For that only obstinacy .

From the moment  the private  life is thrown  on display, explained  to so
many people, it becomes  the public life, and it is vain to hope to maintain
it.
This life (empty) of cities and unbearable days without love.
For ten years it is what has interested  me more than anything  else in the
world.
The First Mau. "And thinking  of all that he had done without really
wanting  to, that others had wanted-or , more simply, because  in similar
circumstances  others had done things this way-all  of which nonetheless
accumulated  in the end to form a life, the one he shared with all men who
ultimately  die  without  having  known  how  to  live  the  life  they  really
wanted to live."
The  First  Mail.  Theme  of  energy.  "I  will  conquer ,  but  without
compromising.  Compromise,  hypocrisy , base desire of power, all of that is
too  easy.  But  I  will  truly  dominate,  without  making  a  movement  to
possess or to have."
The only law of being is to be and to transcend oneself.
.Ionas.  The  concier ge  beside  herself  (her  son  died):  "Ah!  Monsieur
Jonas,  you  understand,  don't  you!"  and  then  immediately  afterward:
"Don't go see Monsieur Jonas, he beats his wife and children."
The First Matt.  Theme of friendship.
M., without much culture  and entering  full-on  into the masterworks.
Incapable  of  dawdling  with  mediocrity ,  even  out  of  laziness,  and
discerning greatness by instinct.
The  First  Man. Theme  of  anguish.  (cf.  Connaissance  de  l'homme.`'
Adler p. 156). Character  motivation:  desire for power, psychologically
speaking.

Don Faust (or Doctor  Tenorio):  "I never asked anything  for what I
gave, I never spoke of what I did, I considered  myself  too small for never
having  given quite enough,  and I thought  mainly  of all that I'd never
given. But today I need the little that I've done; I need those who are here.
Those to whom I've never refused  my hand nor my help, they who speak
and testify in my favor. All are silent. Then it is I who will speak. This one
. . ." (rebellious text).
First Man. With Simone.  For one year, he cannot  take it. And then
avoidance. She cries and this triggers everything.
Everything  comes from my congenital  inability  to be bourgeois and a
contented  bourgeois.  The  smallest  appearance  of  stability  in  my  life
terrifies me.
In the end, my greatest  advantage  over the disingenuous  is that I am
not afraid to die. I hold horror and distaste  for death, but I am not afraid to
die.
Treason  of the left-wing  intellectuals.  If their true goal is to preserve
the u.s.s.i .'s revolutionary  principles  while progressively  correcting  its
perversions,  what reason would the Russian  government  have to renounce
its totalitarian methods  if it knows in advance  that they will always  be
excused?  In truth, only the frank opposition  of the West's leftists  can make
this government  reconsider , assuming  it can or wants to. But in truth our
intellectuals' treason is still explained by something other than stupidity .
Why weakness  in the face of pleasure would be guiltier  than weakness
in the face of pain. Weakness  is sometimes  responsible  for incomparable
devastation.
Don Faust. 1st scene or prologue  - Faust asks to know all and have all.
"Thus,  I will give you seduction,"  the devil says. And Faust becomes Don
Juan.
Last scene. He has to pay. "Let's go." No, the devil says, he must come
against  his  will,  otherwise  he  dies  simply.  "Die  simply  then"  (here  a

chorus of men welcome the hero among them - Better late than never).
Russia  and the communists'  insular  complex  (Cf. Adler: Connaissance
de l'homme, p. 154).
In N.R.F.: dialogues  (answers,  questions)  or an imaginary  letter'  out of
Actuelles.
Novel.  "This evening  did not go well-at  the concert  he applauded  after
the third movement  thinking  that the symphony  was finished.  But the
vigorous  and  reproachful  hush  taught  him  that  there  were  four
movements.  And the looks of his neighbors,  heavy with recent ecstasy  and
sudden scorn, still pursued him."
One of the short stories in the French style (Jonas).
Flooding  of the Seine. During  the night, a noise from the river, never
heard.
Don Juan. The atheistic  moralist  finds faith. Consequently  everything
is allowed since someone  can absolve  what men cannot  pardon.  Hence,
generous libertinism crowned with vibrant faith.
The taste of creation  is so strong  that those who are incapab le of it
choose  Communism,  which  assures  them  of  an  entirely  collective
creation.
Theatre.  Timon - Possessed - Julie - Impromptu - Press - Bacchantes.
Dante allows  neutral  angels in the quarrel  between  Satan and God. He
slips them into the vestibule of his hell.'  11137.3
February 17.
Arrival  in Algiers.  From above, in a plane that runs parallel  to the
coast, the city looks like a handful of glittering  stones thrown  along the

sea. The Hotel St. Georges' garden.  O welcoming  night toward which I
finally return and which faithfully receives me as in days gone by .
February 18.
Beauty  of Algiers  in  the  morning.  Jasmine  in  St.  Georges'  garden.
Inhaling  the scent fills me with joy, with youth. Descent  on the city, cool,
airy. The glittering sea from afar . Happiness.
Francois'  death, crippled.  Sent back home from the clinic with tongue
cancer. Dying  alone in his hovel,  vomiting  blood all over the wall, he
slams his fist against  the thick and soiled wall separating  him from the
neighbors.
19.
In my home, not even one sofa. A handful  of chairs.  Always  like this.
Never neglect nor comfort.
Visit  with  Belcourt's  merchants.  3  dead.  The  Massons.  Marthe.
Alexandrine.  Juliette.  Zinzin (prominent  ears, contortionist,  sings with the
Alcazar cinema).
First Man.
In what year was Papa born`?
I don't know . I was four years older than he.
And you in what year?
I don't know . Look at my family record book.
Well, his family  abandoned  him. At what age'? - I don't know. Oh! he
was young.  His sister left him. How old was his sister?  I don't know. -
And his brothers?  He was the youngest-no,  the second.  - But then his

brothers  were too young to take care of him. - Yes, that must be why. -
Then, they couldn't have done otherwise.
At age sixteen,  a farm laborer's  apprentice  for his sister's  in-laws. They
work him hard.
"He no longer wanted to see them. He'd had enough."
Id. He fights for the Arab cause. He is caught  with his wife in an anti-
French  riot. He kills her to prevent her from being raped, but he survives.
He is judged and condemned.
Or else: I fought  20 years for them, and the day of their liberation  they
killed my mother .
Id.  X.'s  suicide.  St.  Germain-des-Pres.  Friends  of  Mephisto.4
Marinella.  Intoxication.  Jean-Pierre  insults  X.:  "You  succeed  in
everything.  You make me sick."
20.
Tipasa.  Rain  and  sunshine.  The  wormwoods  soaked  in  water. And
streaming light, cool on the damp ruins. Same emotion, always new .
How lucky to be born into the world on the hills of Tipasa and not at St
Etienne or Roubaix.  To know my luck and receive it with gratitude.
21.
Radiant  day.  In  the  distance  the  sea  and  sky  glitter,  evenly  mixed
together . As every morning,  the garden  and the scent of jasmine,  today the
birds exult.
February 22.

Fog.
February 23.
Awakened  by  the  sun  floodin g  my  bed.  A  day  like  a  crystal  cup
overflowing with an uninterrupted blue and gold light.
February 24.
Orleansville.5  In the morning,  the mountains  carved  out in a delicate
cyclamen  petal. In Orleansville  itself, shanties  and reconstructio n: the Far
West. The young  team of architects escapes  despondency  because  they
can see this city in the future.
February 25.
R.IT.A.Ii  The happiness of this simple friendship that I have lived.
February 26.
When the old queen has given birth to the young queens,  they kill her
or drive her out.  And on the edge of the hive she dies of hunger .
This ridiculous  parade  of love and its abominable  demands,  thanks  to
which the weak and vulgar help each other to live and to appear .
April 26.
Departure  from Paris.7  Heartbroken  and emptied  of any joy by X. The
Alps. And the islands that come one by one to meet us on the sea: Corsica,
Sardinia,  in the distance  Elba and Calabria.  Cephalonia  and Ithaca are
almost  invisible   in  the  twilight.  Then  the  Greek  coast,  but  at  night,
Peloponnesus's  muscular  hand becomes  a dark and mysterious  continent,

covered  with snowdrop,  where here and there the snow-covered  peaks
shine. A few stars in the still illuminated  sky and then a crescent moon.
Athens.
27.
Awakening,  wind, clouds,  and sun. Some errands.  My charming  21-
year-old translat or, with a youthful  glow (I told you I was close to the
hotel but that was not true, and I ran the whole way so as not. to be late,
which is why I am out of breath), who wins me over and whom I adopt.
Acropolis.  The wind has cleared  all the clouds,  and the whitest,  most
natural  light falls from the sky. All morning,  the strange  feeling of having
been  here  for  years,  moreover ,  of  being  at  home,  without  even  being
bothered  by the language  differences.  While climbing  the Acropolis,  this
impression  increases when I notice that I go there "as a neighbo r" without
an emotion.
Up there it's another thing. Over the temples  and the ground stone,
which the wind seems to have also stripped  to the bone, the eleven  o'
clock  light  falls  fully,  bounces,  shatters  into  thousands  of  white  and
searing  swords.  The  light  digs  into  the  eyes,  causes  them  to  well  up,
enters the body with a painful  speed, empties  it, opens it to a sort of full
physical violation, cleanses it at the same time.
Helped  by habit, the eyes open little by little and the extravagant  (yes,
it's what strikes  me there, the extraordinary  audacity  of this classicism)
beauty  of the place is received  in a purified  being, cleaned  with the light's
cresol.
Then the dark red poppies  I have never seen before,  one of which
grows directly  on a bare stone, alone, the [...],8  the mauves,  and marked
by the perfect  vantage point, space all the way to the sea. And the face of
the second Kore statue on the Erechtheion, the bent leg of the third ...

Here one fights against  the idea that perfection  was reached  then and
that the world has not. ceased  to decline  since. But this idea ends up
crushing  the heart. It is again, and always,  necessary  to fight against  it.
We want to live and to believe that is to die.
Afternoon, Hymettus, a violet color . Penteli.
7 p.m. Lecture. Dinner at a taverna in the old quarter .
28.
Morning.  With  Margarita  Liberaki.9  Daphni.  But  Byzantium,
definitely .... The place is charming. In Eleusis  one must have a lot of
imagination.  But the fields before and after Eleusis  are quite beautiful.  In
the temple, two paths lead to the sanctuary  and the second  is deviated
such that everything is out of the view of the uninitiated.
Vital importance of what I know of Eleusis.  To develop.
Admirable pieces at the museum.
Lunch at the embassy . Tiempo perdido.'
Afternoon.  Agora.  Theseion.  Areopagus;  in Agora's  small  museum,
statues  of  Herakleion,  Athena,  Hercules.  Hercules  is  knotty  and  hard
beneath  the flowery  honeysuckle s that cover him. Then I go up on the Hill
of the Muses.  The sun, low on the horizon,  is not yet the red color that
will draw it perfectly  in the clear sky. But it is no longer intense: it wanes
and loses its form. Then from its broken  circumference  escapes a subtle
honey that, spreads  throughout  the sky, gilds the hills and the Acropolis,
and covers the scattered  city blocks with a soft and unique  splendor which
reaches out to the four corners of the horizon, all the way to the sea.
I return just in time for my controversial  lecture.  After two hours of
answering  questions,  I leave fatigued.  Dinner  in Piraeus  with Margarita

Liberaki.  Curious being: secretive  and grim with sudden  bursts of life and
laughter .
29.
Morning.  National Museum.  It contains  all the world's  beauty. I knew
the Kore statues  were going to touch me, but the wonderment  with which
they've  left me lasts still. I am allowed  to visit the cellars  where they kept
some  of  them  during  the  war  to  protect  them  from  the  invasion  and
destruction.  And there, in the cellar where history  has thrown  them, they
still smile under the dust and straw that covers  them, and this smile, over
twenty-five  centuries,  still  warms,  informs,  and  encourages.   Funerary
steles,  too,  and  repressed  grief.  On  a  black  and  white  lekythos,  the
inconsolable  dead cannot  resign themselves  to never seeing  the sun and
sea again. I leave unhappy and a little drunk with this perfection.
Then I leave for Sounion.  The midday  light is still slightly  shrouded,
carrying  an invisible  mist in the air, but I admire  the space and vastness  of
these landscapes,  however  reduced. As we approach  Sounion  the light
becomes  fresh and youthful.  Then on the cape, at the foot of the temple,
there is nothing  but wind. The temple itself leaves me cold. This marble,
too white, has the appearance  of stucco.  But the promontory-where  it rises
and moves into the sea like a poop deck from which one controls the
squadron  of offshore islands,  while in back, on the right and left, the sea
foams along the flanks of sand and rocks-this  is an indescribable  place.
The  furious  wind  whistles  so  strongly  in  the  columns  that  one  would
believe  oneself to be in a lively forest. It swirls the blue air, sucks up the
fresh sea wind, violently  blends with the fragrance  rising from the hill
covered  in miniscule  fresh flowers, and furiously , without  truce, snaps
woven  blue cloths of air and light around  us. Sat at the foot of the temple
to shelter  ourselves  from the wind; the light immediately  cleared  in a sort
of immobile  gush. The islands  drift in the distance.  Not a single bird. The
sea foams softly all the way to the horizon. Perfect moment.

Perfect,  except  for this island across from Makronisos,2  empty today
it's true, but it was once a deportation  island of which I'm told terrible
tales.
All the way at the bottom,  on the small beach, we have a lunch of fish
and cheese  in front of the large fishing  boats in the small port. Toward the
middle  of the afternoon,  the colors darken,  the islands  solidify , the skies
lighten.  This is the perfect  moment of light, of abandon,  where All is well.
But because  of my lecture,  I must leave. I tear myself  from these places
with sadness and I never leave them completely .
But  on  the  promontory  again,  before  taking  to  the  road,  one  sees
Makronisos.  Throughout  the entire trip back, the most beautiful  light that
I have had here, over the fields of olive trees, fig trees with particularly
green leaves, rare cypresses and eucalypti.
Lecture.  Dinner where  I obtain information  on the deportation.  The
figures  seem to agree. The number  of deportees  was reduced  to 8 or 900.
It is with this that I should be occupied.
30.
National  Museum.  Again I go to see the large and lean Kouros  statues.
Repetition  of Hecuba.  Except  one, these young Greek girls lack grace and
style. Dinner  in Kifissia;  beneath the soft light the garden  resonates  with
the nightingales' song.
Afternoon.  Work, then the Hill of the Muses.  This time the sun is close
to setting. Again a sort of hilarious joy before the  extraordinary  audacity
of  the  Acropolis,  where  the  architects  played  not  with  harmonious
measures  but with the extraord inary extravagance  of the capes,  of the
islands  thrown  on the immense  gulf, and of a vast, swirling,  conch-shell
sky. It is not the Parthenon  that they built but the space itself, and with a
delirious  view. Over this entire squadron  of islands  and peaks, dominated
by the rock's poop deck, the appeasement  of night falls suddenly and [. .
.]`;  on a noiseless navigation.

Inserted Letter .
My dear X.
My current  silence  interests  only me. It touches  too many parts of my
personal  life  for  me  to  explain  it  to  you.  Nonetheless,  you  will  be
delighted  to know that if I had spoken  I wouldn't  have said what you hope
for, I wouldn't  have given that pleasure  to anyone.  Besides,  the cause that
interests  you does not lack appointed lawyers  (I recognize,  moreover , that
they have not been very vigorous  in the circumstance).  But your letter
pushes  me to say one thing that I've wanted  to say to you for a long time
now. Namely that in the grand conflict  that cuts the XXth century  in two,
you have already chosen.
For example, you know that East Germany  has been rearmed  for a long
time and that a certain  number  of old Nazi generals  are active there, just
like  in  the  West.  On  several  occasions  the  U.S.S.R.  has  recognized
Germany's  right to have national forces.  You say nothing  of this. It is
because  you accept this rearmament  if it is controlled  by the U.S.S.R.,  but
you  refuse  it  within  a  Western  framework.  And  it  is  like  this  with
everything.  In  extreme  cases  (ask  yourself),  you  would  accept  the
transformation  of France  into a popular  democracy  under the Red Army's
protection  (and I remind  you that I defended-me-the  communists  against
all "atlantization " of domestic  policy). Every time that you spoke or wrote
to  me  of  these  problems,  your  implicit  opinion  was  obvious,  your
indignation  only sincere  in the face of Rosenber g-type  crimes,'  but as
soon as it was about the repression  of a worker's  rebellion  in Germany ,
courtesy  of a communist  regime, this created  a sort of silence  in you,
filled with doubts  (this last point is important  and it seems to me a painful
but decisive test of left-wing intellectuals).
Thus, in my opinion,  you have chosen.  And since you have chosen, it is
normal  that you enter the Communist Party. It is not I who will reproach
you  for  it.  I  don't  have  contem pt  for  communist  activists,  although  I
believe  them to be making  it fatal error. I have an excess  of contempt for
the intellectuals  who are not really intellectuals,  who murder  us with their

pseudo-ripping  of  secular  priests,  and  who,  finally,  give  themselves  a
clear conscience at the expense of the working activists.
Then, once and for all, do what you wish to dostraighten  yourself  out
with  yourself.  You'll  see  then. You  constantly  compare  two  things  of
which you only know and judge one-the  society  in which we live-and  you
ignore  the other. The Communi st Party will not help you know popular
democracy . Far from it. But it will help you know Communism,  of which
you know very little. If you find peace there, a rule of life, this will be all
for  the  better.  If  not,  at  least  you  will  have  found  there  a  true
understanding of the question.
Solely  to  avoid  any  error,  I  repeat  to  you  what  I  believe.  German
rearmament  must be condemned  in both cases, otherwise  everything  is a
deception.  And if I continue  to find helping  Franco  or the "fruit-bearing"
policy in South America  or colonialism  inexcusable,  I do not accept  the
fruitbearing  policy  grafted  on  France  courtesy  of  Russia  and  its
unconditional  supporter:  the  French  Communist  Party.  In  general,  I
remain  fundamentally  opposed  to the initiatives  and methods  of what I've
called Caesarian socialism.
Besides,  these are things that you know. My books have simply  meant
much less to you than you say. Your sympathy  for me was more real. But
the one who enters into religion,  he also loved his friends  and his mother,
and yet he abandons them. For I cannot  let you believe  then that you are
not entering  a church the second  you choose  an orthodoxy  like that of the
Communist  Party. Do not doubt,  but on the contrary , recognize  in your
heart that communist temptation  is, for an intellectual,  of the same nature
as religious  temptation.  There is nothing  shameful  in it, provide d that one
loyally  submits  with full knowledge  of the facts. As for me, you maintain,
even from afar, my friendship.  I only ask that if you take action on your
project,  when you hear that I am, objectively , as one says, a dreadful
fascist,  don't deny it, which will be impossible,  but, try not to think it.
Good  luck,  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  and  believe  in  my  faithful
thoughts.

The popular evening  dances  at "Johnny  le fou.  I make an effort to find
these dances  interesting  but the dancers,  particularly  the female  dancers,
are too unattractive.
May 1.
Early  morning  departure  for Argolid. The  Corinthian  Gulf  coast. A
shimmering  light, ethereal  and jubilant,  inun dates the gulf and offshore
islands.  Stopped  a  moment  at  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  the  sea's  entire
immensity  ahead of us, offered in a single bend, like a caesura  where we
drink the light and air , in long gulps.
After an hour on the road I am literally  drunk with light, head full of
flashes  and  silent  cries;  within  the  heart's  den,  an  enormous  joy,  an
interminable  laughter ,  that  of  knowledge,  after  which  anything  can
happen  and everything  is accepted. Descent  on Mycenae  and Argos. The
Mycenaean  fortress  is  covered  with  thick  bunches  of  poppies,  which
tremble  beneath  the wind above the royal tombs.  (Every  part of Greece  I
have  traveled  through  is  at  this  moment  covered  with  poppies  and
thousands  of flowers.)  Above  the fortress,  the plain stretches  up to Argos
and the sea. Agamemnon's  kingdom  is no bigger than ten kilometers and
yet the proportions  are such that never has a more immense  kingdom
extended  under the sun. Mycenae-sunk  between  its two high boulders,
surrounded  by enormous  blocks,  beneath  a light that become s frightful
here-is today the savage queen of this unfor gettable land.
The  ruins  of  Argos  are  without  much  interest  for  me.  The  young
archaeologist,  Georges Roux, Vauclusian,  so alive, so impassioned  by his
beautiful  trade, he interests  me quite a bit. I envy him a little and bitterly
reproach  myself  for  the  wasted  time  of  these  last  years  and  for  my
profound  failure. We lunch in Asini, and before  the lunch I swim in a
crystalline and cold water on the beautiful beach.
In  the  afternoon,  in  Epidaurus,  the  May  1st  festival  has  brought  a
kermis  of joyous  Greeks.  But from above the theatre,  in a thick and tepid

light that spills over the slopes of olive trees, eucalypti,  [... ]'~  and acacias,
every sound resonates  in a sort of vast and gentle disaffection. Only the
weak bells of sheep herds make themselves  heard above the other sounds,
but always with the same disaf fection. Here, the hour is still perfect.
Soiree.  Nafplion  before the sea, at this hour, which the Greeks  call the
royalty  of the sun and which is the hour of crimson  in the sky, of mauves
and blues deposited on the mountains and bays.
May 2.
Depart  for Sparta in the morning beneath  a formidable  sky. Each wide
valley constitute s a kingdom  of olive trees and majestic  cypresses, and
mountains,  every so often a village-Greece  is deserted  here-only  the pink,
green, and red painted herds of sheep travel it. Over the plain of Evro- tas,
Sparta,  beneath  the snowy  Taygetus, stretches  its fields of orange trees,
their abundant perfume  no longer  leaving  us. Over the ruins of Mystras,
flights  of  turtledoves.  A  tranquil  monastery  with  whitewashed  walls,
opened  over  the  immense  plain  of  Laconia  to  the  well-rou nded  and
wellseparated olive trees, shivering beneath a tireless sun.
Upon returning,  the descent  on Nafplion,  its gulf, the islands  and the
mountains,  in the distance.  Stop in Argos with the young archaeologists
doing the excavations.  Same impression  as in front of the small group of
architects  who rebuild  Orleansv ille and live there in a community . I have
only been happy and at peace in a trade, a job accomplished  with other
men whom I can like. I do not have a trade, but only a vocation.  And my
work is solitary . I must accept it and try only to be worthy  of it, which is
not the case at this moment.  But I cannot  protect  myself  from a feeling  of
melancholy  in the presence  of these men who are happy with what they
do.
We return to Mycenae; the sun has just gone down at the moment  we
reach the highest  terrace.  Between  the steep peaks which dominate  it, a
transparent  moon  softly  sails.  But  across  from  us,  the  darkened  plain

extends  from the foot of the Blue Mountains  of Argos all the way to the
brighter  sea on our right. The space is immense,  the silence  so absolute
that the foot regrets  having  caused a stone to roll. A train chuffs in the
distance,  on the plain a donkey  brays and the sound rises up to us, the
herds' bells rush down the slopes like a whisper  of water. On this wild and
tender  setting  [...1-  is magnificent.  Over the now blooming  poppies,  a
light wind passes very close to the ground.  The most beautiful  evening  in
the world sets little by little over the Mycenaean  lions. The mountains
darken  little by little until the ten chains,  which are reflected  all the way to
the horizon,  become  a single blue vapor. It was worth the grief of coming
from so far to receive  this grand bit of eternity . After this, the rest is no
longer important.
May .3.
Work in the morning.  Depart  for Delphi  at one P.m. Always  the same
light but this time over less considerable  heights,  stony, without  a tree. It's
at this point that one realizes  Greece  is primarily  a space made of curved
or straight lines, but always  sharply contoured.  The entire earth outlines
the sky and gives it its form, but the sky in turn would be nothing without
these reliefs whose  harmonious  closure  organizes  its own space. This is
why  every  mile  has  divided  this  place  into  the  grand  kingdoms:  the
surface  of the earth is double  that of the sky. Arrive  in a sort of basin, a
single cloud that we watched  swell for some time now bursts and blusters
in only seconds . Solid hailstones  pound the car with a deafening  sound.
Five minutes  later, out of the basin, we once again find the sky clear and
carry on cheerfully .
Delphi.  Initially , most striking  about the grandeur  of the site is, at the
bottom  of the immense  valley, this murky  green river which pushes  its
muscular  hindquarters [...]8  toward  the sea. The olive trees are packed  so
tightly  one against  the other that seeing them from this height,  they make
only one quivering path toward  the horizon.  As for the ruins, the storm,
which has also fallen on Delphi,  has wet them. They appear  more alive in
the middle of the more vivacious  flowers  and greener  grasses. A black

eagle sails very high for a few seconds  and disappears.  Then the day
lightens  and from the high cliffs a tranquility  that announces  the night
begins to fall. Return to the stadium from which I leave happy .
Evening.  In a bouzoukia,`'  four Greeks  kindly invite me to dance.  But
their steps are too difficult. If I had the time for it, I would like to learn.
From my room, the valley fills with shadows  all the way to the small
strand  of  lights  that  border  the  sea.  Surrounded  by  filmy  scarves,  the
moon  places  a  fine,  powdery   light  over  the  mountains  and  shaded
hollows.  The silence, vast as space, is good.
May 4.
Depart  in the morning  for Volos. Rough  mountains,  then the plain of
Lamia.  More mountains,  softer, greener  beneath  the rising sun-and  this is
the  immense  plain  of  Thessaly .  The  Vlachs'  primitive  huts-and  the
immense  expanse.  The East is not far. Volos. 80% of the houses  have been
destroyed  or knocked  down. The entire city is under tents. The sun weighs
on the cloths and the dusty city. Few or no bathrooms.  I wonder  how they
avoid epidemics.  French  lycee under the tents. And the sea quite close,
slick and cool, at the edge of the ruined city. The mayor receives  me in the
courtyard  near the ruined house.  Intelligent  and elegant  character . Due to
an offhand remark,  a hairdresser  arrives  and cuts my hair in the courtyard,
in front of everyone, with the most charming  familiarity . Still in the city.
The Mass celebrated  outside,  the hospital  tent, etc. Return  to Larissa  by
car. Railcar. Larissa to Salonica.  During  the night we travel parallel  to the
sea glistening beneath the moon.  Arrival 1 1:00 tttit.
May 5.
Work.  Lunch  with  Turner  and  Colonel  Bramble'  (or  someone  who
strongly  resembles him). Byzantine  churches.  The small convent  with the
peacocks.  St. David,  St. Georges. St. Dimitriu.  The twelve  apostles  (St.
Sophie  of no interest).  I am not, very touched  by Byzantine  artone must
acknowledge  it, though-but  interested in this evolution  that goes from the

Vth to the XIIth century  and which makes it possible  to reconsti tute a link
between  the Hellenistic  period  and the Quattrocento.  For example, the
mosaics  and frescos  of the twelve  apostles  are far from the stiffness and
hieraticism  of that art's first centuries.  There one finds the beginnings  of
Duccio.  A little later (in the evening) I question  a specialist  who teaches
me  that  the  Byzantine  artists  emigrated  to  Italy  after  the  fall  of
Constantinople.
Little by little, the Eastern influence will be eliminated in this way .
Evening.  Lecture.  Am touched  by a registered  girl.2  Reception  for the
University  students. During  the night I rest on my room's  balcony, to gaze
at the port, the caiques,  the sea's flowery  quay, and to breathe  the beautiful
scent of salt and the night.
May 6, 7, 8.
Lunch  with T. in front of the sea, atop a cliff. The hour is pleasant.
Afterward,  T. plays me the latest compositions.  I must leave. Plane. The
Sporades  drift off below us in the glittering  sea. Dinner  Merlier .33 At
midnight  D. comes to get me and we leave for Piraeus  where M. Algades
and  his  attractive  cutter  await  us.  Good-natured  man,  delighted  and
cordial.  We leave Piraeus  under an ashen moon that illuminat es the sea
with a hot, irreal light. I am happy to feel the water hitting  the hull and to
see again a light foam slipping  by both sides of the ship's stem. But after a
moment  we see the fog literally  being born from the sea, layer upon layer,
thickening  and, little by little, blocking  the horizon.  It is cold and damp.
Algades  claims  that he has never seen this in the archipelago.  He has to
reroute  the cutter to avoid two small islands.  I go down to lie down.
Impossible  to sleep until six A.M. Two hours later I awaken  and go back
up on the deck. The fog is still there. Algades  and his mariner  kept watch
all night out of fear of running  aground.  But little by little the sun rises,
shows itself, pale, breaks  through the fog and finally  dispels  it. Around
eleven  o'clock we move (without  sails because  there is no wind) on a
motionless  sea in a glittering  and delicate  light. The air is so limpid  it

seems that the least noise could be heard from the far end of the horizon.
The sun warms  the deck and its heat rises little by little. Then the first
island appears.  We pass between Se- riphos  and Sifnos,  because  of the
detour we made. On the horizon , Syros and the other islands  take shape,
all appearing  like a sketch in the sky. On the inverted  hull of the islands,
the small villages  fixed upon the slopes look like shells, pallid concretions
left by the receded sea.
The small yellow islands like bundles of wheat on the blue sea.
We sail in the middle  of these distant  islands  on an illuminated  sea,
which  gently  wrinkles  itself,  runs  parallel  to  Syros  at  length;  soon
Mykonos  appears and as the day advances  it begins  to become  clearer, its
snakehead  that bends toward  Delos still invisible  behind  Rinia. The sun
sets as we find ourselves  nearly in the center of a circle of islands  whose
colors begin to change.  Faded gold, cyclamen,  a mauve-green,  then the
colors darken and on the still glistening  sea the island masses  become  a
dark blue. It is a strange  and vast calming  that then falls on the waters.
Happiness  at last, happiness  close to tears, because  I wish to hold against
me,  to  squeeze ,  this  inexpressible  joy  that,  however ,  I  know  must
disappear . But for so many days it lasts faintly, today it grips my heart so
definitely  that it seems to me I should  be able to regain it faithfully every
time I wish to do so.
Night has fallen when we descend  on Mykonos.  As many churches  as
houses.  All white. We wander  in the small streets where colored  boutiques
open. In the pitch-black  streets we come across the scent of honeysuckle.
The moon shines faintly  above the white terraces.  We climb back aboard
and I lie down so happy that I don't even feel my fatigue.
In the morning  a divine light falls on the bleached  houses  of Mykonos.
We raise the anchor  for Delos.  The sea is beautiful,  crystalline  and pure
above the sea bed of which we already  catch sight. While approaching
Delos, we glimpse enormous  bunches  of poppies  on the first slopes of the
island.

Delos. The island of lions and bulls, representations  of which cover this
island of animals,  but one must add snakes  to it [...]4  and large lizards
with dark bodies, but light green at the tail and head, and the dolphins  of
the mosaics.  The marble  that the lions are made of is eroded  and pitted by
the effects of the erosion,  so much so that they appear  to be made of rock
salt, a little ghostly, they give one the impression  that the first rains will
dissolve  them. But this island of lions and bulls is also covered  with the
brown  and  friable  bones  that  are  the  ruins,  and  beneath  these  bones,
suddenly , admirable and fresh discoveries (mosaics of Dionysus at rest).
The island of ruins and flowers  (poppies,  convolvulus,  wallflowers,
asters)  also. The island of the mutilated  gods of the museum  (little kore
statues).  At noon, climbed  to the top of Cynthe,  and the surround ing gulfs,
the light, the reds and the whites; the entire circle of the Cyclades  turns
slowly  around Delos, on the sparkling  sea, in one movement,  a sort of
motionless  dance. This world of islands  so narrow  and so vast appears  to
me to be the heart of the world.  And at the center of this heart stands
Delos  and  this  peak  where  I  am,  from  where  I  can  look  beneath  the
straight  and pure light of the world,  at the perfect  circle that borders my
kingdom.
Returned  later by rowboat,  a ravishing Greek teenager , dressed  simply
on the quay. When the rowboat  leaves  the quay I wave to her and she
immediately  responds with a beautiful  smile. On the cutter I undress  and
plunge  into the transparent  green water. It is ice cold, and I climb back up
after some strokes.  We return to Mykonos.  Feeling  of infinite  freedom  to
travel the sea like this, in all directions,  from one island to the next. And a
freedom  not  at  all  limited  by  the  fact  that  this  world  of  islands  has
boundaries.  On the contrary , this freedom  exults in its circle.  For me,
freedom  would not be to puncture  this circle and sail toward  Sumatra, but
to go farther  from this bare island to an island of trees, and from the rock
to an island of flowers.
In Mykonos  to shop. I preferred  the city at night. We return to sea late.
Strange  sadness  so similar  to the sadness  of love while watching  Delos
and Cynthe  disappear  little by little behind  Rinia. For the first time I

watch a land that I love disappe aring with the painful  feeling  that perhaps
I will never see it again before (lying. Heartache.  The colors again change
over the sea and islands  [...]5  the sails, which flap softly with a light wind.
Hardly  have we tasted the peace that rises from the sea toward  the sky,
that, empties its light little by little, and already  behind  a rocky isle the
moon rises. It rises rapidly  in the sky, then illuminates  the waters. Until
midnight,  I gaze at it, I listen to the sails, I inwardly  accompany  the
movement  of the water on the sides of the ship. Free life of the sea and the
happiness  of these days. All is forgotten  here and all is remade. These
marvelous  days spent flying on the water, between  islands  covered  with
corollas  and columns,  in a tireless  light; I retain the taste of it in my
mouth, in my heart, a second revelation, a second birth....
In the morning,  head wind, the sails whip, the heel increases  and we
head for Piraeus  with the loud noise of water and fabric.  Rain of light,
drops of which fall and bounce  back on the morning  sea. Despaired  to
leave this archipelago, but this despair itself is good.
May 9.
Depart  for Olympia.  The road to the Gulf of Corinth.  Beaches  and
gulfs. Swim in Xylokastro.  This time it is the intensity  of the trees, the
waters,  the fresh fruits of the earth. A little before  Olympia,  the hills are
covered  with fragile  cypresses.  Gentleness  and tenderness  of these places
beneath  a light that is, for the first time, a little grey. The tall pines and the
remains  of the temples to Zeus and Hera. The birds' cries, the day ending,
the peace that soon rises from the dormant glen.  At night I think of Delos.
May 10.
For the first time, the morning  is grey on the Alpheus  valley, which I
see from my window. But a soft light falls on the stones,  cypresses,  and
green prairies. Since Delos,  I could feel nothing  more than the peace of
these hills, this soft shade, this silence  nourished  by the birds' soft cries.
Museum.  Along  with  the  frescoes  of  Sifnos  in  Delphi,  the  height  of

classical  sculpture.  Next to Apollo  or the three male figures  of the East
Pediment,  or the different Athenas from the metopes,  Praxitele's  Hermes
is a sugary success  that stinks of decadence.  Behind  it, moreover, two
superb,  large-framed  terra  cottas  representing  a  warrior  and  Zeus
removing  Ganymede  are  evidence  of  a  superbly  different  art.  Strange
archaic  bronze  kore statues,  griffins, figurines  that seem to come straight
from the East. Stroll. It. rains lightly, and the tender and washed  colors of
the valley are gentle on the eye. Fascinated  by the diversity  of landscapes.
In fact, everything  that Greece attempts  with landscapes,  it succeeds  at
and leads to perfection.
In the company  of the villager s and their gentle familiarity . Free in
appearance  and movement  even though  political  freedom  does not exist
here.
Brief evening rain. I climb up on the hill through  batches  of aromatic
flowers.  Small village  of Thronia. Miserable  houses.  Children  in tattered
rags although apparently in good health.
May 12.
Cool and bright morning.  The shade beneath  the trees surrounding  the
ruins  is  quite  precious.  The  light.  is  divine.  Swim  and  lunch  in
Xylokastro.  The clear water is not as cold but the air has become  mostly
transparent  and all the mountain s on the other side of the Gulf of Corinth
are  revealed  with  a  strange  purity.  M.  has  a  sumptuous  smile  in  this
landscape.  And like this, the whole route, soon the gulf of Athens,  the
islands,  from which we can make out each house and each tree. I cease
noting  here these pleasures  which from now on overwhelm  me. Chaste
pleasures, sober , strong, like joy itself, and the air that we breathe.
Thisssion.
In the luminous and clear sky the moon's tip like a hawthorn petal.

Evening  at R.D. The honeysuc kles, the bay far off in the night., the
mysterious taste of life.
May 13.
These twenty  days of racing through Greece,  I contemplate  them now
from Athens, before my departure,  and they seem to me like a lone and
lengthy  source  of light that I will be able to keep at the center of my life.
For  me,  Greece  is  no  more  than  a  long  glittering  day  extended  over
voyages,  and also like an enormous island covered  with red flowers and
mutilated  gods endlessly  afloat on a sea of light, beneath  a crystalline sky.
To retain this light, to return,  to no longer give in to the darkness  of days
...
May 14.
Depart  for Aegina.  Calm sea. Hot and blue sky. Small port. Caiques.
Aphaia's  ascension.  The  three  temples  that  suspend  a  blue  triangle  in
space:  Parthenon,  Sounion,  Aphaia.  I sleep on the temple's  flagstones,
beneath  the columns'  shade. Prolonged  dip in a small, tepid cove in Aya
Marina.  On  the  port  in  the  evening  they  sell  large  lilies  whose  scent
suffocates.  Aegina  is  the  island  of  lilies.  Return.  The  sun  goes  down,
disappears  in the clouds,  transforms  itself into a golden  fan and then into a
big wheel with blinding  rays. The islands,  which  I permanently  leave
tonight, again drift away . Stupid desire to cry .
The Variguerez evening and the shadow puppets.
May 15.
Sunday .  Byzantine  museum.  With  the  D.'s  in  Kifissia,  then  on  the
beaches  of Athens.  Stroll by the sea beneath  a nice wind full of light. For
me these are the last hours, the farewell  to this country , which for weeks
has poured the same long joy over us.

May 16.
Depart for Paris, heart aching.
Novel.  He looked  at the sparkling  artillery  shell, blinding  beneath  the
sun, which hid the motor. And again the mysterious  joy threade d through
him,  a  fountain  flowed  blindly  inside  him.  It  was  the  joy  of  Delos,
circular , red and white,  whirling circle.  In an airplane  that was falling
uncontrollably  toward  the  sea,  above  the  appearing  grain,  life  began
again, identical to the approaching death.
The Guest.
The prisoner picks the path to prison,  but Daru had misled  him, he had
pointed out the path to freedom.
Novel.  A conceited  character  who does not complain  under distress,
does not give into anything.
A privileged  person  who, as an adult, discovers  the working  life. What
he gives up little by little. And this is never enough.  Even becoming  a
workman  cannot  change  that he was not born as such. Finally  he must die
for it.
I tried to be a complete  man and bring everything  together  in me. And
then ...
First Man. Francine family . Wolfromm family .
From the whole of genius,  the Romans  only had it in what we call our
armies.
History  is made of blood and courage.  Nothing  to do. When the slave
takes up arms and gives his life, he exercises  his rule as master and he
oppresses.  But when the oppressed, for the first time in the history  of the
world, rules by justice, without  in his turn oppressing,  everythin g will end
and everything will at last begin.

My essay on Grenier .0  Difficult. It's like pulling  logs from a brilliant
flame one by one. And then we find ourselves  in front of the blackened
firebrands.
In Ancient  Greece,  those who wanted  to obtain magistracy  were not to
have conducted any business for at least ten years.
Julia.7  She believes she can live with her two loves. But when Guibert
proposes  she live with him and his two loves also, she cannot  allow him
what she allowed  herself.  But she cannot  judge him. Hence  her social
disease.
Still enough tenderness  to help. . . . This sort of devotion,  however ,
supposes  that conviction  is useful. I have the opposite  impression, and
that is what disarms me.
Fierce suffering and sunshine,  every day. He is cured and adores,  alone,
the blood god."
Moderation  and  insanity .  Moderation  in  her  relations  with  others;
insanity  against  herself;  struggling,  bending.  And  in  both  cases,  both
things at the same time.
Jesus had 300 million contemporaries. He would have 2 billion.
Nothing burns in hell except the self (St Catherine of Genoa).`'
The only French industry  that does not experience  underemploy ment is
cruelty.
First Man. Peace for such a long time. And then one day he agrees to
fight and risk his life. His joy .
In Italian talento means desire.
First Mail. "Many  years later, when, giving  in to various  fatigues, it
happened  that we occasionally  left each other at night with the slight

disillusion  of not having  really loved each other that particula r day, the
small gesture of victory  that she used to make in front of her door while I
was  waiting  at  the  car's  steering  wheel,  waiting  for  her  to  disappear ,
connected  this apparently  lost day to the solid thread of our dogged love,
saving it from any bitterness."
Id. Jessica's  incredible  harshnes s during  breakups.  The loss of love is
the loss of all rights, even though one had them all.
Play. A man appoints himself king today .
Etienne.I  Howls while awakening and when he is alone.
Finally  (if a life is worth a life) the condemned  himself  justifies  the
death sentence. (Cf. Melville finally gives in with Billy Bud.)
Norlernber  6, '56.
Facing  the  constant  threat  of  destruction  through  warthus  the
deprivation  of a future-which  morals  can allow us to live only in the
present? Honor and freedom.
I am of those that Pascal moves deeply and does not convert.
Pascal, the greatest of all, yesterday and today .
First Man.  The friend Saddok.
1) Young militant - My comrade-crisis of '36.
2) Friend - Returns  to the Moslem  tradition  since the other betrayed
him. Marries  according  to his father's volition.  Fears missing  his unknown
wife.
3) Terrorist.

Later a Europea n friend has his wife raped and killed.  The first man
and this friend rush to their weapons,  arrest an accomplice,  torture  him,
then throw themselves in pursuit  of the culprit,  surprise  him, and kill him.
His shame afterward. History is blood.
Id. Resistance  sequence.  He would rather be an R.A.F. hero. Be killed
from afar. And not be subjected  to the presence,  the cruelty, of the enemy.
No, he dreams  of gigantic  battles  in the blazing  sky of the metropolises
and he goes by Metro to dusty or muddy places, from Paris to St. Etienne.
Id. Scene in the Montmartre  Suburbs.  As blows from the S.S.'s pistol
butts approach  in the porte-cochere  and frightened  neighbors  recriminate
against  the  resisters,  he  sees  himself:  contempt  on  his  face.  But  why
scorn?  He gets rid of the plate. When the S.S. have searched  him, he
leaves  with  a  little  shame.  He  discovers  on  himself  a  paper  just  as
compromising.
First Man. Pierre,  militant,  Jean, dilettante.  Pierre is married.  They both
meet  Jessica.  Jean  and  Jessica  since  the  old  mistress.  In  one  of  the
intervals,  she is with Pierre,  whom  she leaves  and hurts, and who will
make  his  wife  suffer. Thus  he  learns,  far  from  meetings,  what  justice
really is. Jean, on the contrary , learns to love Jessica,  and in this way he
opens himself  up to people.  Pierre dies close to Jean (war, Resistance)
who has hated him out of jealousy . And he helps with all his heart. fie is
the man whom she has loved at least a little.
Id. Discovery of love. Fascination M.A.
Giorgione, the musicians'  painter. His subjects  and his fluid paintings,
without  contours,  that elongate,  that feminize  everything,  especially  nien.
Sensual pleasure is never dry .
Venice in August. and the swarms of tourists,  who flock to St Mark's
Square  at the same time as the pigeons,  peck at impressions  and give
themselves vacations and ugliness.

Parma.  And over there, the same thing. Here are these small places that
I loved 20 years ago and that still exist, far from me.
Novel.  Do  not  forget  Italy  and  the  discovery  of  art-and  of  religion
suddenly revealed in its relationship with art.
Each  time  this  peaceful  heart.  And  yet  this  time,  continuously
exhausted,  incapable  of coolness  or emotion.  And yet San Leo'  and the
heart open on a beneficial  silence.  Dear Italy where I will be cured of
everything.  On the way hack, the old smell of dusty pathways.  White
oxen with long Romagna  horns drag squeaking  carts. The scent of sun and
straw.
San Leo-and  this desire of mine to retire there-Make  a list of places
where  I  think  that  I  could  live  and  die. Always  small  cities.  Tipasa.
Djemila.  Cabris. Valdemosa.  Cabrieres  d'Avignon  etc., etc. Return  to San
Leo.
Urbino.  These  small,  well-enclosed  cities,  austere,  quiet,  closed  up
around  their  perfection.  At  the  heart  of  the  heavy  fortifications,  the
indifferent  characters  of  della  Francesca's  "Flagellation"  wait  eternally
before  the  angels  and  the  haughty  Madonna.  Sansepolcro.:l  Christ  is
resurrected.  And here he is rising from the tomb, savage  militant.  Piero
della Francesca' s new frescos.  One must return to the Sansepol cro valley
at the end of a life.  Vast, even, beneath the calm sky , it keeps the secret.
I rediscover the sea, again, tepid and gentle on the muscles.
The weight of St Croix. Madonna del Parto4
At the end of my life I would like to return to the path that runs down
the Sansepolcro  valley, descend  slowly, stroll in the valley between  the
wispy olive trees and the long cypresses,  and in a house with thick walls
and cool rooms find a bare room with narrow  windows  from where I can
watch night descend  upon the valley. I would like to return to the Prato
garden  in Arezzo one evening  and again walk the guard path atop the
fortress,  watch night settling  on this incomparable  earth. I would like . . .

Everywhere  and  always  this  desire  for  solitude,  which  I  don't  even
understand  and which is like an announcement  of a sort of death tinged
with the taste of the contemplation that accompanies it.
Rediscovering  Piazza della Signoria  in Gubbio  and gazing  for a long
time at the rain falling  over the valley. Seeing  Assisi without  tourists  or
Vespas and listening to the harmony of the stars on S. Francesco's  upper
square.  Seeing  Perugia  without  the houses  which are built all around,  and
thus, one cool morning,  able to gaze at the hills' wispy olive trees over the
borders of Porta del Sole.
But especially, especially , repeat on foot, with a backpack,  the route
from Monte  San Savino  to Siena,  to walk alongside  this field of olive
trees and grapes,  whose  scent I smell, by these hills of bluish tuff that
extend  all the way to the horizon,  to then see Siena spring up in the setting
sun with its minarets, like a perfect Constantinople,  to arrive there during
the night, alone and without  money, to sleep near a fountain  and be the
first on the palm-shaped  Campo,  like a hand that offers the greatest  of
what man has made, after Greece.
Yes, I would  like to revisit Arezzo's  sloping  square,  the shell of the
Campo  in Siena, and again eat from the heart of watermelons  on the hot
streets of  Verona.
When I am old I would like to be given the chance  to return to this road
in Siena, which is equaled  by nothing else in the world, and to die there in
a ditch, surrounded  only by the kindness  of these unknown  Italians whom
I love.
August 22, 1955. San Francesco di Siena. 1 1 o'clock in the morning.
At the Siena museum,  one of the many last judgments  (Giovanni di
Paolo).``-'  On the right, two blessed  friends  again find each other amidst  a
group  and  raise  their  arms  to  express  their  joy.  On  the  left,  in  Hell,
Sisyphus and Prometheus, their pain prolonged.

Novel.  Portrait of the scorpion.  He hates the lie and loves the mystery .
Destructive  element.  Because  the necessary  lie consolidates.  And the taste
of mystery leads to inconstancy .
Novel.  Grasshoppers  - Earthqua ke. Attack  on the isolated  farmhouse -
Attack on Philippeville -  Attack on the school -  Typhoon over Nemours.
Sensual,  victorio us, at the heart of a life full of joy and success,  he
gives up, enters into chastity , because  he has surprised  two fifteen-year -
old children discovering love on one another's faces.
He  wanted  to  be  ordinary ,  going  out,  dancing,  having  the  same
conversations  and tastes as everyone  else. But he intimidated  everyone
else. By his demeanor, one imagined  thoughts  and preoccupatio ns that he
did not have or that he had without agreeing to place them on display .
First Man. Obligated  to flee Algeria,  the mother  finishes  her life in
Provence,  in the countryside  bought for her by her son. But she suffers in
exile. Her words:  "It's nice. But there are no Arabs."  It is there that she
dies and that he understands.
Title: The Father and Mother?
October  24, 1955.
Death threats. My curious reaction.
They are united beyond  time. But the years pass and she no longer
dares show herself to him in the naked light of Parisian mornings.
Algiers. January 18.1i
This  anguish  that  I  dragged  through  Paris,  and  which  concerned
Algeria,  has left me. Here at least one is in the struggle,  difficult for those
of us who have put public  opinion against  us. But it is in the struggle,

finally, that I've always  found my peace. The intellectual,  by function,  and
no matter what, he has some, and especially  if he meddles  in public affairs
only by writing  about them, lives like a coward.  He compensates  for this
impotence  with verbal exaggeration.  Only risk justifies  thought.  And then
anything  is better than this France  of resignation  and brutality , this swamp
where I suffocate. Yes, I arose happy, for the first time in months.  I've
recovered the star .
My entire life, through  everything  that France  has endlessly  made of
me, I've tried to connect  with what Spain left in my blood, and what, in
my opinion, was the truth.
January 21.
Threats for this evening and tomorrow .

January 22.
Adoration.  The enigma of the world.
January 27.
First Man. X. declares  that only the C.P. has always  done what was
necessary  for their comrades.  Difference  of the generations.  They have
everything to learn, too.
Every artistic doctrine is an alibi whereby  the artist tries to justify  his
own limits.
St Augustine8  lived in the totalitarian  world:  the late Roman  Empire.
Marrou9  said: "The art of living in times of catastrophe."  Two opposition s
to Christianity  come from the peasants  and the aristocracy . The pride of
belonging  to the Church  of Africa.  Faithful  for 14 years to this woman
who gives him  Adeodatus. St Paul's text makes him a man of the church.
"No more feasts nor orgies, no more sleeping  around  nor debauchery;
cover yourself  with the Lord Jesus Christ and no longer seek to gratify  the
flesh in its concupiscence."
Always  struggle s to defend  his work against  the invasion  of external
occupations. His image of the divine Sun that illuminates our spirit.
"An abundance of words does not go without sin."
Chaste  fear  and  servile  fear.  "You  will  always  be  able  to  enjoy
everything  but  you  will  never  see  my  Face.  Choose."  Nobody  always
wants to enjoy everything.
Those who accuse  the time of being a time of misfortune:  "What  they
want is not so much an era of peace and quiet but rather the security  of
their vices."

XVIIth century , Augustinian century .
Novel.  Portrait  of V.U. She has big strong hands and, at the end of a
thin elegant  body, the feet of a dancer. Everything  is action,  unrestrained
ferocity in the dance where she reveals herself completely .
She celebrates the anniversary  of the day she got her car, puts the dress
that she just bought  at the foot of her bed every evening  so that she can
have the joy of seeing it when she awakens.
She does not express  herself  except  in indefinite  terms. She has to go
pick someone up someplace  so that she can go to another  place where she
has to do something ... etc. Double or triple hidden  lives (cf. X. "I have a
lunch").  "I have impure  thoughts," she says. And, about someone who
does not truly inspire impure thoughts: "It's in the bag."
The men with whom she has had relationships,  they appear  to her to be
of another  race. "Like Zulus,"  she says. "How not to feel compassion
before an intelligent man. Everything  that he knows and sees others put up
with because they don't know or see it." "Women expect  from men all the
happiness  of their life." "Women who don't please are stingy with the only
man whom they have. Only women who please are capable  of generosity ."
"I don't love really young  people,  they're  idiots. A man always  believes
himself  superior  to the woman  whom he ... I accept this sentiment  from an
intelligent  man, not. from a young imbecile."  Her small car. "I cannot  do
with out it; I love it with tenderness for all the freedom  that it gives me."
There  she  keeps  the  old  and  filthy  slippers  that  she  wears  to  drive,
abandoning  her elegant  Louis XV heels. For that matter, she abandons  her
shoes everywher e, cinemas,  restaurants,  etc. Lovely  feet of the dancer that
she  is.  "In  my  neighborhood  there  are  only  grandmas  and  pellagra
sufferers so people notice me."
She arrives at the hotel with her baskets  full of makeup  and toiletries,
her long thin blond hair [...].'
"Let's be frank, fame is an aphrodisiac."

If she became  a billionaire,  more exactly, if she married  Onassis,  she
would macerate  in a gold or platinum  bathtubwhich  would better match
her hair -filled with the perfume of her choosing.
"I love my car more than my mother ." She loves her era.
Her avidity  to laugh. Her determination  to seize everything,  succeed  in
everything,  to  taste  all  of  today's  pleasures:  ski,  sea,  dance,  high  life,
commercial  success.  And clear in this frenzied  desire.  Because  of him. "I
have  defense."  Her  words:  "She  spilled  an  omelet  onto  her  head"
(speaking  about a blond);  "she would wreak havoc in a herd of Jesuits";
"during  her shtick she can do a handstand  or skin the cat, either way she is
applauded."  Since I have a bandage  on my finger, having  cut myself:  "that
makes you look like a clumsy carpenter ."
What I love about V., what makes her attractive:  she sticks to her class,
however  unbearable, which is to say that she has figured  out what she can
give without complication  (develop). V. and marriage.  She will be faithful
if she marries. She will owe that much to the poor guy who ... etc.
One always sees her fresh young lady's petticoat  when she sits down. "I
don't understand  these married  women  who harass their husbands.  They
have money, a father for their children,  security , their old days insured,
and they ask for fidelity  in addition.  They overdo  it." And further:  "In
marriage  the man has everythin g to lose, the woman  everything  to gain,"
etc., etc.
Don Faust and Doctor Juan.''  Leporello. Nothingness.
Id. He makes himself an actor , theatre on theatre.
Id. Faust and the youth of women (cf. Dupuis).
Id. In love, I was not faithful  to her, and I would be in love if she were
unfaithful.
Leporello: Nothingness.

"Is that your new servant?"
"Yes, he is a philosopher . I bought him in Paris."
Id. Nothingness.  There is a regret in you that bothers  me. There is
nothing, I tell you.  This statue, you can invite it, you won't see it coming.
D.F. Are you sure of that? Invite it.
Leporello goes.
D.F. No (he hesitates).  Yes.
Leporello clowns around with the statue.
D.F. decides on chastity , searches  for and finds a chaste  girl. A long
time ago I would have converted.  But I've always  held back out of fear of
what my friends would say .
The old doctor of the prologue  is an atomic  scientist.  He could blow the
world up. But he is not like that; he wants to learn and enjoy .
End. The Franciscans  have locked him up in a monastery .3  He denies
their god and confesses to them.  Adoration of the world being.
The true creator, if tomorrow  he were to find himself  alone, he would
know a depth of solitude  that no era has ever imagined.  He would be alone
to conceive and serve a civilization  that cannot  be born without  everyone's
support.  He would be suspicious  that this civilization  is on its last leg and
that he is one of the last to know .
F.M. He has an answer to everything except decency .
Before  the third stage: short stories for "A Hero of Our Times." Themes
of judgment and exile.'
The third stage is love: the First Man, Don Faust.  The myth of Nemesis.

The method is sincerity .
History , easy to think, difficult to see for all those who are subjected  to
it in the flesh.
The oppressed has no real duty because  he has no rights. Rights  only
return to him with rebellion.  But as soon as he acquires  rights, duty falls
on him without  delay. Thus rebellion,  source  of rights,  is by the same
token mother of duties.  These are the origins  of the aristocracy . And its
history.  He  who  neglects  his  duty  loses  his  rights  and  becomes  the
oppressor  even if he speaks  in the name of the oppressed.  But what is this
duty?
Novel.  A deporte e is forced to strip. While he undresses,  a cufflink rolls
into a corner; he goes to pick it up.
Paris. Spring,  late and sudden.  All the horse chestnut  trees covered  with
their wax candles.
M.: "How could I be jealous  of a person  whom I know will die and slip
away from me forever. My true jealousy  would be to want to die with him
no matter what."
The Growing Stone. The cook - But he's not bad. One's enemy  should
be killed: has he not been?
D'Arras: He has been.
The cook: Here, we kill our enemies,  and afterward  there's  the Good
Jesus.
At  Solidor's;  a  man,  Barbara,  does  his  drag  routine  (as  a  society
woman)  in front of the guests:  his mother, his grandmother , and a young
man who is the son of his current lover . The family is delighted.
July. Palermo.5

Three days of mistral  had brushed,  polished  the sky to its most delicate
base, a thin layer, transparent  and blue, swollen  with a heavy weight  of
gilded water ... and as such, we waited  for it to burst and for a wave of Vin
Jaune to drown the earth beneath an exultant flood.
July 12. Palermo.
About the mistral.  The days are hot and I wait for the mistral  to pick up.
Then I went on the hill that was covered  in aromatic  herbs and minuscule
snail fossils. The mistral  descended  from the north, sweeping  the nearby
mountains,  brushing  the sky to its base, mashing  and cleaning  the trees,
howling  in the countryside,  keeping  animals  and people  in the houses,
prevailing  at  last....  Etc. And  lying  on  the  hill,  crushing  shells,  in  the
violent bath of wind and sun ... the celebration.
A.B. writes to me about Van Eyck's true history. Shortly  after the theft,
a  priest  attached  to  the  chapter  was  suspected.  He  confessed.  He  had
stolen  the  panel  because  he  could  not  stand  to  see  judges  near  the
Adoration  of the Mystic  Lamb. Considering  his intentions,  he receives
absolution  by promising  to reveal the panel's  hiding  place the day of his
death. The day comes.  Extreme  Unction.  He wants to speak, but his voice
fades away . He utters unintelligible words and dies.6
Through  the  years,  what  I  have  always  found  at  the  heart  of  my
sensibility  is the refusal  to disappear  from this world,  from its joys, its
pleasures, its suf ferings, and this refusal has made an artist of me.
Jean asks for fishing  equipment , which I buy for him. Searches  in vain
for  worms.  Then  finds  some.  Goes  fishing.  Catches  six  minnows  and
bursts into tears before their agony . He does not want to fish anymore.
July 22.

The light and full moon above the poplars.  Luberon  nearly white and
naked in the distance.  A light wind on the reeds. Maman  and I gaze at this
marvelous night with the same aching heart.
But she is going to leave and I always fear not seeing her again.
Nemesis.  Thoughts centered  on the history  of those who despise time
the most, its effects, its edifices,  and its civilizations.  History  for them is
what destroys.
End of July .
Nights full of moon and wind.  The large [...]7  of Vaucluse.
It seems that in this country  no party can sustain  the patriotic  effort for
long. So the right gives up in 1940 and then the left sixteen years later .
Stormy  night. This morning  the air is light, the contours  clear. On the
hill flooded  with cool light, a pink carpet  of bindweeds.  The scent of
young cypresses. Do not deny anything anymore!
If you know nothing more than this: I would like to be better .
Music on the South Atlantic  transatlantic  liner. Only music is equal to
the sea.  And certain passages of Shakespeare, of Melville, of [. . .].8
Anecdote  (imaginary ,  I  suppose)  about  Russia:  Stalin  commanded
Krupskaya  to cease all criticism s or else he would appoint  Lenin another
widow.
Novel's  end. Maman.  What was her silence  saying.  What was this mute
and smiling mouth screaming.  We will be resurrected.
Her patience  at the airfield,  in this world of machines  and offices that is
beyond  her, waiting  without  a word, as old women  have for millennia  all
over the world,  waiting  for the world to pass. And then very small, a bit

broken,  on the immense  ground,  toward  the howling  monsters,  holding  her
well-combed hair with one hand ...
If  nothing  will  redeem  our  days  and  our  actions,  then  are  we  not
obliged to elevate them in the greatest possible light?
Novel.  Etienne.   Great,  sensitivity .  The  odor  of  eggs  on  the  plates.
Whence, micro-tragedies.
Paris. Beauty is perfect justice.
Freedom  is not hope for the future.  It is the present  and the harmony  of
people and the world in the present.
The  Revolution   is  good.  But  why?  One  must  have  an  idea  of  the
civilization  that one wishes  to create.  The abolition  of property  is not an
end. It is a means.
At the first snowfall, Tolstoy's  paternal  grandfather  used to send his
dirty Russian linens to Holland  on the sleighs  that returned  a bit before
spring with clean linen.
Tolstoy:  "Political  literature,  reflecting  the  transitory  interests  of
society,  has  its  importance,  yet,  however  necessary  to  the  people's
development,  there still exists another  literature  that, echoes  the eternal
preoccupations  shared  by  all  mankind,  and  which  contains  creations
precious  to the heart of the people,  a literature  accessible  to the man of
any class, of any time, and without  which no vigorous  population  full of
strength has ever developed."
Tolstoy had a bastard child with  Axinia (peasant).
Id. Turgenev reads Fathers and Sons to  Tolstoy who falls asleep.
Id. cf. the countess: "He disgusts  me with his people"  (she has recopied
War and Peace 7 times).
Id. Tolstoy: "The merciless beatings depress me."

Id. "Madness is selfishness."
Id. Shakespeare. "An abomination is a booby trap."
The  Optina  Hermitage  that  attracted  all  the  Russian  writers  was
founded in the XIVth century by a reformed crook.
See Alexandra  Tolstoy:  Tolstoy:  A Life of My Father, p. 302 and above
all for me p. 444.
Tolstoy  speaking  of  the  Russo-Japanese  war:  "In  a  war  with  non-
Christian  people, the Christian  people must be defeated."  Id. in his diary:
"A criminal desire to die." And at the moment  of death: "Alexandra,  do
not lose courage, all is well."
Novel  (end).  She  sets  out  again  for  Algeria  where  the  fighting  is
(because  she wants to die there). They prevent  the son from going into the
waiting  room. He remains  waiting.  At twenty  meters  apart, they gaze at
each other, one at the other, through  three layers of glass, with small signs
from time to time.
The world collapses,  the East is in flames,  people  are torn apart all
around  her, and M. on a deserted beach at the farthest  end of Europe,  in a
howling  wind, racing  the shade of the clouds  on the sand. She is life,
triumphant.
August 1956
C.9  I love this anxious, wounded  little face, tragic at times, beautiful
always;  this little being with attachments  so strong but with a face lit by a
dark and gentle flame, that of purity, of soul. And when she turns her back
on the scene, insulted by her partner, then this slight unhappi ness fades
away, and her frail shoulders.
For the first time in a long time, my heart is touched  by a woman,
without  any desire,  nor intention,  nor game playing,  loving her for her, not

without sadness.
Novel.  After loving  Jessica  for fifteen  years, he meets a young dancer
who has, with slight differences,  the same talents,  the same fire as J. And
something  is born in Jean that resembles  the love that he had for J. As if
he  were  still  capable  of  beginning  again  (and  as  M.H.,  in  the  same
position,  had loved Jessica  without  saying so). But he is old, she is young,
he still loves Jessica  and the love that he had for her. He is silent. Gives
up. Life does not begin again. Hardly  had he discovered,  or believed  to
discover , that he loved her when, terrified,  he decided  never to lay his
hands on her. He would like it if those whom we begin to love could know
us as we were before meeting  them so that they could perceive  what they
have made of us.
Inserted letter .
I am old or I will be. I've spent half of my life as a man defending one
person  at the price of sacrificing  another  and perhaps  a part of myself.
What I've spent twelve  years protecting,  I cannot  throw away for a few
months  or  a  few  years  of  life. The  person  for  whom  I  broke  another
person,  I cannot  break her in turn, like a mischievous  child who mutilates
all his toys one after the other .
I've  always  thought  that  love,  that  any  feeling,  always  ended  up
resembling  what it was at the very second  of its conception.  And what I've
felt before  you is love without  possession,  the heart's  gift. Possession  is
added to love and it has a dimension but not sensual....
It's there that perhaps we could rediscover  a sort of alliance,  a marriage
known only to us, an engagement, an agreement.
Time no longer existed  for me; 10 hours a day in the theatre  basement
beneath  the rehearsal  lamps'  poor, and at the same time intense,  light;
fascinated,  I followed  over this small face which was lit from inside by
another  light, a day of suffering, all the emotions  that the pain of living
can produce  on the human  face. I was there, before what is most profound,

wounded,  solemn,  and  unarme d  in  man. And  when  we  went  out,  the
unpredictable  rains or the gentle September  nights were welcomed  as they
were, an immutable  order, the backdrop  for that which is agitated and
suffered  in  the  hearts  of  men  and  women,  and  which,  alone  for  long
weeks, made me alive and full.
C., novel character . Young Jewish  deportee,  served  at the S.S. camp
(X.'s sister). She returns.  She becomes an actress:  1) because  her capacity
for derision  becomes  spectacul ar; 2) because  this removes  her from the
world;  3) because  she lives all the lives that will be forever  preferable  to
what she has seen and done. And on her face: Belsen  and pity. That is
what they applaud.
Her awkwardness. Burn, stain, lose, etc.
Alone in the car after a long night's  work, Paris deserted,  and the long
rain resounding  over the steel plates above them. On this face lit only by
the gleam of a streetlight  through the windshield,  the shadows  of water
droplets  streame d on the glass, ran without  end. Around  this shadow  they
huddled  in their sheet-metal  house,  and around  them the street, the silent
city, a continent , the world in flames,  and he could not tire of looking  at
this face streaming with shadowy tears.
"Our  gentle,  secret,  solitary  vacations."  He  shook  the  tree  branches
above the walls, and water droplets rained down over his friend's  surprised
face. One by one he drank these droplets  that shone like feverish  and
tender eyes.
Sunday , September  2, 1956.
The slow foundering and her drowned face.'  Birth.
Monday .
Faithful rain.

Tuesday .
Pure donation.  Without asking anything for oneself.
Thursday , 6.
Insurmountable fatigue and finally the confession of love.
I would like to be able to breathe-to be able to love her by memory or
fidelity. But my heart constantly  aches. I love you continuously , intensely .
Her  hand-kissing  hurt  him.  Her  irritating  manner  of  always  leaving
something behind her .
C.'s father-a Jewish  doctor  - Remains  in Paris under the occupation.
Deportee  died in Birkenau.  Typhus.  Crematorium:  "I always  think that he
had gold teeth." Separated  from his wife, violent,  passionate,  seductive.  C.
loved him. Her life starts upon disembarkation at the age of sixteen.
Paris, where sunshine is a luxury, where dying costs an arm and a leg,
where there are no trees without  a bank account.  Paris, which wants to
give lessons to the world.
The theatre  bursts the cities' walls. And these fleabags  who wish to
make the theatres scruf fy, in the cities' image.
At fourteen  years of age, C. escapes  from her house in El Biar during
the night, her sheets tied into a rope.
C. the heart starving for unhappiness. Her fury against her body .
Tragic love and that alone. Tragic happiness.  And when love ceases to
be tragic it is something  else and the individual  again throws  himself  in
search of tragedy .
Industrial  civilization,  by stamping  out natural  beauty, by covering  long
stretches  of  it  with  industrial  waste,  creates  and  fuels  artificial  needs.

Consequently , poverty can no longer be lived and tolerated.
Faust is rejuvenated  in Don Juan.2  The wise and old spirit in a young
body. Explosive combination.
Id. Scene where Don Juan assists with his burial.  Don Faust or the
Knight of the  West.
Dawn.  A fable. The Don Juan of knowledge:  no philosopher , no poet
has discovered  him. He lacks the love of the things that he discovers,  but
he has spirit and sensual  pleasure  and he enjoys  the charms  and intrigues
of  knowledgew hich  he  pursues  up  to  the  highest  and  most  remote
starsuntil  finally there is no knowledge  left for him to chase, except that
which  is  absolutely  painful,  like  the  drunkard  who  ends  up  drinking
absinthe  and aqua fortis. This is why he ends up wanting  hell. It is the last
knowledge  that  seduces  him.  Perhaps  it  will  also  disappoint  him,  like
everything  he knows.  Then he would  have to come to a stop for all of
eternity ,  nailed  to  disillusion,  and  he  himself  would  become  the  stone
guest, desiring  an evening  meal of knowledge,  a meal that he will never
have. For the whole world of creatures  finds not a bite to give to this
hungry mouth.
Intellectuals  for  progress.  They  are  the  dialectician's  knitting  wives.
With every head that falls they rethread  the stitches  of reasonin g torn out
by the facts.
Joanna  the  Mad;;  remained  forty-four  years  in  a  small,  windowless
room-lit  day and night by a lamp-from  which she left only to go to the
neighboring  convent  and to gaze at her husband's  grave. Perhaps  this is
real life.
The businessman  who has had enough  and makes  a clown of himself.
But without leaving his house or his business.  Simply, he dresses  as a
clown.
X.X. After long kisses: "How violent it is!"

Custine4:  "The contradiction  that exists between  a burning  soul and the
uniformity of existence makes my life unbearable."
Id.: "Today so many words are nothing  but a negotiation  between truth
and vanity ."
The two greatest  minds the heavens gave to the RomansLucretius  and
Seneca-committed suicide.
After Nuptials,  Summer . The Festival.  (1 - Soccer;  2 - Tipasa; 3 - Rome
- The Greek Isles -  The Mistral - Bodies - Dance - Eternal morning).
He loses his daughter . I am an old man now. To be young,  one must
have a future.
Massacre  of the innocent  during  Christ's  life. Born guilty, one must die
innocently .5
Reprinting  of Fall, p. 73: "melancholic  surrender ," p. 126 masculine
corporation.
Dr Schnitzler . Several  concentration  camps.  Saved finally  because  he
was likable. Everyone helped him.
X.X. professor:  "Men must love one another ," "they must they must...."
Around him, reality: an indescribable mess.
At times I feel myself  overtake n by an immense  tenderness  for these
people around me who live in the same century .
The Canadian  prostitute  in a cafe near the Folies-  Bergere: "My father
has been around  the world, me too, trust me, I was in Germany , in Algeria,
I've suffered too much, I've nearly starved  to death, I'm lousy now and my
mother  hasn't seen me for two weeks,  my father jumped  on a mine, my
brother  also, in short, I do this for you because  you're a good pal, well, I
wait  for  him,  it's  already  enough  that  I  make  my  family  run  through

money, still going out with that idiot, ah, it's not going well, I don't know
anyone."
N.: power in moderation is the highest power .
M. says: "The race of Christ-and the other ."
Play. A writer (or savant  or artist or actor) overworked  due to social
pressure  is overtaken  in life. Beside him, a quite dignified  professor seized
by love displays  evidence  of infantilism:  he claims  to know how to drink,
to drive cars, make love, practice judo, etc.
In the world there is, parallel  to the force of death and constraint,  an
enormous force of persuasion that is called culture.
In the Old Testament  God says nothing,  it is the living people who
serve him with their words.  It is because  of this that I have not stopped
loving that which is sacred in this world.
N.  realized.  Multiplication  of  experiences  but  controlled,  oriented
toward  the greatest  being and the highest  epoch,  by extreme  freedom  but
according  to discipline-and  the life risked without  truce, like a permanent
sanction-an  accepted and prodigal  solitude,  bowing  only before the human
being, secretly. Say no more but do make meaning  of a higher  word and
speak only according  to ... (For the one who is losing his memory  the
journal  is  like  an  instrumen t  of  that  asceticism.)  Custine:  "Arab
architecture  is  the  art  of  effeminate  people  (cut  out  papers  that
confectioners  use to cover their boxes of sugared  almonds).  He (Custine)
cites the word of Volitaire  or Diderot:  `The Russians  rotted before  they
were ripe."'
At 10 years of age, with his friends,  Nietzsche  founds  the Theatre  des
Arts  where  two  ancient  dramas,  of  which  he  was  the  author,  are
performed.
June 1957.

Festival  d'Angers  finished.6  Happy  fatigue.  Life,  marvelous  life,  its
injustice,  its glory, its passion,  its struggles,  life begins again. Strength  still
to love everything and create everything.
July 15.
Depart  from Paris. Sleep in Gueret. This is the universe  of the family
nuisance.
July 17.
('ordes.7  Silence  and beauty. The solitude  of this large house,  of this
ghost  town. Time  flows,  delicate,  in  me,  and  breathing  returns  to  me.
Around  Cordes,  over the perfect circle of hills, the sky rests, tender, airy,
and at the same time both cloudy  and bright.  At night, Venus, big as a
peach,  sets upon the Western hill with tremendous  speed.  It stops for a
moment  on the crest, then abruptly disappears,  sucked  up like a token in a
slot. Soon the stars multiply and the Milky  Way becomes creamy .
July 18.
It  rains. This  morning,  the  wild Aveyron  Valley. Work.  I  no  longer
endure  any attachment,  so mad with freedom  that more and more I deepen
a solitude that can be dangerous. I continuously think of F ., my grief.
Evening. Discouraged by myself, by my barren nature.
July 20.
A  letter  from  George  Didier's "  boss  telling  me  of  his  death  in  an
automobile accident in Switzerland.
July 21.

Rain that does not let up for days. Profound and dry sadness.
July 22.
Letter from Mi,9  who speaks to me about her family and their "scathing
feasts."  Telephoning the one she loves, 700 km away, she cannot  find her
words. "I was miserable and merry there."
July 23.
The truth.  The truth!
July 24.
Beautiful  and deserted  countryside  where each house encountered  has
fallen apart. In barns gutted and infested  by nettles,  old harrow's  wheels
rust; old and enormous  spiders  haunt this deserted  kingdom.  Rush toward
the cities, the factories,  the collective  pleasures.  Here a civilization  dies
slowly, around us, and the old houses  testify to it. I tell M. who tells me
that she does not have the impression of death but of waiting.  Waiting for
what? - the Messiah.
It is still raining; I am hungry  for light as for bread and can no longer
stand myself.
July 24.
Depart Roussillon.  The sea. Leucate. Return the evening of the 25th.
July 26.
Superb mornings. Drunken swallows.

Those who are not curious:  what they know puts them off from what
they ignore (C.).
Buddhism  is  atheism  that  became  religion.  Renaissance  originating
from nihilism.  Unique  example,  I believe,  and priceless  to reflect on for us
who are wrestling with nihilism.
One  cannot  ask  suffering  to  justify  its  reasons.  One  would  expose
oneself to empathizing with nearly nothing.
Cordes.  Every  evening  I  went  to  watch Venus  setting  and  the  stars
rising in the hot night, above its bed.
The old English  lady commits  suicide.  In her diary, for months,  she
noted the same thing every day: "T oday, nobody came."
At the end of The Adolescent  (and in the three variations)  Dostoyevsky
ironically puts  Tolstoy on trial.
Cordes.  August 4.
Thoughts of death.
August 6.
Visiting  Cayla:  a  silent  and  solitary  place  around  which  the  world
comes to die. I understand  better what I later read in Eugenie  de Guerin's
journal:  "I would gladly make a vow of confinement  to Cayla.  No other
place in the world pleases  me like my home."  And yet: "Where  will I be?
Where  will we be when these trees grow tall again?  Others  will stroll
beneath  their shade and will see, as we see, the passing  winds that will
knock them down."
The Old Believers  in Russia  thought that we carry a small devil on the
left shoulder  and an angel on the right shoulder . There is an idea for the
theatre  (for  Don  Faust?):  the  angel  and  the  devil  grow  according  to

whether  they are nourished.  In general,  one or the other is heightened. My
character  returns  with  two  smaller  characters  of  equal  height.  Their
dialogues:  between  them, the character  to the two creatures,  the two to the
character , etc., etc.
"The lightest  silk thread is more unbearable  to me than a lead ball is to
others" (N.).  Alas, to me also.
Svidrigailov  from Crime  and Punishment:  "A small room filled with
smoke, with spiders in the corners, and that is all eternity is."'
August 8, 1957. Cordes.
For the first time, after reading  Crime and Punishment,  absolute  doubt
about my vocation. I seriously  consider  the possibility  of giving up. I have
always  believed  that creation  was a dialogue.  But with whom?  Our literary
society  whose principle  is second-rate spite, where offense takes the place
of critical  method?  Society  in general? A populace  that does not read us, a
bourgeoisie  mass, who, in a year, reads the press and two popular  books?
In reality, the creator today can only be a solitary  prophet,  inhabited, eaten
by  a  disproportionate  creation.  Am  I  this  creator?  I  believed  it.  More
precisely , I believed  that I could be it. Today I doubt it, and the temptation
is  strong  to  reject  this  incessant  effort  which  renders  me  unhappy  in
happiness  itself,  this  empty  asceticism,  this  call  that  alerts  me  toward
what, I do not know. I would do theatre,  I would randomly  write dramatic
works,  without worry, I would be free, perhaps.  What do I have to do with
estimable  or honest  art? And am I capable  of what I dream?  If I am not
capable  of it, what good is it to dream?  To free me from this, too, and to
consent to nothing! Others who were greater than I have done it.
August 12.
C.S. "It is not pain that must arouse  the greatest  pity but indignity . The
most extreme  misfortune  is to feel ashamed.  All of you seem to have lived
through only beautiful suf ferings, distinguished suf ferings." It is true.

Emerson: "The secret of genius is to suf fer no fiction to exist for us."
August 13.
Depart from Cordes.
Atonal  music is always  dramatic  even though  it wants to be in reaction
against  musical  romanticism.  Insignificance  is  always  pathetic  and
dramatic. Id. for painting.
A comment  about The Fall since they do not understand.  Shaped  by and
ridiculing  the  modern  attitude  and  this  strange  and  salacious  secular
remorse  of sin. Cf. Chester - ton2  "The XIXth century  (id. the XXth) is full
of Christian ideas gone mad."
Why Lenin never concerned  himself  with the masses.  Cf. Sperber3:
The left and  Truman's Fourth Point.4
Id. Freud did not feel a medical  calling,  a "penchant  for humanity's
suffering."
Nemesis.  Profound  complicity   of  Marxism  and  Christianity  (to
develop).  This is why I am against both.
The blind lovers, groping about, kill the blind husband.
Un Theatre Ininterrompu.5
Religion's attraction for theatre people.  The dream life and the real life.
I loved those places (luminous  restaurants,  dance halls, etc.) that men
invented to shelter themselves from life.  This wounded thing inside me.
Necessity  and  exaltation  of  opposites.  The  measuring  place  of
contradiction. Sun and darkness.

At the age of fifteen,  Nietzsche , his comrades  in front of him denying
Mucius  Scaevol a'si6  action,  takes a burning  coal from the stove without
saying a word and shows it to his friends.  He carries  the scar from this his
entire life.
Story about the brothel  (H. p. 48). Cosima should  be condemned  for
having  destroye d all the letters  from N. to W. "Tragic knowledge  and
Greek  gaiety."  The  Basel  Cathedral's  terrace  where  Nietzsche  and
Burckhardtx  conversed.  "A modern  anchoritism-an  impossibility  to live in
agreement  with the State."  Id. "Aristocracy  of the mind must conquer  the
entirely  of its freedom with respect  to the State, which today holds science
in bridles" - Id.  The dreamer , lying on a tiger .
About the Louvre fire during  the Commune,  which makes him cry and
destroys  him for days: "Never, so sharp was my pain, would I have thrown
a stone at these sacrileges,  which are, to my eyes, only the carriers  of
everybody's  sin. Sin on which there is much to think about."  "Arrange for
nle  to  be  buried  like  a  loyal  pagan,  without  lies."  Sad  without  light,
exalted since his return.
Plan  for  "ten  years  of  meditat ion  and  silence."  Idea  of  the  "mask."
Praise for Napoleon  in La Gaya Scienza.1  Affair with  Mme V.P. in 1887,
last letter to Rohde, shattering.2  Rohde  does not reply. "Lisbeth ,3  why do
you cry?  Are we not happy?"
I had much prevention against  rationalism.  But my colleagues'  passion
[. . ]4
September  8.
Death of Robert Chatte.5  Alone, in  Villejuif Hospital.
To refuse to shine when one can shine, to appeal,  etc. A little artifice is
necessary , but artifice  ends up eating everything.  Moping  (as long as is
necessary)  is ultimately  more fruitful  than chitchatting  and going out for
nothing.

What would be necessary:  not only someone  whom you love without
asking  anything  of, but also someone  whom you love and who gives us
nothing.
Novel.  Mi: in love she breathed  like a swimmer  and smiled  at the same
time, then swam faster and faster, beaching  herself  on a hot and humid
shore, mouth opened,  still smiling,  as if by dint of caves and deep waters,
water had become her element  and the earth the arid place where,  as a
dripping fish, she cheerfully choked.
The  greatest  man,  the  greatest  spiritual  force:  the  most,  the  most
concentrated [...].6
Nietzsche.  Irreligious through  religion.  Pascal-in  his way - After all,
according to  Thomas, faith is courage of the mind.
Id. For him, Christ: the immoralist Savior .
Custine.  "One day the sleeping  giant will rise and violence  will put an
end to the reign of speech.  In vain then, frantic  equality  will call the old
aristocracy  back to the aide of liberty;  the weapon  taken again too late,
grasped by hands too long inactive, will have become powerless."
Id. about the French:  "they would paint themselves  as ugly rather than
letting themselves be for gotten."
Don Faust. When he is transformed into Don Juan, the scene begins
with  the  hearty  laugh  of  a  man  backstage,  which  signals  I)on  Juan's
entrance.
Nietzsche.  "Still a few thousand  years on last century's  track! - And in
all  that  man  will  do,  the  supreme  intelligence  will  be  apparent-but  in
precisely  this way the intelligence  will have lost all its dignity. It will be,
without  a doubt,  necessary  to be intelligent,  but it will also be such an
ordinary  thing  that  a  nobler  mind  will  perceive  this  necessity  as  a
vulgarity . Perhaps to be noble will then mean to be mad in the head."

The Bible is born among the stones.
October  1st.
G.T.7  visits before departing for Algeria  to confide  in me what she has
done. One month  ago in Algiers.  Contacted  by  emissaries  of the F.L.N.'
who propose to her a meeting  with those in charge, who have questions  to
ask her regarding  her booklet  (Algeria  '57), she accepts.  Then meeting
procedures:  she  waits  briefly  at  a  house  in  the  Casbah  where  she  is
received  by two women.  Then two armed men arrive.  They argue. G.T.
explains  her thesis to them, the reduction  of a population  to beggary , the
bulk of auxiliar y wages,  which come from France,  the metropolis,  etc.
(her  opinion:  politically  valid,  economically  uncultivated) .  At  this
moment,  the one who appears  to be the leader  says: "You take us for
murderers."  Then G.T. says: "But you are murderers"  (this is shortly  after
the attack on the Casino  de la corniche).  Then the other's  painful  reaction:
tears in his eyes. Then: "These  bombs,  I would  like to see them at the
bottom  of the sea." "That is up to you alone,"  G.T. says. They talk about
torture.  I am the plaintiff, she says (she belonged  to the commission on
[the] network of camps).  They reach [one] compromise:  suppression  of
civilian  terrorism  in exchange  for suppression  of executions.  Pretty much
in the terms that I had propose d (but the follow  up, alas ... ). The other
man regarding  nailings:  "It's France." "Go tell that to your grandmother ,"
G.T.  says,  "I  was  there.  It's  the  F.L.N.  and  you  know  it."  The  leader
motions  to the other man in order to keep him silent. She learns shortly
after that this is Ali la Pointe.  While leaving  she takes him by the tie and
shakes  him.  "And  don't  forget  what  I  said."  And  he  responds:  "No,
M'dame."
2nd meeting after execution  and she learns then that the leader is Yassef
Saadi. Two weeks after this, he is arrested.
Also shows me the writings  of 30 Arab students  between  the ages of 11
and 12 to whom their Arab teacher gave the subject:  "What would you do

if you were invisible?"  All would take up arms and kill the French,  either
the paratroopers or the government leaders. I despair for the future.
That the slave is subjugated  because  he preferred  life over death is
historically inaccurate. Budapest.
October 17.
Nobel.  Strange  feeling  of overwhelming  pressure  and melancholy . At
20 years old, poor and naked, I knew true glory . My mother ."
October 19.
Frightened  by what happens  to me, what I have not asked for. And to
make matters  worse,  attacks  so low they pain my heart. Rebatet.l  dares
speak of my longing  to order the firing squads  when he was one of those
whom  I, along with the other Resistance  writers,  asked to be pardoned
when he was sentenced to death. He was pardoned,  but he does not pardon
me. Desire again to leave this country . But for where?
Creation  itself, art itself, its detail, every day and rupture  ... To scorn is
beyond  my powers.  No matter what, I must overcome  this sort of fear, of
incomprehensible  panic where this unexpected  news has thrown me. For
this ...
"They do not like me. Is this a reason not to bless them?" N.
The saints are afraid of the miracles  they produce.  They cannot  love the
miracles nor love themselves in the miracles.
Three  suffocation  attacks  this  month,  aggravated  by  claustrophobic
panic. Unbalanced.

The tireless effort I have made to join the others in common  values,  to
establish  my own balance,  is not entirely  useless.  What I said or found can
be useful,  must be useful to others. But not to me who is now delivered
unto a kind of madness.
December  29.
3 P.M. Another  panic attack.  It was exactly  four years ago, to the day,
that X. became  unbalanced  (no, we are on the 29th, a day away, then).2
For  a  few  minutes,  a  feeling  of  total  madness.  Then  exhaustion  and
trembling. Sedative. I write this an hour later .
Night of the 29th to the 30th: interminable anguish.
December  30.
Continued improvement.
January 1st.
Anxiety redoubled.
January-Mar ch.
The major attacks have passed. Only a dull and constant anxiety now .
March 5.
Discussion  with de Gaulle.  As I speak of the risks if Algeria  is lost and
of the fury of the French  Algerians  in Algeria  itself: "French  fury? I am 67
years old and I have never seen a Frenchman  kill another  Frenchman.
Except me."

Compare  France  with the rest. "After all," he says, "no one has come up
with anything better than France."
1905  revolutionaries'  song:  "Brothers,  toward  the  sun,  toward
freedom."
Sperber . The Achilles  Heel, p. 202: "The idea of substituting  a radical
break for suicide  is not new. The will to definitively  disavow  his own acts,
to forever untangle himself  from them, is often found in the dreams that
men devote themselves to: that only the body's  logic still connects  to life
and that nothing  connects  to beings,  neither  what they received  from them
nor even what they gave to them. This dream is born of a solitude capable
of  destroying  everything,  even  the  affection  that  a  man  can  have  for
himself."
In front of Hegel,  Kierkegaard  brandished  a terrible  threat: to send him
a young man seeking advice.
Dostoyevsky , after his admirable  Speech  on Pushkin':  "For what I said
in Moscow, look how I have thus been treated  almost  everywhere  in our
press: as if I had stolen from or swindled  a few banks.  Ukhantsev  (a
famous swindler) himself does not receive as much garbage as I do."
Id. after his early success:  "... created  for me a questionable  fame, and I
do not know how long this hell will last."
"The thought  that occupies  me most is what our communion  of ideas
consists  of, what are the points on which we will all be able to meet,
regardless of predispositions ..."
"One should not waste one's life for any goal" (extend).
Those who really have something to say , they never speak of it.
Marseille.

Algiers  to Kairouan.4  Double  spray. The foam and crackle  of the first
wave to break against  the ship-and all at once a violent  wind blows,  twists,
wrings  the air; and a second  spray, not as thick with water, laced with a
fine vapor , thickens the mist.
The seagulls' wings are broken  exactly  in the middle  /VV in the shape
of a rooftop.
The soldiers  on the bridge,  beneath  the wind, pressed  against  the ropes,
their heads wrapped  with scarves,  their capotes  shapeless.  These moments
where man abandons  demonstra tion and presses  at the level of need, this
is history .
Motionless  over the upper bridge,  the gulls descend  and continue  their
patient,  flight close to me. The obstinate  gulls with their globular  eyes,
their sorcerer's beak, their tireless  muscles.  The seagulls  have nowhere  to
rest other than the waves'  changing  hollow  or the tall mast's oscillating
cross.
Condorcet:  "Robespierre  is  a  priest  and  will  never  be  anything  but
that."
Among  the primary  reflexes,  those that belong  to man and animal's
immediate nature, Pavlov listed the "freedom reflex."
Power does not separate  itself from injustice.  Good power is the healthy
and careful administration of injustice.
Never speak of one's work.
Actor.
Nietzsche.  "In a superabundance  of vivifying  and restorative  forces,
even  misfortunes  have  a  solar  splendor  and  generate  their  own
consolation...."

Id.:  "Supposing   that  we  are  always  waiting  for  misfortune,  for  an
unpleasant  surprise,  we will always  be in a state of tension  and animosity ,
will be unbearab le to others and we will see our health suffering from it;
such natures lead to their own extinction."
Id.: "Fear of death, European disease."
Id.: "Happiness  lies in the swiftness of feeling  and thinking;  all the rest
of the world appears slow, gradual,  and stupid.  Whoever  could feel a light
ray's flight would be filled with happiness, for it is very swift."
Id.:  "Portrait  of  man  to  come:  eccentric,  energetic,  cordial,  tireless,
artist, enemy of books."
Id.: "Men of very high culture,  with vigorous  bodies,  are above all
sovereigns."
About  the  biophages5:  Montherlant's  Notebooks,  p.  82:  everything
there is said with excellence and moderation.
For me: I would  have succumbed  to every last one of my remaining
feelings. I have always opposed two feelings, one to the other .
Tipasa: The sky grey and soft. At the center of the ruins, the slightly
choppy  swells  come  to  replace  the  birds'  chirping.  The  Chenouas6
enormous  and light. I will die, and this place will continue  to dole out
plenitude  and beauty. Nothing  bitter about this idea, but on the contrary , a
feeling of gratitude and veneration.
Algiers' heavy , vertical rain. Endless. In a cage.
Algerians.  They  live  in  the  richness  and  warmth  of  friendship  and
family. The body as the center, and its virtues-and  its profound  sadness  as
soon as it declines-life  without  a view other than the immediate  one, than
the physical  circle. Proud of their virility, of their capacity  for eating and
drinking, of their strength and their courage.  Vulnerable.

The stabbed dove.
Return.  Kairouan.  Storm.  Irresistible  impulse  to throw myself  into the
water. The solitude  and resignation  of a man alone in the raging seawaters
behind a ship pursuing its path.
Stages of healing.
Letting volition sleep. Enough of "you must."
Completely depoliticize the mind in order to humanize it.
Write the claustrophobic-and comedies.
Deal with death, which is to say , accept it.
Accept  making a spectacle  of yourself. I will not die of this anguish. If I
died  from  it,  the  end.  Otherw ise,  at  worst,  shortsighted  behavior .  It
suffices  to  accept  others'  judgment.  Humility  and  acceptance:  purely
medical remedies of anguish.
The world moves  toward  paganism but it still rejects  pagan values.
They must be restored,  to paganize  belief,  Graecize  Christ  and restore
balance.
Wouldn't  it  be  that  I  have  suffered  from  the  excess  of  my
responsibilities?
Since I am in the desert and lifelessness,  I must push aridity all the way
to the end so that the threshold  is reached  and, one way or another , crossed
over. Madness or complete control.
Method:  as soon as the appearance  of anguished  breathing  accelerated
or slowed  down the warning.  Thereto  associating  immediate  deprivation
of every action and every gesture.
Second association: general relaxation.

In  the  long  run:  transfer  and  accumulation  of  the  energy  that  is
characteristic  of all want or desire by the temporary  suspension  of this
want and this desire.
With regard  to society, recogni ze that I expect  nothing  from it. Any
participation  then becomes  a gift that does not await repayment . Praise or
blame then become  what they are: nothing.  Finally, suppression  of the
conformist.
Eliminate the brooding morals from abstract justice.
Remain  close to the reality  of beings  and things.  Return  as often as
possible  to personal  happiness.  Not refusing  to recognize  what is true even
when  the  truth  happens  to  thwart  the  desirable.  Ex.:  recognizing  that
power, it also, it especially , persuades.  The truth is worth all the torments.
It alone establishes the joy that must crown this ef fort.
Recover ener gy-as the central force.
Recognize the need for enemies. Love that they exist.
Systematically  shatter  automatisms  from smallest  to largest. Tobacco,
food, sex, emotional reactions  of defense  (or of attack.  They are the same
thing) and creation itself. Asceticism  not out of the desire that must be
kept intact, but out of its satisfaction.
Recover the greatest strength, not to dominate but to give.
May 3.
Almost  a total recovery;  I even hope for increased  strength.  Understand
better now what I have always  known: the one who drags through his life,
and succumbs under its weight,  cannot  help anyone  with the few duties he
does take on. The one who controls himself  and controls  his life can be
truly generous,  and give without effort, expecting  nothing  and asking  for
nothing but this strength to give and to work.

Journal.
End of  April 1958. Cannes.?
At sea every day. In the evening,  the nets' buoys (a bottle with a lead
clapper ,  the  whole  thing  floating  on  cork)  make  the  sound  of  bells
gathering  the sea's flocks.  At night in the port the boat's masts and bridges
shriek and whimper .
The light-the light-and the anxiety  retreat,  not yet gone, but dulled,  as if
put to sleep by the heat and sun.
April :30.
Martin  du Gard. Nice. He straggles along with his rheumatoid  arthritis.
77 years old. "In the face of death nothing  prevails,  not even my work.
There is nothing,  nothing...."  "Yes, it is good not to feel alone" (and his
eyes fill with tears). We set a rendezvous  for July at Tertre.8  "If I am
alive." But always this same heart interested in everything.
May 29, 1958.
My job is to make my books and to fight when the freedom  of my own
and my people is threatened.  That's all.
The artist is like the god of Delphi: "He does not show nor does he
hide: he signifies."
Chekhov:  "I  am  neither  a  liberal  nor  a  conservative....  My  holy  of
holies is the human  body, health,  intelligence,  talent, inspiration,  love, and
absolute  freedom.  The  freedom   from  all  brute  force  and  all  lies,  in
whatever manner they are expressed:
That is what my agenda  would  be if I were a great artist" (letter to
Pleshcheyev .`'  1888).

Musil':  a great project  that supposes  all the means of art, which he does
not have. Hence  this work is moving  by its failures,  not by what it says.
This author's  interminable  monologue,  where the genius  shines  in some
passages, and where art never shines in its entirety .
Musil. "Each one of us possesses  a second  nature where everything  that
he does is innocent."
"Ordinary life is the average of all our possible crimes."
Maman.  If we loved enough  those whom we love, we would prevent
them from dying.
June 9, 1958.
New departure for Greece.2
June 10.
Acropolis.  The feeling  is not as great as the first time. I was not alone,
and so I preoccupied  myself  with my com pany. And then the meeting
with 0., which bothers  me. The Acropolis  is not a place where one could
lie. At  two  o'clock,  the  airplane  to  Rhodes.  Islands,  rocks  on  the  sea,
drifting  off behind  us. Pulveriza tion of continents.  In Rhodes,  we land in
the middle  of fields where short flowery  wheat grows,  which the wind
moves  in  waves  toward  the  blue  sea.  Sumptuous,  florid  island.  The
promenade  at night, in the center of the Frankish  architecture.  Encounter
with R. P. Bruckber ger, who announces  to me his intention  to break with
the Church  without  defrocking.  My liking for him always  alive. Boat with
Michel G. and Prassinos.
June 11.
I get off the boat in the early morning,  alone, and go to wash on the
beach of Rhodes  twenty  minutes  away, alone. The water is clear, fresh.

The sun, at the beginning  of its trip, warms  without  burning.  Delectable
moments  that remind  me of Madrague  mornings,  twenty  years ago, when I
used to leave the tent, sleepily , a few meters  from the sea, to plunge  into
the somnolent  morning  water.'  Alas, I can no longer swim. Or rather, I can
no longer breathe as I used to. Nevertheless,  I regret leaving  the beach
where I have just been happy .
At ten o'clock  we leave Rhodes  to pass the northern  point, of the island
and to arrive near Lindos.
12:30 Lindos.
Small,  natural port, almost  enclosed.  Perfect  bay. We lose an anchor  in
the absolutely clear waters.  Initially , the bay is dominated  by the village's
white houses, then by the Acropolis,  fortified  by medieval  ramparts in the
middle of which rise Doric columns.
We reach the beach in a dinghy. Swim. At the end of the afternoon  we
climb toward the Acropolis.  Over the top, wide, steep stairs lead to an
immense  midair space, which on one side dominates  the port where we
are  anchored,  and  on  the  other,  a  balanced,  dizzying  void,  another
enclosed  cove, the one where  Saint Paul landed.  Above  this space the
swallows  turn, drunk with light, plunge  vertically  into the void and climb
back up with piercing  cries. The day ends over the columns,  the two bays,
the capes that multiply  all the way to the horizon  and the immense  sea
before  us. Feeling  of powerless ness to join, to express  so much beauty.
But at the same time, recognition  before the world's  perfect  state. Back in
the city, the young  donkeys,  the rowboat  in the evening  ... During  the
night, the donkeys' loud braying.
June 12.
At six o'clock  I climb onto the deck one last time to see the bay that I
love. Everyone  on board is asleep except the captain.  In the mild morning,

the scent of Lindos,  scent of froth, of heat, of donkeys  and grass, of smoke
...
Rhodes at 8:30  A.M.
Stroll to see a gorge full of freshly  hatched  butterflies.  They are nestled
in the grass, the trees, the caves,  and before  our steps they disperse  in
silent and bustling  clouds.  Crushing  heat. Return.  Depart  for Marmaris,  a
Turkish port, at three P.M. Arrive at five P.M. The bay we are anchored  in
the middle of is beautiful  but somber . The little town, from afar, looks
pathetic.  And little by little we see all the inhab itants gathering  on the
pier.  The  Turkish  police  and  customs  officers  arrive  on  board.
Interminable  discussions  to  settle  the  customary  formalities.  Then  we
disembark  and are surrounded  by a crowd  of disheveled  children.  The
poverty , the dereliction  of the streets and houses  makes the heart ache so
much so that we return without  waiting  any longer. After dinner, another
visit from the officials.  More discussions  (they do not speak any Western
language),  interminable.  They kept the passports,  etc. We will get them at
six o'clock in the morning.  The captain  protests  . . . etc. We will actually
have to go to pick them up the next morning.
June 1:1.
Depart  at  seven  o'  clock.  At  eleven  o'  clock,  the  island  of  Synri.
Admirable  Greek cleanliness.  The poorest  houses  are freshly  painted  with
lime, decorated,  etc. Unbelievab le and revolting  that the Turks could have
dominated  these  people  for  such  a  long  time.  Swim.  But  growing
claustrophobia.  For everything  else, superb  form. At three t'.w we again
set out for Kos.
Kos.  Small  port  where  life  is  easy  at  night.  Music.  The  radio's
loudspeakers  shout the events of Cyprus  with a tone I know all too well.
We dine beneath a pink light.

June 14.
The island.  Small temple  on a beach with clear water. Swine and lunch
in Psameros.  In the small cove, five houses  painted  with lime, white and
blue. The little girls get in the water in their shirts and swim toward us.
Every day, the monstrous  sun ... not heavy nor veiled by mist, but clear
and pure, hurling all its heat, ferocious ...
To Kalymnos  at six P.M. The sea is covered  with short, cool waves....
Dozens  of  children  with  round  heads  escort  us.  Katina.  June  15,  the
following  day, she runs all the way to the pass and again, for a long time,
waves  her hand. Noon swim in Leros.  Then toward  Patmos  where  we
enter a bay that is almost entirely protected.  The evening hour .
June 16.
Climb upon mules and donkeys  toward  Patmos  and the Monastery  of
St. Jean de P. From up there, the two isthmuses.  The violent  northern wind
(the meltem) picked up. The Greek mistral  has the same effects: it brushes
the sky and brings forth a purified  light, clear, taut, almost  metallic.  But it
prevents us from returning to the sea; we have to wait here until it calms.
June 17.
Depart  at six o'clock  in the morning  under the meltem  to head toward
Gaidaros.  But the sea is furious.  Shaken  for three hours by big waves-
everybody  on  board  sick  or  sallow-the  boat  is  diverted  to  the  Fourni
Islands.  Shelter  in a deserted  cove where the wind blows less, but it blows.
Day of waiting.  Toward the evening  the wind dies down a little, but it is
too late to leave.
June 18.

The wind, which picked  up again during the night, now blows violently .
We waive departure. Then, since nothing  changes  and the bread is running
out-the  water  soon-we  decide  to  leave  around  six  P.M.,  regardless.
Everyone  in the cockpit.  Heavy squalls,  but we arrive in eyeshot  of the
fires of  Tigani (ancient Samos) around eight-thirty P .M.
Gentleness of the small port, quiet in the night, after the violent sea.
June 19.
In the morning  I go for a swim alone. Depart  by car to visit the island.
One of the most beautiful  because  of the great abundance  of olive trees
and filiform  cypresses  that furnish the slopes of the hills and mountains
toward  the sea. After having  taken a dip, we lunch in a small village on the
southern  coast. The table is outside. A crowd  of beautiful  children play
around  us, then come to look at us. One of the little girls, Matina, with
golden  eyes, touches  my heart. When we leave, she comes close to the car
and I take her small hand. Toward the evening,  the Heraion,  the crushed
temple  whose  formidable  debris-scattered  in front of the sea among  the
reeds and oats, in the middle  of an admirable  landscape  of mountains and
sea-has  itself been destroyed  by the recent earthquakes.  In a nearby  cafe,
where our drivers  offer us a drink, they begin to dance together  to the
sound of a radio, for their pleasure and ours.
Polycrates,  tyrant of Samos,  "brilliant  statesmen  and depraved  tyrant."
Frightened  by  his  own  luck-insolent,  perpetual-and  by  his  unflinching
successes  and his fabulous  wealth, he threw an expensive  ring that he
wore on his finger into the sea in order to beseech  fate. But a fish served
on his table returned  to him this ring that it had swallowed.  Completed  the
Heraion,  held a sumptuous  court where the arts held great importance.
Perished crucified by the strategic Croites who lured him into a trap (522).
June 20.

Day at sea toward  Chios. In the morning  a manatee  beneath  the bow. It
rolls, moves forward,  waddles  with a mocking  air, then plunges  toward  the
depths.  A little later, a few miles from shore, the scent of rosebays comes
to us on the wind. Afternoon  of sun and swimming  in a cove where the
water is ethereal  due to its clarity;  we enter Chios on a beautiful  and quiet
evening.
June 21.
Chios. Turkish quarter. Crossing  the island.  The enormous  cinder-block
houses.  Red soil. Enormous  olive trees. The peasants  beating  wheat with
their mules'  hooves,  beneath  a blinding  heat. The summer  of massacres.4
Finally,  the  leprosarium,  in  a  narrow  ravine  planted  with  eucalyptus,
deadending  in an impasse  of rocks. Series of long dilapidated  brown and
dark green buildings.  Retired  in the unfolding  evening  to their rooms with
large iron beds covered  with coarse  brown  blankets.  11 leprous  women
and 3 leprous  men roam beneath  the verandas.  Some have lost fingers.
Others  with large turbid eyes, yellow, without  pupils or eyeballs,  like an
enormous,  rotten drop of water. Their natural  gaiety beneath  their thick,
greyish  clothes  of infinite  poverty. One of them complains  that somebody
wants  to  remove  them  from  this  miserable  place  to  move  them
elsewhere.... Evening dances and laughter very late into the night.
June 22.
Toward Mytilen e. Vast indentation  of bays and beaches.  The olive trees
go down almost  to the sea. P. is sick. Doctor  (Paritis).  Ascent  to Ayassos.
Dip. I swim a little. Depart  along the side of the island.  At the end of the
afternoon  hundreds  of  terns,  flying  over  the  surface  of  the  still  water,
again rise by the boat.  Arrival at Sigris.
(We arrive in the ports at sunset. And at times the sun masked  the port
from us, then disappeared  behind  the hill, and in the twilight  the port
appeared....  ) Signs.  Return  to Sigris.  Two enclosed  bays. Naked  hills.

Smooth  water,  evening  light. The  world  and  life  end  here. And  begin
again.
The village,  viewed  from the boat at night, is illuminated  by Saint-
Jean's fires.5
Depart  during  the night. Michel and I take the midnight  watch.  Night
on  the  sea,  immense  after  the  crescent  moon  sets  in  the  west.  The
constellations  descend  toward  the horizon.  Unforeseen  islands  take shape
in the shadows  on the horizon.  In the morning,  Skyros,  layered  over its
crests.
Depart  at  three  P.M.  for  Skopelos.  In  the  afternoon,  the  Northern
Sporades.  One, two, five, ten, fourteen  islands  appear  on the sea. Skopelos
at  night  and  its  roofs'  edges  are  underlined  with  lime.  Jasmine,
pomegranates,  hibiscus.  Peaceful  night. In the morning  Skiatho s, and we
take the Euripus Strait.
June 26.
Khalkis.  Preface   Grenier6:  "each  conscienc e  wants  the  death  of  the
other." But no. Master  and slave. Master  and disciple.  History  was built on
admiration as much as on hatred.
For this book I want the young  reader  who resembles  the one that I
used to be.
Like that quest from island to island that Melville  illustrated  in Mardi,
this one ends in a meditation on the absolute and the Divine.
Khalkis.  At  night,  vast  and  silent  Bay  of  Marathon.  The  waters
suddenly  settle. Only a brief and heavy surf. And night falls over the
immense  corrie  of  mountains  and  over  the  suddenly  mysterious  bay.
Beauty sleeps on the waters.
June 27.

In  the  early  morning,  while  the  cicadas  begin  to  shriek  in  the
surrounding  hills, swim in the still and fresh water. Then the sea and at
twelve  o'clock,  Kea,  the  island  with  green  rocks,  large  pasty  oysters
beneath  the slightly  veiled sky. But during  the night the southern  wind
picks up, and the next day, the 28th, we are stuck in Kea. 29th. Depart  in
the morning on bad waters.  Sounion.  Light. Hydra,  Spetsai  for the night.
30th. Poros, Egine and again Ayia Marina  like four years ago. Marvelous
island at the center of a whirling of light and space. Return there.
July 1st.
Athens.  Heat.  Dust.  Idiotic  hotel.  Fatigued.  2nd.  Delphi.  Again  the
extraordinary  rise in light levels. I lay my feet in my footstep s. Evening
scent over the small stage. 3rd. Return  to Corinth.  Until Patras.  Alone,
quick  dip,  the  water  ...  Patras:  large,  dusty  Oran,  ugly  and  alive.  4th.
Olympia.  5th. Mycenae,  Argos. The tall pines of Olympia  crackle  with
cicadas.  Greece  bursting  with sonorous  braying  in the valley hollows,  on
the slopes of the island.
Pavese.7  As if the sole reason  why we always  think about ourselves  is
that we have to stay with ourselves longer  than with anyone  else. As if
genius  is  fecundity .  To  he  is  to  express,  to  express  constantly .  As  if
idleness  makes  the hours slow and the years fast, and activity  makes  the
hours  brief  and  the  years  slow. As  if  all  libertines  are  sentimentalists
because  for them the relationshi ps between  men and women  are an object
of emotion, not of duty .
Id. "When a woman  marries,  she belongs  to another , and when she
belongs to another , there is no longer anything to say to him."
Id. The old Mentina woman,  who for seventy  years has ignored  history.
She has lived a "static and immobile  life." That gives Pavese  the shivers.
And what if the old Mentina woman had been his mother?
Live  in  and  for  the  truth. The  truth  of  what  we  are  foremost.  Quit
compromising  with people.  The truth of what is. Don't be tricky with

reality. Accept then its originality  and its impotency . Live according  to this
originality  until this impotency . At the center, creation  with the immense
force of the person finally being respected.
Return.  Lunch with A.M. He tells me that Massu and two or three of his
collaborators  have submitted  to torture  in order to have the right to ... (The
difference: they chose it.  There is no humiliation.) Strange impression.
Since  returning  from  Greece  ten  days  ago,  bodily  strength  and  joy.
Sleep of the soul and heart. In the depths,  the convent  sleeps,  the strong
and bare house where silence contemplates.
The  lie  lulls  or  dreams,  like  illusion.  The  truth  is  the  only  power,
cheerful,  inexhaustible.  If we were able to live only of, and for truth:
young and immortal  energy in us. The man of truth does not age. A little
more ef fort, and he will not die.

APPENDIX
[Albert  Cainns  had attached  drafts of letters and notes to Notebook  VIII,
which we publish here in the appendix.]
Letter to Amrouche
November 19
My Dear  Amrouche, I
It's time-and  health-that  has kept me from responding  to you. It was
necessary  to respond  at length,  and I wasn't even able to keep up with my
ordinary  mail. Today I am no better able to do so. But I don't want to delay
in thanking you for your second letter, which touched  me. I owe you,
however , the truth about what I think. Personal  questions  cannot  separate
us. What are they in the face of what is happening  and about to happen?
But I was painfully shocked  by what you wrote,  on several  occasions,
about French-Al gerians  in general  (in Le Monde  and in Commune). You
have the right to choose  the positions  of the F.L.N. For my part, I think of
them as murderous  in the present,  blind and dangerous  in the future.  But
even while placing  yourself  on this side, you must make the necessary
distinctions,  which you  have not done. I have given up on trying to make a
voice of reason heard publicly . I hope, against  all hope, to one day be able
to do so. But, in private,  I must tell you my reaction,  and you should  not
ignore the shooting,  nor justify that they shoot at the French-Algerians  in
general,  and thus entangled,  shoot at my family, who have always  been
poor and without  hatred  and who should  not be mixed  up in an unjust
rebellion.  No cause, even if it had remained  innocent  and just, will ever
tear me from my mother, who is the greatest  cause that I know in the
world.'

In this sincere  language,  I know you will again find an echo of past
fraternities.  Can  they  inspire  you  to  work  toward  appeasement  and
assembly , rather than toward  fratricidal  separation;  that is the wish that
forms, from the bottom of his heart, your brother of birth and sky .
Albert Camus
Letter to Anonymous
April 3
Monsieur ,
My poor health has delayed  this reply, and I apologize  for that. More
than a year ago, after having  recognized  what irremediably  separates  me
from the left as well as from the right with regard to the Algerian  question,
I decided no longer to associate  myself  with any public campaign  on this
subject.  Collective  signatures-t hese  ambiguous  alliances  between  men,
which all, by the way, break apart-lead to confusions  that largely overflow
and  consequently  compromise  the  objective  they  mean  to  serve.  Even
when this objective  is valid, as is the case, I have consequently  decided  no
longer  to act except  personally , under the conditions  and at the moment
that I deem useful, no matter what pressures are exerted upon me.
Moreover , I intend to handle  the questions  that interest  you in a book
that will come out soon and that will speak for me alone. In any case, I
entrust  this personal response  to your loyalty, and ask you to accept  my
sincere regards.
Albert Camus
Letter to Guerin3
June 9, 1954
My Dear Guerin,

Your article from the Parisian  (I do not read this journal  and I am not
subscribed  to Argus) was passed  on to me. No, it is not "ingratitude,"  nor
"rigor,"  that  I  reproach  you  for.  I  do  not  like  the  place,  nor  the
discourteous  manner, in which they are expressed.  I do not like either that
you speak of things that you do not know, by which I mean to say of my
life. If you knew my life, you would have kept silent about this point. But
as for content,  you have the right to say that you do not like what I publish
and to say it openly .
What  I  reproac h  you  for  is  an  unspeakable  breach  of  the  custom
whereby  a  personal  letter  cannot  be  published  without  the  sender's
authorization.  I did not write to you, at the time when I did, so that my
trusting  letters,  written  with freedom  of heart, would ten years later be laid
out in public.  You have the right to divulge  your own secrets  to that public
and to speak with complete  freedom  about those who were your friends,
but you do not have the right to force those friends  to divulge  their own
secrets.  By reading  those sentences  of affectionate  camaraderie,  written  to
a friend in pain, in the place where you have printed  them, an intolerable
embarrassment  has come to me and a sort of disgust  that you should  have
perceived  in advance  and which I do not forgive you for having  inflicted
upon me.
I cannot, in any case, let you go unaware of my feeling on this point.
yours
Albert Camus
Letter to Anonymous
July 20, 1956
Madame,
I am very sorry about what you have told me. And even more so since it
undoubtedly concerns, I assure you, a misunderstanding.

I might have met the doctor whose name you mentioned,  but this name
means nothing  to me. Thus, he is not one of my friends.  And in any case I
do not know this doctor well enough that he could ever take the liberty  to
reveal a secret concerning  a third party. Besides,  supposing  that this secret
were divulged  to me, to imagine  that I could have used it without  care is
not to know me very well.
I assure you on my honor that the details  described  in The Fall pertain
only to me. Your friend is not the only one who likes the high plateaus.  I
love them and I have lived there. Once tubercular , I in fact suffer from a
pulmonary  sclerosis  that  has  made  me  claustrophobic.  Those  who
surround  me can confirm  my fear of pits, caves, and all enclosed places,
which comes from this quite personal infirmity . People  often joke with me
about my impatience  with speleologists,  about my sadness  in the deep
alpine  valleys,  etc.  As  such,  every  detail  that  struck  your  friend  can
receive  an  irrefutable  explanat ion.  As  for  the  principle  anecdote,  you
understand  that I do not come to divulge  secrets  here. Let me, however ,
quote for you a sentence  from a letter I received  from one of my friends
the other day: "Each one of us, without  exception,  thus has a girl in his life
whom he did not rescue."
This is clear evidence,  and your friend must convince  himself  of this
evidence.  You say that he has always  read me with regard  and particular
interest.  Then he is aware that I am unable to lie about such a matter .
It  is  on  my  honor,  I  repeat,  that  I  assure  him  that  he  has  nothing,
absolutely  nothing,  to do with my character . He has not been betrayed  by
anyone,  and if he is what I imagine  he is, he will give back to his friends
this  confidence  of  heart  without  which  every  life  is  an  exhausting
unhappiness.
A primary cause of the doubt from which your friend suffers today is
the exhausting  life that we all lead, and particularly  so for those who add
the stress of a personal  work to the interminable  weight  of modern life.
How could I not understand?  Sometimes  my days end with clenched  teeth,
and I often have the impression  of walking  and working  by pure will that

alone  holds  me  up.  But  in  these  cases  we  must  agree  to  be  easy  on
ourselves  and our own nature.  We must return to a more animalistic  life, at
rest, in solitude.
I hope that your friend,  enlightened  by my testimony , will again find
rest  and  peace.  I  will  then  comfort  myself  in  having,  without  having
wanted  to, rid a virtuous  heart of its turmoil.  For the time being I feel only
sad to have done harm with one of my books,  as I have always thought
that art was nothing if, finally , it did not do good, if it did not help.
Letter to M. R.P .
M. R.P.
I received your letter very late, and the news of my friend's  brutal death'
that  you've  delivered  to  me  hits  hard  even  though  it's  all  over  with.
Nevertheless,  I want to thank you, from the bottom  of my heart, for having
thought  of me. Didier was a part of my childhood  and my youth, and when
I encountered  him again later as a man of religion,  I had no trouble  liking
once again what he had never ceased  to be. Because  he had remained the
same child, become  the same man, with the same faith, purer and deeper,
and with the same fidelity. The discretion  and constant  sensitivity  that he
brought  to our relationship,  far too distanced  by our different lives, could
only enrich and render  our childhood friendship  that much more tender.
This end, so sudden,  so unexpec ted, is a great sorrow  for me. For the last
few hours, the world has been poorer  in my eyes. I am aware that for him
death was only a passage;  he spoke knowingly  of a certain  hope. But for
those who, like me, have loved him without  being able to share this hope,
the grief is allencompassing.  You are right: he remains  a memory  and an
example.  Know that, with gratitude, I transfer  a part of our long friendship
onto those who have loved him and had the joy of living near him, and do
not doubt my faithful feelings from now on.
A.C.

In  the  hospital  X.  discovered  something  that  I  have  always  known
(because  of a similar  experience  [...]5  youthbecause  of other things  as
well)  the  solidarity  of  bodies,  unity  at  the  center  of  the  mortal  and
suffering flesh. This is what we are and nothing  else. We are this plus
human genius in all its forms, from the child to Einstein.
No,  dear  Dominique,  it  is  not  humiliating  to  be  unhappy .  Physical
suffering is sometimes  humiliati ng, but the suffering of being cannot  be, it
is life, just like this happiness  that Bernard  speaks  of in his text with a
conviction that so violently moved me.
I hesitate  to tell you, but what you must do now is nothing  more than
live like everybody  else. You deserve,  by what you are, a happiness,  a
fullness  that few people  know. Yet today this fullness  is not dead, it is a
part of life and, to its credit, it reigns over you whether  you want it to or
not.  But  in  the  coming  days  you  must  live  alone,  with  this  hole,  this
painful  memory . This lifelessness  that we all carry inside of us-by us, I
mean to say those who are not taken to the height of happiness , and who
painfully  remember  another  kind  of  happiness  that  goes  beyond'i  the
memory .
Sometimes,  for violent  minds,  the time that we tear off for work, that is
torn away from time, is the best.  An unfortunate passion.
NOTES ON  AGENDA
Gala  and I at the time of the demonstration:
You're going to screw up
Well! You don't want to come?
Albert I'm going to smack you.
He is like my brother, and in my family  whoever  touches  my brother  is
dead.

Fame is a convent.
X.  Initiation  by  his  mother's  gymnastics  teacher.  Upon  his  mother's
request,  the gymnastics  teacher  arranges  a course  of sexual  initiation  for
him (at 15 years old), then persuades  her that it is better that the thing be
done by an expert....
X. His rotund  comrade  repeats  a sentence  from the novel he is reading:
"Live each hour as if it were to be the last and most beautiful,"  and he
writes:  "That's  it exactly." But, X. says: he doesn't  even leave his room to
visit the city , and he divides his time between fine meals and his bed.
At heart, X. says, we are like these Christians.  Pagans,  well, everyone,
but we profess  our paganism  on the tip of the tongue,  even him. Her
companion-with  his athletic  [. . .]9-cannot  make love before  the match,
because  he muse keep his strength, nor after, because  he does not have any
left; for the same reasons,  he does not go out. In the morning,  he wakes
her  with  a  knee  to  the  small  of  the  back  so  that  she  will  go  make
breakfast....  She: "I don't have sex, I don't go out, I'm the maid, and this
has gone on for three years."
From the prison's ink on the slave's chains to the
gentle faces of the executed I write your name
Liberty'
The strokes of your letters are bars your face is
a bolt fraternal to the executioners On the gate's
command I write your name Liberty Liberty ,
betrayed liberty  Where are your defenders? In
the cellar's darkness  Your gentle eyes crackle I
write your name Kalande dies  Writing is easy
dying is terrible I write, I write I write your
adulterous name Over yours which despairs
Oh! What have you done with my young
Kalande?  We die naked

When your brothers kill you I write your
sonorous name In an ink that disgraces
To bar the future  To scratch out the memory I
write your name Liberty In capitals of pain.
Pierre Serment

July 1 9 5 8 - December 1 9 5 9
July 21. Alone all day to reflect.  Evening  dinner with B.M.'  In M.'s place
inside me, all day , an emptiness that upsets me. I write to her .
22.24.
Nothing.  Recorded Fall on my tape recorder . Mi's letter ("violent and
pure  nights").  Wandered  yesterday  evening  in  St  Germain-des-Pres-
awaiting  what? Spoke with a drunk painter  "What do you do for a living-
I'm  not  in  prisonthat's  negative-no  it's  positive"  and  he  swallows  five
hardboiled  eggs  sprinkled  with  cognac.  Distressed  by  my  inability  to
work. Fortunately  Zhivago2  and the fondness  I feel for its author. Gave up
trip to the Midi.
25.
Nothing.  Recording  Fall.  Possessed  distributed.  N.R.F.  Dinner  with
A.C. His romance with M., impotent with his wife, which M. reveals  to
her. "He is better," she says-"that  is" - "Well, he is not yet a man, but he is
no longer  an old man either." This pool of shadows  over their lives. All
lives. After having  accompanied  her back, I stroll in St Germain-desPres.  I
wait, stupidly. Ah! if the strength  to work returned  to me, it would be the
light, finally. The little punks,  dressed up like James Dean, and the gesture
of  the  hand,  like  a  spoon,  their  ring  fingers  arranging  their  genitals,
apparently  wedged too tightly  in their blue jeans. I think of the naked
brown bodies, ages ago, in my lost country . They were pure.
26.

Recording  Fall. Barely  begun the preface  for Islands.'  Dinner  with C.,
lazy and cynical,  turned  only toward  pleasure.  But he is self-employed.
Also, a second- rate writer. But he bears no resemblance  to anybody . I
leave him early. He goes to play poker, which bores me, and I go home.
Earlier:  a rather inelegant  girl, pursued  by an Arab, rejects  him. "I am
racist," she says simply .
27.
Finished  recording  Fall. Don Giovanni.  Grey sky all day. Evening  film
about soccer's  World Cup. The young  Black Brazilians  crying  after the
victory  and trying to hide their faces from the camera.  As before,  this still
touches and moves me.
28.
Dinner  B.M. A.C. joins us. A storm weighs  over the cityand  does not
break.
29.
Algeria  obsesses  me this morning.  Too late, too late ... My land lost, I
would be worth nothing.
July 30.
Solitary  day. Shapeless  work. The evening,  through  Nabokov , Narayan-
who could be Gandhi's  successor -explains  to us the movement  of villager
and agrarian  socialism  in the Indies (Vinoba).4  I admire, distantly . Back
home, passing  in front of the Aiglon, I see A.M.'s  name on the illuminated
marquee.  I enter. Eleven  years ago, I had happiness  with her. Married now
to an Air France  steward,  with whom  she goes fishing.  And she sings
every evening.

July 31.
In the afternoon , A.M. comes to see me for a half-hour . In the daylight,
I see the traces left by eleven years. She was 22 years old, therefore  she is
33. But we laugh a lot together .
August 1st.
Lunch  at Barrault's  place in Chambourcy . The sky is constantly  black
from a storm that never breaks.  B. again proposes  to me the Dantchenko-
Stanislavski5  association.  In  the  afternoon  Colin  Wilsonti  -  A  baby;
obviously  Europe  has conquered  England.  "We must now communicate
faith in [. . .]7  [ know it well. This faith is mine; it has never left me. But I
have taken the path of the era-with  its frustrations-so  as not to cheat and
affirm after having shared  in suffering and denial,  just as I had actually
felt it. Now we must transfigure , and this is what distresses  me in the face
of this book that I must make and that binds me. Perhaps  the painting,  of a
certain  distress  has completely  exhausted  the men of my age and we will
no longer be able to speak our true faith. We will only have prepared  the
terrain for the boys who follow us. I say to C.W. and "if I did not succeed,
I'll have been an interesting  witness, at best. If I did succeed,  I'll have been
a creator ."
In the evening  I dine with A.E. and Karin,  then stroll to Montmartre
with just Karin. The gardens  in the night, washed  beneath  the moon but
dark. Karin is 18 years old. Parents divorced.  She left Sweden,  I don't
know why, and earned  her living as a model  for a second-rate  designer
who exploited  her. Thirty-five  thousand  francs for seven hours of work a
day. The courage  of these girls of the half-century , it always  fills me with
the same admiration.  Beauty  a little boyish,  but slow, as if absent. Return.
Her naturalness.  She immediatel y advances  her tender mouth,  then leaves,
precise and reserved.
August 2.

I force myself  to write this diary, but my reluctance  is exquisite.  I know
now why I never kept a personal  diary: for me life is secretive. With
respect  to others (and that is what pained  X. so much) but also, life must
be lived through  my own eyes, I must not reveal it in words.  Unheard  and
unexposed,  like this it is rich for me. If I force myself  to keep a personal
diary at this moment, it is out of panic in the face of my failing memory .
But I am not sure I can continu e. Besides,  even so, I forget to note many
things.  And I say nothing  of what I think. Hence  my long reflection  in
regard to K.
Saturday 2.
The evening, M. at the train station  until Sunday  evening.  Fatigued and
distant.  Toward the evening she resuscitates and I am happy about this.
Monday 4.
Lunch M. Afternoon  Doctor  X. According  to him, because  I must save
X.'s health, this makes me live "in a glass ball." His prescription : freedom
and  selfishness.  Superb  prescription,  I  say.  And  by  far  the  easiest  to
follow."  Evening K.
Tuesday 5.
Afternoon  M. Long conversation.  Few people  have gone further  than
her in the acceptance  of life. The 6th. Go out in the evening  with Michel,
Anne, and M. Dance.  The 7th. Again the feeling  of distance  from M. The
most passionate  person  whom I have known  is in fact the most chaste.
Dinner  with the Russian  nurse and her nine-year -old girl at Brice Parain's9
place. B.P., like all religious  minds,  tries to just'ify  all misfortunes  by the
necessary  atonement.  I tell him that, in any case, we meet all that is worst
in dialectics. He knows this. He reflects.
Friday 8.

Solitary  day like most of the preceding  ones. I try to organize my work.
It  has  rained  for  2  days.  Letter  from  X.:  "well-oiled  and  informal
conversations" (on the telephone).  Warm, free, truthful.
Sunday 9.1
Sick. Sunday the 10th. Monday  the 11th. La Corde.  I lie down and fall
asleep with a dreadful  headache.  Bad night. During  the day Mi telephones
from Marseille;  she runs from one city to the next, pursued  by anguish  and
panic. I advise her to return to Paris.
Tuesday 12.
In the morning  C. comes to see me. Wednesday  the 13th. Lunch Char.
We laugh a lot. Afternoon  Ivernel.2  Evening  dinner  and golf with M.G.,
Anne, and R.G. Evening  on the prairies.  Thursday  the 14th. Ivernel  on the
telephone.  He spent all night reading  my adaptation  of Possessed  without
being able to put it down. He agrees  to play the part of Shatov. Evening
dinner with R. Physically , he has been the same for the past 20 years. But
since his nervous  breakdown  the drive has disappeared.  He lives by heart
alone, obviously . We bump into K. Her naturalness  suffocates  me (the
unreserved  hand and then come along, no why, I have an appointment) she
eats nonstop.
August 15, 16, 17.
This whole period  since the 2nd is in fact empty. One cannot  write
without  recoveri ng vitality  and energy-the heart's health-even  if what one
must  say  is  tragic.  Particularly  so.  Finished  Zhivago  with  a  sort  of
tenderness  for the author. It's not true that this book again takes up the
XIXth  century's  Russian  artistic  tradition.  It's  much  more  gauche  and
modern  in composition,  with its continual  snapshots.  But he does better:
he  resuscitates  the  Russian  heart,  crushed  beneath  forty  years  of
watchwords  and humanitarian  cruelties.  Zhivago  is a book of love. And of

such love that it is poured  out upon all people  at the same time. The doctor
loves his wife, and Lara, and others still, and Russia.  If he dies, he is to be
separated from his wife, from Lara, from Russia, and from all the rest.
People without name are near to me  Trees,
children, and sedentaries I am overcome by all
of these  And that alone is my victory .'
And Pasternak's  courage  was to rediscover  this true source  of creation
and to work at it slowly  in order to make it gush out in the middle  of the
desert.
What else? the evenings  of the 16th and the 15th, recorded  The Poems
of Char with M. Night of the 15th, stroll along the Seine. Beneath the Pont
Neuf young foreigners  (Scandinavians)  are joined together  around two of
their own, a trumpeter  and a banjo player, and lie on the street, couples
embracing,  listening  to the improvisation.  Farther, on one of the benches
of the Pont des Arts, an Arab has stretched  out, a portable  radio by his
head, playing Arab music to him. The Pont de la Cite, beneath  Paris' warm
and hazy  August sky .
For Julia. Guibert  is the noble progressive.  Mora the face of the old
world.4
August 18.
Lunch M. Meet again. Evening dinner R. Depression not improved.
19.
Letter from X. which saddens me once again.
Evenings of the 21st-23rd.

Mi. Fills these days with beauty, with gentleness.  Far from taking me
away from work, this long joy turns me toward  it. Her 22-year -old sister
dies  from  liver  cancer.  Her  father  orders  her  to  admire  the  sunsets:
"because you are an artist."
August 23.
Death of Roger Martin  du Gard. I had postponed  my visit to Belleme
and suddenly  ... I again see this man, whom I loved tenderly , speaking  to
me in Nice, in May, of his solitude, and of death. He dragged  his large
heavy body, hunched  over, from the table to the armchair . And his good
looks ... One could love and respect him. Grief.
25.
Dinner  Brisville5  (and Therese).  B.M.  (and Vivette6).  Go  out  for  a
stroll. The chapel and over the outer boulevards. Sordid Paris.
26-29.
Giacometti's  example.  Ah! and then M. and her life: "Those  who, like
us, knew extreme  experiences  very young (including  fame and love), and
who, arriving at maturity , want nothing more than life, simply ."
29.
C. returns.
September  2  at  Isle-sur -Sorgue.  Best  rule  for  this  notebook:  to
summarize  from time to time (2 times per week?)  the important  events of
the past period.  Saturday  the 30th I saw Jamois7  and agreed with her that I
could not immediately  present  The Possessed  in Montparnasse.  Despite
her dryness and air of bitterness , she has charm,  with her proper  sandals,
her  small,  well-kept  feet,  her  long  body,  and  this  beautiful,  sad  look.

Telephoned  Barrault  afterward  to tell him of my agreement.  Sleep early. I
don't sleep all night, fall asleep at 3 A.M., wake up at 5 A.M., eat a lot,
and, beneath  the rain, take to the road. I don't leave the steering  wheel for
eleven  hours-nibbling  a  biscuit  from  time  to  time-and  the  rain  doesn't
leave me either until I reach the Drome  where it lets up a bit over the
heights  of Nyons  so that the scent of the lavender  comes to me, awakens
me, and enlivens  my heart. The landscape  that I recognize  nourishes  me
again and I arrive happy. The Isle where,  in the scanty room at the Hotel
St. Martin, I feel at once sheltered and pacified.
Meet up with Rene Char at the Isle. Sadness  to see him chased out of
his house and his park (where  hideous  H.L.M.  buildings8  now rise) and
stuck  in  this  small  hotel  room  at  St.  Martin.  In  Camphoux,  at  the
Mathieu's,  Mme. Mathieu,  an aged Clytemnestra,  wears glasses.  As for M.
Mathieu,  the estate manager  became  an impotent  old man who can no
longer  even control his explosions.  I take care of the rented house,  a bit
sad but charming,  however , with its view of the Luberon.  Surely it will not
please X. But I try to make it more comfortable.  3 long walks with R.C.
on the roads of the Luberon  peaks. The violent  light, infinite  space, moves
me. I would like to live here again, find a house that suits me, finally settle
down a bit. At the same time, I think a lot about Mi. and about her life
here. At dinner, Mme. Mathieu  says: "Even the swallows  have become
foolish.  Instead  of taking silt for their nests they take the crop soil. And for
the first time in decades,  twelve  of the thirteen  nests in Camphoux  have
been crushed  along with their eggs" and Char: "one would  hope that at
least the birds would salvage honor ."
The 4th I am still awaiting  a telegram  or telephone  call from X. telling
me of her arrival with the children. It is Mme. Mathieu  who tells me that
X. will only stay here for four days and that her family  will be in Paris.
Anger and disaffection,  which mount against  her and against  me, we who
never stop waiting for signs of tenderness  there where there are none and
cannot be any .
September  30.

A month after looking  around  the Vaucluse  for a house,  purchased  the
one in Lourmarin.  Then off toward St. Jean to find Mi. For hundreds  of
kilometers,  through  the scent of the grape harvest,  elation.  Then the great,
foamy sea. Pleasure  like those long waves,  flowing,  grating  on. Depart  in
the morning for Paris and the pink briars in the pine forests.  Still twelve
hours behind the steering wheel, then Paris.
Visit from the writer turned  miserable  intellectual  (the slum of the St.
Denis suburb).
Pasternak.  ". . . this live and throbbing  element  of aristocratism  that,
following  Pushkin,  we call the highest  Mozartian  principle,  the Mozartian
element."
J. de Beer. "Adultery should  be punished  by death. True lovers could
then be counted ." Even this is not true. Often,  spinelessness  is stronger
than fear .
October  17.
Depart  Vaucluse. I should sum up these 18 days, and I will do so.
October  18.
.1 disembark  from the night train in the dry and cold mistral  at Isle-sur -
Sorgue. Fine and grand elation  all day in the glittering  light. I feel all my
strengths.
19.
Incessant  light. In the empty house, without  any furniture,  up for long
hours gazing at the dead leaves and red woodbine,  blown  by the fierce
wind, entering into the rooms.  The Mistral.

27.
Return  to Paris. During  the night reassuring  voices announce  the names
of the stations. Nation.
Do not complain.  Do not boast about what one is, nor about what one
does. If one gives, consider that one has received.
November 5.
Letter from E.B.'s husband  telling  me that his wife wants to commit
suicide  and  asking  me  to  intervene.  I  who  so  easily  and  often  so
senselessly  feels responsibility  toward  people,  I do not feel any in this
case. That said, I must intervene.
November  7,  45  years  old.  How  I  wanted  a  day  of  solitude  and
reflection.  Beginning  now, this detachment  will be realized  at fifty. That
day, I will reign.
Democracy  is not the rule of the majority  but the protection  of the
minority .
November 22.
Dinner  with Char and St. John Perse. Islands.  Afternoon  Waldo Frank"
in a dreary room.
December .
Possessed rehearsals.'  Curly, who is my age, seems too old to play
Stavrogin. M.  We change jobs, that's all. L. -  Yes, but women will
escape us and we will die.

MMi. Her marvelous appetite.
March 3.
I struggle like a fish caught in the net's meshes.
March 17.
Death of Paul Oettly2  at 69 years old. The next day his old mother  (93
years old) commits suicide.
Catherine is ill. I suspend my departure for the Midi. Heartache.
March 20.
Maman  operated  on.3  The  telegram  from  L.  reaches  me  Saturday
morning.  The following  night, airplane  at three o'clock  in the morning.  7
o'clock  in Algiers.  Always  the same impression  over this land of Maison-
Blanche4:  my land. And yet the sky is grey, the air gentle and spongy. I
settle at the clinic on the heights of  Algiers.
In the spotless room with bare white walls: nothing.  A handkerchief  and a
small  comb.  On  the  sheets:  her  knotty  hands.  Outside,  an  admirable
landscape  that extends  to the gulf. But the light and space bother her. She
wants the room to be kept shaded.
She speaks  of Philippe,  to whom Paule has just become  engaged: "His
father is good, his mother  is good, his sister is good. They are ancient
people.  He, he has done his duty. He has seen Paule to the petroleum  and
(gesture of two index fingers coming together).  All the better ."
"Later,  when  I  am  at  home,  the  doctor  will  give  me  something  to
recover ." She says "thank  you monsieur  Doctor." She cannot  do anything:

neither  read, she does not know how, nor sew or embroider , because  of her
fingers, nor listen, since she is deaf.  Time drips, heavy , slow . . .
Her lips have disappeared.  But her nose, so fine, so straight-her  large
forehead,  full of nobility , her brilliant  black eyes in the bony and shining
arch.
She suffers silently. She obeys. Around her the family sits, dense, mute,
and waiting.  . . . Her brother  Joseph,  younger  by a few years, also waits-
but as he would wait for his turn-resigned and sad.
March 23.
Bad  night.  It  rains  in  the  morning  over  the  gulf  and  the  hills. The
wisterias:  they  filled  my  youth  with  their  scent,  with  their  rich  and
mysterious  ardor.... Again,  endlessly . They have been more alive, more
present  in my life than many people  ... except  the one who suffers next to
me and whose  silence has never ceased  speaking  to me throughout  half
my life.
She says  Vichy5  for all mineral water .
The flesh, the poor flesh, miserable, dirty, faded, humiliated.  The sacred
flesh.
Leopold  [F ... 16 on Nietzsche:  "the consent  to the life that the union of
patience and revolt led to is the highest peak of life."
This strange  habit of preceding  her name with the distinction  Widow,
which had been with her all her life, and which still appears  on hospital
papers today .
She lived in ignorance  of all things-except  suffering and patience-and
she  continues  to  absorb  physical  suffering  today,  with  the  same
gentleness....

The  people  whom  neither  the  newspaper ,  nor  the  radio,  nor  any
technology  has touched.  As they were a hundred  years ago, and hardly
more distorted by the social context.
It looks like I've had blood in my stool. No?  Ah! Good.
The smell of syringes.  The hill covered  in acanthus,  reeds, cypress,
pines, palm trees, orange trees, medlar trees, and wisteria.
March 29.
Return to Paris.
Sophocles danced and played ball well.
"Detras de la cruz esta el demonio."7
Destroy everything in my life that is not this poverty . To lose everything.
Pasternak  on Scriabin8:  "Each one of us has known  a similar  moment
in  our  life. To  each  one  of  us  the  revelation  is  offered,  this  gift  of  a
personality promised, and, in its way , to each one this promise is kept."
Id.: "The greatest  works in the entire world, while speaking  of the most
diverse things, in fact tell us of their own birth."
Id.: "... one can, day after day, run to rendezvous  with a bit of built-up
earth, as if it were a living being."
Nietzsche.  "No suffering could, nor will be able to drive me to give
false testimony against life, such as I know it."
Id. "Six solitudes are already known to him
But even the sea was not solitary enough for him ..."

On the use of fame as the camouflage behind  which "the self can again
invisibly play with and laugh at himself."
"Win freedom  and spiritual  joy, so as to be able to create and not be
opressed by outside ideals."
Historical meaning is only a masked theology .
N.  Northern  man,  suddenly  placed  before  the  sky  of  Naples,  one
evening: "And you could have died without seeing that!"
August  20, 1880, letter to Gast where he laments  Wagner's  friendship
"... what good is it for me to be right about many matters."
The man with a deep heart needs friends unless he has his God.
The men who have "a long-range willpower ."
It  is  through  L'Esprit  souterrain`'  that  Nietzsche  discovered
Uostoyevsky  in '87; he compare s this with the discovery  of Le Rouge et le
Noir.'
In '88 he discovers Strindber g's Les Maries"
April 1st.
Love  on  the  contrary,  but  impossible.  Search  no  more?  Receive  it.
Ultra-powerful in creation.
Nietzsche  in '87 (43 years old): "My life is, at this very moment,  at its
meridian: one door closes, another one opens."
April 28.
Arrival  Lourmarin.  Grey sky. In the garden,  marvelous  roses weighed
down by water, luscious  like fruits. The rosemary  is in bloom.  Stroll, and

in the evening, the irises' violet shade deepens.  Worn out.
For years I've wanted  to live according  to everyone  else's morals. I've
forced myself to live like everyone  else, to look like everyone  else. I said
what was necessary to join together, even when I felt separate.  And after
all of this, catastrophe came. Now I wander  amid the debris,  I am lawless,
torn to pieces,  alone and accepting  to be so, resigned  to my singularity  and
to my infirmities.  And I must rebuild a truth-after  having  lived all my life
in a sort of lie.
At least the theatre helps me. The parody  is better than the lie: it is
closer to the truth that it performs.
May.
Resumed  work.  Have  progressed  with  the  first  part  of  First  Man.
Recognition of this country , of its solitude, of its beauty .
May 13.
Travel to  Arles. M. Pentecote's splendid youth; travel to  Toulon.
Television  broadcast.'  I cannot  "appear"  now without  causing  reactions.
Remember ,  repeat  to  myself,   constantly ,  that  I  must  eliminate  all
unproductive  polemic.  Exalt all which must be. Silence  the rest. If I do not
hold myself  to this rule, in the current  state of things,  I must agree to pay
and be punished . See stages of healing.'  Hang on to this precious  tremor,
this total silence that I have found here.  The rest does not matter .
For almost five years I have been critical  of myself,  of what I believed,
of  what  I  lived. This  is  why  those  who  share  the  same  ideas  believe
themselves  to be the target, and bear such an intense  grudge  against me;
but no, I wage war with myself  and I will destroy  myself,  or I will be
reborn, that is all.

The Marseillais  lovers.  Under the beautiful  sky, the juicy sea, the gaudy
and colorful city, their desire always renewed,  tiresome  at first and finally
throwing  them  into  an  endless  intoxication....  Only  the  creeks,  white
stones, and sea ablaze with light are chaste.
Grenier . Ermitages  Maronites  (Un Ete au Liban).5  "In the same cave,
one sees almost  effaced-and  it is a pity-a small, much older crucifixion
where  Christ,  knees  half  bent,  seems  to  wear  bouffant  pants  like  the
country's  inhabitants-and  it is accompanied  by strangelo  lettering (what is
Strangelo)."  To  write  beneath  the  title  -  Le  Strangelo-a  not  quite
comprehensible narrative.
May 21.
This is the red season. Cherries and poppies.
At noon the sound of a tractor  in the small valley of Lourmarin  ... Like
that of the boat's engine  in the port of Chios, overpowered  by the heat, and
I was in the shade-filled  cabin, waiting;  yes, like today, full of a love
without object.6
I love the small lizards,  as dry as the stones where they run. They are
like me, of skin and bone.
Paris, June '59.
I have abandoned  the moral point of view. Morals  lead to abstraction
and  to  injustic e.  They  are  the  mother  of  fanaticism  and  blindness.
Whoever  is virtuous  must cut off the heads. But what to say of those who
profess  morality  without  being able to live up to its high standards.  The
heads fall and he legislates,  unfaithful.  Morality  cuts in two, separates,
wastes  away. One must flee morality , accept being judged  and not judging,
saying yes, creating unity-and for the time being, suf fering agony .
Danoise de Joski.

The city drunk with heat.
Venice from July 6 to July 13.7
The heavy and dead heat, like an enormous  sponge,  was crushing  the
lagoon,  cutting  the hideaway  from the side of the Pont de la Liberte  and,
installed  above the city, weighed  on it, obstructing  the outlets  of the streets
and canals, filling all the free space between  the closely  situated houses.
No exit door, no escape,  a heat trap where we must live and go round in
circles.  An  army  of  hideous  tourists  turned  thus,  furiously ,  crazed,
sweating,  savage,  dressed  grotesquely ,  like  the  terrible  troupe  of  an
immense  circus, suddenly  idle and terrified  to be so. The whole city was
drunk  with  heat.  In  the  morning  we  read  in  11  Gazzattino  that  some
Venetians,  driven crazy by the heat, had been sent to the insane asylum.
Exhausted  cats were everywhere . Occasionally  one of them rose, risking  a
few steps on the burning  campo,  and at once the soft and malicious  sun,
which  was  on  the  lookout,  knocked  it  down.  Rats  hoisted  themselves
above the canals'  stagnant  waters and three seconds  later fell back into the
water en masse.  This soft and burning  heat seemed  to eat away at the
increasingly  decrepit city, the peeling  splendor  of the palaces,  the burning
campos,  the moldy foundations  and piles of mooring,  and Venice plunges
a little deeper into the lagoon.
We wandered, for our part, unable  to eat, and we nourished  ourselves
with coffees and ice creams,  unable  to sleep, and we no longer knew
where the days and nights began and ended.  The day surprised  us on the
Lido  beach,  in  the  tepid  and  viscous  morning  water,  or  on  a  gondola
wandering  in the lost canals while the sky became  a greyish  pink above
the suddenly turquoise  tiles. The city was empty then, but the heat did not
let up, neither  at this hour nor in the evening  hour, always  steady, always
burning  and humid,  and Venice has always  been surrounded,  while, giving
up hope of ever leaving,  we looked  only to breathe  one more time, and
another  still, in short to last in this strange  time without  landmarks nor
rest, nerves  on edge from coffee and insomnia,  torn from life. Beings
beyond  time, but beings,  likewise, that no one, nor anything  in the world,
desired  other than in the continuation  of this crazed and immobile  insanity ,

in  the  center  of  the  frozen  fire  that  devoured  Venice,  hour  after  hour,
endlessly , and at this point where we waited  for the instant  when suddenly
the city, earlier  still glittering  with colors  and beauty, would  sink into
ashes, which  not even the absent wind would  carry away. We waited,
hanging  on to one another , unable to separate  ourselves,  burning  also, but
with a sort of interminable and strange joy , on this pyre of beauty .
D.J. notices  a young Danish  girl, incidentally  rather ugly, on the terrace
of a cafe and then in the theatre.  He approaches  her, sits next to her, then a
few moments  pass, then they get up together . My heart aches seeing  the
submissive  air with which she follows  him. That submissivenes s that they
all have at this moment.
It is there that J. informs  me that she is pregnant  by P.; I advise her to
talk to him about it. He laughs  and an hour later returns  to his hotel with
X., in front of J. J. remains with X., who likes her , and falls silent.
Novel.  Love bursts between  them as a passion  of flesh and heart. Days
and days vibrant,  and a total blending to the point where the flesh becomes
sensitive  and touched  like the heart. United  everywhere,  in the sailboat,
and continuous  desire reborn  as emotion.  For him it is a struggle  against
death, against himself,  against  oblivion,  against  her and her weak nature,
and finally  he gives up, goes back between  her hands. And after her there
will be nobody  else, he knows  it, promises  it in the only place he finds
slightly  sacred.  At Saint Julien the Poor, where Greece  joins with Christ,
he decides  to keel) this promise despite  everything,  so that behind this
being  whom  he  clutches  against  him,  there  is  only  emptiness,  and  he
clutches  her tighter  and tighter, melting  into her, opening  her tip until the
agonizing  struggle to at last take refuge,  sheltering  himself  there forever,
in  the  love  finally  recovered,  the  place  where  the  senses  themselves
sparkle  in  the  light,  purify  him  on  an  unremitting  pyre,  or  a  jubilant
gushing  water-crowning  themselves  with a limitless  gratitude.  This hour
where the borders  of bodies fall, where the singular  being is finally born in
the total nakedness of profound benefaction.
August 13.

Absence,  painful  frustration.  But my heart is alive, my heart is finally
alive.  So  it  was  not  true  that  indifference  had  overcome  everything.
Gratitude,  fiery  acknowledgme nt  to  Mi. Yes,  jealousy  testifies  for  the
spirit. It's the pain of seeing the other reduced  to an object and the desire
that everyone  and everything  acknowledge  it as subject.  One is not jealous
of God.
Evening  fell on the small valley, the old walls, the crenels,  the patient
houses.  The rustling of the grass beneath my feet.
September .
Y. Printemps  awakens  at 11 o'clock,  stays in bed, lunches  in bed around
1  or  2  o'clock,  and  then  stays  in  bed  until  the  end  of  the  afternoon
surrounded  by France-Dimanche,  Match,  Noir et Blanc, Cinemonde,8  etc.,
etc., which she devours.
Mi, to whom I speak,  half-laughing,  half-serious,  of extreme  old age,
when the flight of things is finished,  of the jubilation  of the senses,  etc.,
bursts into sobs, "I love love so much!"
Before  writing  a novel, I'll put myself  in a state of darkness  for years.
Test of daily concentration, intellectual asceticism, and extreme lucidity .
Culpability  of a people?  (France like Germany  - Judasthese  who lie
idle, etc.).
How is your dear mother?  I was pained  to lose her 3 months  ago. Oh, I
was unaware of that detail.
One hundred  forty thousand  dying per day; ninety-seven  per minute;
fifty-seven million in one year .
This left that I belong to, in spite of me and in spite of it.
The death that began in  Adam ends in Christ.

The most exhausting effort in my life has been to suppress  my own
nature in order to make it serve my biggest  plans. Here and there-here and
there only-have I succeeded.
For the mature  man, only happy loves can prolong  his youth.  Other
loves throw him suddenly into old age.
Unfortunate  to  reach  the  age  of  responsibilities  without  the  loss  of
sensibility  that usually  corresponds  to it and then allows for the exercising
of these responsibilities without excessive regard for others.
M.  Mathieu"  retires  from  his  position  as  a  literature  professor .  To
confront death there is only the recipe of classical humanism.
In the towns of stone the wind and rain bring only the memory  of
meadows and sky .
For me, physical  love has always  been bound to an irresistible  feeling
of innocence and joy . Thus, I cannot love in tears but in exaltation.
The sea, divinity .
Over the primitive ground  the rains have been falling for centuries in an
uninterrupted manner .
It is in the sea that life is born, and for all of time immemorial , which
has  led  life  from  the  first  cell  to  the  organized  marine  creature,  the
continent,  without animal  or plant life, was only a land of stones filled
solely  with  the  sound  of  wind  and  rain  in  the  center  of  an  enormous
silence,  traverse d by no movement  other than the rapid shade of large
clouds and the racing waters over the ocean basins.
After billions of years the first living being exited the sea and set foot
on terra firma. It looked  like a scorpion.  This was three hundred and fifty
million years ago.

The flying fish make their nests in the abysses  so as to shelter  their eggs
there.
In the Sar gasso Sea, two million tons of algae.
The large red jellyfish,  at first the size of a thimble,  in the springtime
becomes  broad like an umbrella.  It moves  by pulsations,  trailing behind  it
long  tentacles  and  sheltering  under  its  parasol  clusters  of  codfish  that
move along with it.
The fish that climbs higher than its habitat,  passes an invisible  border,
bursts, and falls to the surface.
The deep sea squid, unlike those of the surface,  which emit an ink, emit
a luminous cloud.  They hide themselves in the light.
Terra firma, finally, is nothing  but a very thin plate on the sea. One day
the ocean will reign.
There  are  waves  that  reach  us  from  Cape  Horn  after  a  trip  of  ten
thousand  kilometers.  The  tidal  wave  of  358  rose  in  the  eastern
Mediterranean,  submer ging the low islands  and coasts  and leaving  the
fishing boats on the forts of  Alexandria.
I  am  a  writer.  It  is  not  I  but  the  pen  that  thinks,  rememb ers,  or
discovers.
I cannot live with people  for a long time. I need a little solitude,  a
portion of eternity .
In the Grand Luberon, a domesticated  horse, which has escaped,  lives
in freedom, alone for years. Short story? A man who has heard talk of it
goes to look for it. He is converted to the free life.
For Nemesis (in Lourmarin December '59).

Black  horse,  white  horse,  a  single  hand  of  man  controls  the  two
passions.  At breakneck  speed,  the race is joyous.  Truth lies, frankness
hides. Hide yourself in the light.
The world fills you and you are empty: plenitude.
Soft sound of foam on the morning  beach;  it fills the world as much as
the clatter of fame. Both come from silence.
The one who refuses  chooses  himself,  who covets  prefers  himself.  Do
not ask nor refuse.  Accept surrender .
Flames of ice crown the days; sleep in the motionless fire.
Equally  hard, equally  soft, the slope, the slope of the day. But at the
summit? a single mountain.
The  night  burns,  the  sun  creates  darkness.  0  earth  that  suffices  at
everything.  Freed of everything,  enslaved  to yourself.  Enslaved  to others:
freed of nothing. Select your servitude.
Behind  the cross, the devil.'  Leave them together . Your empty altar is
elsewhere.
The waters of pleasure  and of sea are equally  salty. Even within the
wave.
The exiled individual reigns,  the king is on his knees.  In the desert,
solitude ceases.
On the sea, without  truce, from port to island,  running  in the light,
above the liquid abyss, joy , as long as very long life.
You mask yourself, here they are naked.
In the brief day that is given to you, warm and illuminate,  without
deviating from your course.

Millions of other suns will come for your rest.
On the flagstones of joy , the first slumber .
Sowed  by the wind, reaped  by the wind, and creative  nonetheless,  such
is man, through the centuries, and proud to live a single instant.
"The vanity of men erects these magnificent  mansions  only to receive
the inevitable  host there, Death,  with all the ceremonies  of superstitious
awe" (Conrad,  Anguish).
Saint  Ignace  (spiritual  journal)  "indignant"  not  to  receive  from  the
heavens  confirm ation of his election  by the Holy Trinity. But he wished
"to die with Jesus rather than live with another .' 12  Hell would make him
more unhappy  by the blasphemy  that is made of God's name than by the
sufferings one endures there.
Id.: he tells the devil who tempts  him: "Stay in your place " Elsewhere:
that God is immutable and the devil immobile and changing.
For Don Faust.~l  There is no more Don Juan because  love is free.
There are men who please more than others. But neither sin nor heroism.
There is lope de Vega's Don Juan: La promesse  accomplice  (translate  it
and also Zorrilla ).'  Philip IV's love for sister Marguerite  de la Croix-1  (see
the  famous  trials  of  Spain),  see  also  (p.  189  and  sq.)  Don  Juan  and
Gregorio Maranon's Don Juan.ti
In "Parabole"7  (p. 388) the one condemned  to death who had said that
he was innocen t, then acknowledged  that he was not, resigned  himself.
Then,  beneath  the  noose,  he  sees  a  bird  flying  toward  a  branch  and
alighting  there  where  it  begins  to  sing;  he  seizes  the  noose  then  and
shrieks that he is innocent.
Thus I have chosen you and this is what will help me pass this bad
period,  to no longer suffer from the details  of what I recognize  as just and
legitimate in principle....

What  also  helped  me-equity-this  difficult  acceptance  of  oneself  and
others is creation. But since I am in this crisis, in this sort of impotence,  I
understand  this ignoble  desire for possession  that, in others,  has always
incensed  me.  One  can  conquer  a  being  for  lack  of  being  conquered
oneself.  And it is true that at precisely  this moment,  I have need of this
belonging  that you had given me. For this reason,  as much as for your
evasion,  I have suffered from your lie. But this will pass. A little more
pessimism  still and unhappiness  will radiate  :in turn: I will become  myself
again.
I have suffered from what you revealed  to me: that's a fact. But you do
not have to be sad for my sadness.  I am wrong,  I know it, and if I cannot
prevent  my heart from being unjust, I can at least make it capable  of
equity. It will not be difficult for me to overcome  the injustice  that I do to
you in my heart. I know that I have done everything  to detach  you from
me. All my life, as soon as a person  got attached  to me, I did everything  to
distance  them. There is of course  the incapacity  wherein  I am to make
commitments,  my taste for people,  of multiplicity , my pessimism  with
regard  to myself.  But perhaps  I was not as frivolous  as I say. The first
person  whom I loved and I was faithful  to escaped  me through drugs,
through  betrayal.  Maybe  many things came from this, from vanity, from
fear of suffering further, and yet I've accepted  so much suffering. But I
have in turn escaped  from everyone since and, in a certain  way, I wanted
everyone  to escape  from me. Even X. I have done whatever  necessary  to
discourage  her. I do not believe  that she escaped  me, that she gave herself
even fleetingly  to another  man. I am not sure [...].11  But if she did not do
it, it would be because  of a decision due to her inner heroism,  not because
of an overabundance  of a love that wants to give without  asking anything
in exchange.  So, I have done everything  necessary  in order for you to
escape  from  me.  And  the  more  the  captivation  of  that  September
increased,  the more I wanted  to break a certain  enchantment.  Thus, in a
certain  way, you have escaped  me. That is the sometimes  awful justice  of
this world. Betrayal answers  betrayal,  the mask of love is answered  by the
disappearance  of love. And in this particular  case, I, who have claimed
and lived all liberties,  I know and I recognize  that it is right and good that,

in your turn, you have lived one or two liberties.  The count is not even
complete.
To help myself,  in any case, I will not only help myself  to this cold
equity of the heart but to the preference,  to the tenderness,  that I carry for
you. I sometime s accuse  myself  of being incapable  of love. Maybe  this is
true, but I have been able to select a few people  and to keep for them,
faithfully , the best of me, no matter what they do.

4FTERIVORD
IN THE final weeks of December  1959, Albert  Camus  told his friend
Urbain  Polge: "What pleases  me is that I have finally  found the cemetery
where I will be buried.  I will be fine there."  Struggling  with his writing,
Camus  sent a letter to Catherine  Sellers  in which he wrote: "To work, one
must deprive oneself, and die without aid. So let's die, because I don't
want to live without  working...."  On December  30 he wrote a line to
Maria Casares  regarding  his return to Paris, which,  had the line been
written  in  one  of  his  novels,  would  certainly  have  seemed  to  stretch
believability:  "Let's  say  [Tuesday]  in  principle,  taking  into  account
surprises on the road ..... I
And  it  was  on  the  road,  five  days  after  those  words  were  written-
January  4,  1960-that  the  dashboard  clock  of  Michel  Gallimard's  1959
Facel Vega HK 500 stopped  ticking at 1:55 e.ni. The clock lay in a nearby
field. Fragments  of the wreckag e spread  almost  five hundred  feet. A tire
sat alone on the scarred  cement.  Drizzle  dotted the road. A black leather
valise lay in the mud, tossed next to the tree around  which the car was
wrapped.
Wedged into the back windshield  of the wrecked  automobile  was the
body of Albert Camus,  a long scratch etched  along his forehead,  his eyes
stretched  open. Killed instantly . Official cause of death: "fracture of the
skull and spinal column."
He was forty-six.
In time, Camus'  mud-caked  valise was returned  to his wife, Francine.
When  she  opened  the  briefcase-Camus  never  used  the  lock-she  found
several  items of note, including  a French  translation  of Nietzsche's  The
Gay Science and a copy of Shakespeare's  Othello,  also in a French  trans-
lation.2  At the time of his death, it is believed  Camus  had begun working
in earnest  on his adaptation  of the Shakespearean  tragedy , as later, in a

valise sent by train, Mme. Camus  discovered  a typed transcript  of the play,
which had her husband's  handwritten  revisions  and markings  throughout
the first three acts.'
Nonetheless  these  books  were  not  the  most  important  items  in  the
muddy  briefcase.  Among  Camus'  passport,  personal  photographs,  and
letters,  also inside the valise was the last volume  of these Notebooks  (IX),
which he carried  with him, literally , until his death. And then there was,
perhaps,  the  biggest  discovery:  Le  Premier  Homme,4  the  largely
autobiographical  novel that Camus had hoped would be his big book, his
War  and  Peace.  When  it  was  recovered  there  were  144  pages,  an
incomplete  first draft, scrawled  in his small, tight script,  often without
periods  or commas.  For years this draft remained  behind  closed  doors. It
was  not  until  1.994,  thirty-seven  years  after  the  French  journal  Arts
sarcastically  wrote of Camus,  "'Le Nobel couronne  une oeuvre  terminee,
that the general  public  would  finally  be offered a glimpse  of this last
unfinished manuscript and see for themselves that  Arts had been wrong.
In her introduction  to the American edition  of Le Premier  Homme,
Camus'  daughter , Catherine,  acknowledged  the hostile  attitudes  toward  her
father, which seemed  to permeate  France  at the time, as one of the main
reasons  the  manuscript  was  not  published  sooner.  But  when  the
manuscript  was finally  published,  instead  of drawing  the censure  of past
political  foes, the book met with widespread  critical  acclaim,  showing  Arts
and other politically  motivated  critics that Camus  clearly  had much left to
contribute.  Even  though,  after  winning  the  Nobel  Prize,  only  The
Possessed  and a handful  of essays were published  while he was still alive,
we can see in Le Premier  Homme  the promise  that Camus'  best work may
have been yet to come.
In addition  to Le Premier  Homme,  we can see in these Notebo oks the
beginnings  of several  projects  Camus  had planned  and begun taking notes
for.  There  were  the  two  plays:  one  concerning  the  life  of  Julie  de
Lespinasse  and the other attempting  to blend the legend  of Don Juan,
which had preoccupied  Camus  for much of his life, with that of Faust.
Then there was the essay on Nemesis,  who Camus  saw as the goddess  of

moderation  and on whom he had planned  to center his next major writing
cycle.  Like  the  previous  cycles-the  first  on  the  absurd,  the  second  on
revolt-this cycle on love was to involve a play , a novel, and an essay .
Ultimately , though,  none of these works would  be completed.  At the
point where he may have been at the top of  his craft, Camus  was removed
from the world,  and we were thus forced  to accept,  as Jean-Paul  Sartre
wrote in his Tribute 'o Albert  Camus,  that "every  life that is cut off-even
the life of so young  a man-is  at one and the same time a phonograph
record that is broken and a complete life."6
Camus  sensed  the immediacy  and constant  presence  of death around
him-he  knew all too well that his lungs would likely not allow him to live
to old age-but  with the many weights bearing  on him at the time, what he
might not have been so sure of, what we now know, what we see clearly,
is that his voice, like the last words of his Caligula,  is still alive and will
continue to live long past his shortened life.











































