EXILE
AND THE
KINGDOM
ALBERT CAMUS
Translated from the French by
JUSTIN O'BRIEN
Vintage Books
A DIVISIONOFRANDOM HOUSE
New York
VINTAGE BOOKS are published by ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC. and RANDOM HOUSE, INC.
© Copyright,195 7, 1958, by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and
Pan - American Copyright Conventions.
Published in New York by Random House, Inc.,
and in Toronto, Canada, by Random House of Canada Limited.

Originally publi shed in France as
L'Exil et le Royaume© 1957 Librairie Gallimard
Reprinted by arrangement with Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
CONTENTS
THE ADULTEROUS WOMAN ...4
THE RENEGADE ..13
THE SILENT MEN ... 21
THE GUEST ..28
THE ARTIST AT WORK ..36
THE GROWING STONE ..50
ABOUT THE AUTHOR ..66
THE ADULTEROUS
WOMAN
A HOUSEFLY had been circling for the last few minutes in the bus, though the windows were
closed. An odd sight here, it had been silently flying back and forth on tired wings. Janine lost
track of it, then saw  it  light on her husband’s motionless hand. The weather was cold. The fly
shuddered with each gust of sandy wind that scratched against the windows. In the meager light
of  the  winter  mo rning,  with  a  great  fracas  of  sheet  metal  and  axles,  the  vehicle  was  rolling,

pitching,  and  making  hardly  any  progress.  Janine  looked  at  [4]  her  husband.  With  wisps  of
graying  hair growing  low on a  narrow forehead, a broad nose, a  flabby mouth, Marcel look ed
like  a  pouting  faun.  At  each  hollow  in  the  pavement  she  felt  him  jostle  against  her.  Then  his
heavy  torso  would  slump  back  on  his  widespread  legs  and  he  would  become  inert  again  and
absent, with vacant  stare. Nothing about  him seemed active  but  his thic k  hairless hands,  made
even  shorter  by the  flannel underwear  extending  below  his  cuffs  and  covering  his  wrists.  His
hands were holding so tight to a little canvas suitcase set between his knees that they appeared
not to feel the fly’s halting progress.
S uddenly the wind was distinctly heard to howl and the gritty fog surrounding the bus became
even thicker. The sand now struck the windows in packets as if hurled by invisible hands. The
fly shook a chilled wing, flexed its legs, and took flight. The bus sl owed and seemed on the point
of stopping. But the wind apparently died down, the fog lifted slightly, and the vehicle resumed
speed.  Gaps  of  light  opened  up  in  the  dust - drowned  land-scape.  Two  or  three  frail,  whitened
palm trees which seemed cut out of met al flashed into sight in the window only to disappear the
next moment. “What a country!” Marcel said.
[5] The bus was full of Arabs pretending to sleep, shrouded in their burnooses. Some had folded
their  legs on the  seat  and  swayed  more  than the  others  i n the  car’s  motion.  Their  silence  and
impassivity began to weigh upon Janine; it seemed to her as if she had been traveling for days
with that mute escort. Yet the bus had left only at dawn from the end of the rail line and for two
hours  in  the  cold  mornin g  it  had  been  advancing  on  a  stony,  desolate,  plateau  which,  in  the
beginning at least, extended its straight  lines all the way to reddish horizons. But the wind had
risen and  gradually swallowed up the  vast  expanse. From that  moment  on, the passengers had
seen nothing more; one after an-other, they had ceased talking and were silently progressing in a
sort of sleepless night, occasionally wiping their lips and eyes irritated by the sand that filtered
into the car.
“Janine!”  She  gave  a  start  at  her  husban d’s call.  Once  again  she  thought  how  ridiculous that
name was for someone tall and sturdy like her. Marcel wanted to know where his sample case
was. With her foot she explored the empty space under the seat and encountered an object which
she decided must be it. She could not stoop over without gasp-ing somewhat. Yet in school she
had won the first [6] prize in gymnastics and hadn’t known what it was to be winded. Was that
so  long  ago?  Twenty - five  years.  Twenty - five  years  were  nothing,  for  it  seemed  to  her only
yesterday when  she  was  hesitat-ing  between  an  independent  life  and  marriage,  just  yesterday
when she was thinking anxiously of the time she might be growing old alone. She was not alone
and that law - student who always wanted to be with her was now at her side. She had even-tually
accepted him although he was a little shorter than she and she didn’t much like his eager, sharp
laugh or his black protruding eyes. But she liked his courage in facing up to life, which he shared
with all the French of this c ountry. She also liked his crestfallen look when events or men failed
to live up to his expectations. Above all, she liked being  loved, and he had showered her with
attentions. By so often making her aware that she existed for him he made her exist  in real ity.
No, she was not alone. . . .
The bus, with many loud honks, was plowing its way through invisible obstacles. Inside the car,
however, no one stirred. Janine suddenly felt some-one staring at her and turned toward the seat

across the aisle. He was no t an Arab, and she was sur-prised not to have noticed him from the
beginning.  [7]  He  was  wearing  the  uniform  of  the  French  regi-ments  of  the  Sahara  and  an
unbleached linen cap above his tanned face, long and pointed like a jackal’s. His gray eyes were
exam ining her with a sort of glum disapproval, in a fixed stare. She sud-denly blushed and turned
back  to  her  husband,  who  was  still  looking  straight  ahead  in  the  fog  and  wind.  She  snuggled
down in her coat. But she could still see the French soldier, long and thin, so thin in his fitted
tunic that he seemed constructed of a dry, friable material, a mixture of sand and bone. Then it
was that she saw the thin hands and burned faces of the Arabs in front of her and noticed that
they seemed to have plenty of room, despite their ample garments, on the seat where she and her
husband felt wedged  in. She pulled her coat around her knees. Yet she wasn’t so  fat — tall and
well rounded rather, plump and still desirable, as she was well aware when men looked at her,
with her rather childish face, her bright, naïve eyes contrasting with this big body she knew to be
warm and inviting.
No, nothing had happened as she had expected. When Marcel had wanted to take her along on
his trip she had protested. For some time he had been thinking of this trip — since the end of the
war,  to  be  precise,  when  business  had  returned  to  [8]  nor-mal.  Before  the  war  the  small  dry -
goods busi-ness he had taken over from his parents on giving up his study of law had provided a
fairly good liv-ing. On the coast the years of youth can be happy ones. But he didn’t much like
physical effort and very soon had given up taking her to the beaches. The little car took them out
of town solely for the Sunday afternoon ride. The rest of the time he pre-ferred his shop full of
multicolored  piece - goods  shaded  by  the  arcades  of  this  half - native,  half - Euro-pean  quarter.
Above the shop they lived in three rooms furnished with Arab hangings and furniture from the
Galerie Barbès. They had not had children. The years had p assed in the semi - darkness be-hind
the half - closed shutters. Summer, the beaches, excursions, the mere sight of the sky were things
of the past. Nothing seemed to interest Marcel but business. She felt she had discovered his true
pas-sion to be money, and, without really knowing why, she didn’t like that. After all, it was to
her ad-vantage. Far from being miserly, he was generous, especially where she was concerned.
“If  something  happened  to  me,”  he  used  to  say,  “you’d  be  pro-vided  for.”  And,  in  fact,  it  i s
essential to provide for one’s needs. But for all the rest, for what is not the most elementary need,
how to provide? This [9] is what she felt vaguely, at infrequent intervals. Meanwhile she helped
Marcel keep his books and occasionally substituted for him in the shop. Summer was always the
hardest, when the heat stifled even the sweet sensation of boredom.
Suddenly,  in  summer  as  it  happened,  the  war,  Marcel  called  up  then  rejected  on  grounds  of
health,  the  scarcity  of  piece - goods,  business  at  a  stands till,  the  streets  empty  and  hot.  If
something happened now, she would no  longer be provided for. This is why, as soon as piece -
goods  came  back  on  the  market,  Marcel  had  thought  of  covering  the  villages  of  the  Upper
Plateaus and  of the South himself in orde r to  do without  a  middleman and  sell directly to  the
Arab merchants. He had wanted to take her along. She knew that travel was diffi-cult, she had
trouble breathing, and she would have preferred staying at home. But he was obsti-nate and she
had accepted b ecause it would have taken too much energy to refuse. Here they were and, truly,
nothing was like what she had imag-ined. She had feared the heat, the swarms of flies, the filthy
hotels reeking of aniseed. She had not thought of the cold, of the biting win d, of these semi - polar
plateaus cluttered with moraines. She had dreamed too of palm trees and soft sand. Now [10]she
saw  that  the  desert  was  not  that  at  all,  but  merely  stone,  stone  everywhere,  in  the  sky  full of

nothing but stone - dust, rasping and cold, as on the ground, where nothing grew among the stones
ex-cept dry grasses.
The bus stopped abruptly. The driver shouted a few words in that language she had heard all her
life without ever understanding it. “What’s the matter?” Marcel asked. The driver, in French this
time, said that the sand must have clogged the car-buretor, and again Marcel cursed this country.
The  driver  laughed  hilariously  and  asserted  that  it  was  nothing,  that  he  would  clean  the
carburetor  and  they’d  be  off again.  He  opened  the  door and  the  cold  wind  blew  into  the  bus,
lashing their faces with a myriad grains of sand. All the Arabs silently plunged their noses into
their  burnooses  and  hud-dled  up.  “Shut  the  door,”  Marcel  shouted.  The  driver  laughed  as  he
came back to the door. With-o ut hurrying, he took some tools from under the dashboard, then,
tiny in the fog, again disappeared ahead without closing the door. Marcel sighed. “You may be
sure he’s never seen a motor in his life.” “Oh, be quiet!” said Janine. Suddenly she gave a start.
On the  shoulder  of the  road  close  to  the  bus,  draped  forms were  standing  still.  Under  [11]the
burnoose’s hood and behind a rampart of veils, only their eyes were visible. Mute, come from
no-where, they were staring at the travelers. “Shep-herds,” Marcel s aid.
Inside the car there was total silence. All the passengers, heads lowered, seemed to be listening
to the voice of the wind loosed across these endless plateaus. Janine was all of a sudden struck
by the almost complete absence of luggage. At the end of the railroad line the driver had hoisted
their trunk and a few bundles onto the roof. In the racks in-side the bus could be seen nothing but
gnarled  sticks  and  shopping - baskets.  All  these  people  of  the  South  apparently  were  traveling
empty - handed.
But the driver was coming back, still brisk. His eyes alone were laughing above the veils with
which he too had masked his face. He announced that they would soon be under way. He closed
the door, the wind became silent, and the rain of sand on the windows co uld be heard better. The
motor coughed and died. After having been urged at great length by the starter, it finally sparked
and the driver raced it by pressing on the gas. With a big hiccough the bus started off. From the
ragged clump of shepherds, still m otionless, a hand rose and then faded into the fog behind them.
Almost [12]at once the vehicle began to bounce on the road, which had become worse. Shaken
up, the  Arabs constantly  swayed.  Nonetheless,  Janine  was  feel-ing  overcome  with sleep  when
there  sudd enly  ap-peared  in  front  of  her  a  little  yellow  box  filled  with  lozenges.  The  jackal -
soldier was smiling at her. She hesitated, took one, and thanked him. The jackal pocketed the box
and simultaneously swallowed his smile. Now he was staring at the road, st raight in front of him.
Janine turned toward Marcel and saw only the solid back of his neck. Through the window he
was watching the denser fog rising from the crumbly embankment.
They had been traveling for hours and fatigue had extinguished all life in the car when shouts
burst forth outside. Children wearing burnooses, whirling like tops, leaping, clapping their hands,
were running around the bus. It was now going down a long street lined with low houses; they
were entering the oasis. The wind was still blow-ing, but the walls intercepted the grains of sand
which had previously cut  off the  light. Yet the sky was still cloudy.  Amidst  shouts, in a great
screech-ing  of  brakes,  the  bus  stopped  in  front  of  the  adobe  arcades  of  a  hotel  with  dirty
windows. Jani ne got out and, once on the pavement, staggered. Above [13] the houses she could
see a slim yellow minaret. On her left rose the first palm trees of the oasis, and she would have

liked to go toward them. But al-though it was close to noon, the cold was bit ter; the wind made
her shiver. She turned toward Marcel and saw the soldier coming toward her. She was expecting
him  to  smile  or  salute.  He  passed  without  looking  at  her  and  disappeared.  Marcel  was  busy
getting down the trunk of piece- - goods, a black foot - locker perched on the bus’s roof. It would
not be easy. The driver was the only one to take care of the luggage and he had al-ready stopped,
standing  on the  roof,  to  hold  forth to  the  circle  of burnooses gathered  around  the  bus.  Janine,
surrounded  with  fac es  that  seemed  cut  out  of  bone  and  leather,  besieged  by  guttural  shouts,
suddenly became  aware  of her  fatigue.  “I’m going  in,”  she  said  to  Marcel,  who  was shouting
impa-tiently at the driver.
She entered the hotel. The manager, a thin, la-conic Frenchman , came to meet her. He led her to
a second - floor balcony overlooking the street and into a room which seemed to have but an iron
bed, a white - enameled chair, an uncurtained wardrobe, and, behind a rush screen, a washbasin
covered  with  fine  sand - dust.  When the  manager  had  closed  the  [14]door,  Janine  felt  the  cold
coming from the bare, whitewashed walls. She didn’t know where to put her bag, where to put
herself.  She  had  either  to  lie  down  or  to  remain  standing,  and  to  shiver  in  either  case.  She
remained stan ding, holding her bag and staring at a sort of window - slit that opened onto the sky
near  the  ceiling.  She  was  waiting,  but  she  didn’t  know  for  what.  She  was  aware  only  of  her
solitude, and of the penetrating cold, and of a greater weight in the region of h er heart. She was
in  fact  dreaming,  almost  deaf  to  the  sounds  rising  from  the  street  along  with  Marcel’s  vocal
out-bursts, more aware on the other hand of that sound of a river coming from the window - slit
and caused by the wind in the palm trees, so close now, it seemed to her. Then the wind seemed
to increase and the gentle ripple of waters became a hissing of waves. She imagined, beyond the
walls, a sea of erect, flexible palm trees unfurling  in the storm. Nothing was like what she had
expected,  but  those invisible  waves  refreshed  her  tired  eyes.  She  was  standing,  heavy,  with
dangling  arms,  slightly  stooped,  as the  cold  climbed  her  thick  legs.  She  was  dreaming  of the
erect and flexible palm trees and of the girl she had once been.
* * *
After havin g washed, they went down to the dining - room. On the bare walls had been painted
camels  and  palm  trees  drowned  in  a  sticky  back-ground  of  pink  and  lavender.  The  arcaded
win-dows let in a meager light. Marcel questioned the hotel manager about the merchants. Then
an eld-erly Arab wearing a military decoration on his tu-nic served them. Marcel, preoccupied,
tore  his  bread  into  little  pieces.  He  kept  his  wife  from drinking  water.  “It  hasn’t  been  boiled.
Take  wine.”  She  didn’t  like  that,  for  wine  made  her  sleepy .  Be-sides,  there  was  pork  on  the
menu. “They don’t eat it because of the Koran. But the Koran didn’t know that well - done pork
doesn’t cause illness. We French know how to cook. What are you think-ing about?” Janine was
not thinking of anything, or perhaps of that victory of the cooks over the prophets. But she had to
hurry. They were to leave the next morning for still farther south; that afternoon they had to see
all  the  important  mer-chants.  Marcel  urged  the  elderly  Arab  to  hurry  the  coffee.  He  nodded
wi thout smiling and pat-tered out. “Slowly in the morning, not too fast in the afternoon,” Marcel
said, laughing. Yet even-tually the coffee came. They barely took time to swallow it and went
out into the dusty, cold street. [16]Marcel called a young Arab to help him carry the trunk, but as

a matter of principle quibbled about the payment. His opinion, which he once more ex-pressed to
Janine, was in fact based on the vague principle that they always asked for twice as much in the
hope of settling for a quarte r of the amount. Janine, ill at ease, followed the two trunk - bearers.
She had put on a wool dress under her heavy coat and would have liked to take up less space.
The pork, although well done, and the small quantity of wine she  had drunk also  bothered her
somewhat.
They  walked  along  a  diminutive  public  garden  planted  with  dusty  trees.  They  encountered
Arabs who stepped out of their way without seeming to see them, wrapping themselves in their
burnooses. Even when they were wearing rags, she felt they had a look of dignity unknown to
the Arabs of her town. Janine followed the trunk, which made a way for her through the crowd.
They went through the gate in an earthen rampart and emerged on a little square planted with the
same  mineral trees and  bordered on t he  far side, where  it  was widest, with arcades and shops.
But they stopped on the square itself in front of a small construction shaped like an artillery shell
and  painted chalky blue. Inside,  in the  single room [17]  lighted solely by the  entrance, an old
Arab with white mustaches stood behind a shiny plank. He was serving tea, raising and lowering
the teapot over three tiny multicolored glasses. Before they could make out anything else in the
darkness, the cool scent  of mint  tea greeted Marcel and Janine a t  the door. Marcel had  barely
crossed  the  thresh-old  and  dodged  the  garlands  of  pewter  teapots,  cups  and  trays,  and  the
postcard displays when he was up against the counter. Janine stayed at the door. She stepped a
little aside so as not to cut off the lig ht. At that moment she perceived in the darkness behind the
old merchant two Arabs smil-ing at them, seated on the bulging sacks that filled the back of the
shop. Red - and - black rugs and em-broidered  scarves hung on the walls; the  floor was cluttered
with s acks and little boxes filled with aromatic seeds. On the counter, beside a sparkling pair of
brass scales and an old yardstick with fig-ures effaced, stood a row of loaves of sugar. One of
them had been unwrapped from its coarse blue paper and cut into on top. The smell of wool and
spices in the room became apparent behind the scent of tea when the old merchant set down the
teapot and said good - day.
Marcel talked rapidly in the low voice he [18] as-sumed when talking business. Then he opened
the trunk, ex hibited the wools and  silks, pushed back the scale and  yardstick to  spread out  his
merchan-dise in front of the old merchant. He got excited, raised his voice, laughed nervously,
like  a  woman  who  wants to  make  an  impression  and  is  not  sure  of herself.  Now, with  hands
spread wide, he was going through the gestures of selling and  buying. The old  man shook his
head, passed the tea tray to the two Arabs behind him, and said just a few words that seemed to
discourage  Marcel.  He  picked  up  his  goods,  piled  them  ba ck  into  the  trunk,  then  wiped  an
imaginary  sweat  from  his  forehead.  He  called  the  little  porter  and  they  started  off toward the
arcades. In the first shop, although the merchant began by exhibiting the same Olympian manner,
they  were  a  little  luckier.  “The y  think  they’re  God  almighty,”  Marcel  said,  “but  they’re  in
business too! Life is hard for every-one.”
Janine followed without answering. The wind had almost ceased. The sky was clearing in spots.
A cold, harsh light came from the deep holes that opened up in the thickness of the clouds. They
had  now  left  the  square. They were walking  in  narrow streets along  earthen walls over  which
hung [19] rot-ted December roses or, from time to time, a pomegranate, dried and wormy. An
odor of dust and coffee, the smok e of a wood fire, the smell of stone and of sheep permeated this

quarter. The  shops,  hollowed  out of the  walls,  were  far  from one  another; Janine  felt  her  feet
getting  heavier. But  her husband was gradually becoming  more cheerful. He was beginning to
sell and  was  feeling  more  kindly;  he  called  Janine  “Baby”; the  trip  would  not  be  wasted.  “Of
course,” Janine said me-chanically, “it’s better to deal directly with them.”
They came back by another street, toward the center. It was late in the afternoon; the s ky was
now almost completely clear. They stopped in the square. Marcel rubbed his hands and looked
affec-tionately  at  the  trunk  in  front  of  them.  “Look,”  said  Janine.  From  the  other  end  of  the
square was coming a tall Arab, thin, vigorous, wearing a sky - -b lue burnoose, soft brown boots
and  gloves,  and  bearing  his  bronzed  aquiline  face  loftily.  Nothing  but  the  chèche  that  he  was
wearing swathed as a turban distinguished him from those French offi-cers in charge of native
affairs  whom  Janine  had  occasionally admired.  He  was  advancing  steadily  toward  them,  but
seemed to be looking beyond their group as he slowly removed the glove  from [20] one hand.
“Well,” said Marcel as he shrugged his shoulders, “there’s one who thinks he’s a general.” Yes,
all of them here had that  look of pride; but  this one, really,  was going too  far. Although they
were  surrounded  by  the  empty space  of the  square,  he  was  walking  straight  toward  the  trunk
without seeing it, without seeing them. Then the distance separating them decreased ra pidly and
the Arab was upon them when Marcel suddenly seized the handle of the foot - locker and pulled it
out of the way. The Arab passed without seeming to no-tice anything and headed with the same
regular  step  toward  the  ramparts.  Janine  looked  at  her  hus band;  he  had  his  crestfallen  look.
“They think they can get  away with anything  now,” he said. Janine did  not reply. She  loathed
that Arab’s stupid arrogance and suddenly felt unhappy. She wanted to leave and thought of her
little  apartment.  The  idea  of  goi ng  back  to  the  hotel,  to  that  icy  room,  discouraged  her.  It
suddenly occurred to her that the manager had advised her to climb up to the ter-race around the
fort to see the desert. She said this to Marcel and that he could leave the trunk at the hotel. But he
was tired and wanted to sleep a lit-tle before dinner. “Please,” said Janine. He looked [21] at her,
suddenly attentive. “Of course, my dear,” he said.
She  waited  for  him  in  the  street  in  front  of the  hotel.  The  white - robed  crowd  was  becoming
larger and larger. Not a single woman could be seen, and it seemed to Janine that she had never
seen so many men. Yet none of them looked at her. Some of them, without appearing to see her,
slowly turned toward her that thin, tanned face that made them all look a like to her, the face of
the French soldier in the bus and that of the gloved Arab, a face both shrewd and proud. They
turned that face toward the foreign woman, they didn’t see her, and then, light and silent, they
walked  around  her  as  she  stood  there  wit h  swelling  ankles.  And  her  discomfort,  her  need  of
getting away in-creased. “Why did I come?” But already Marcel was coming back.
When they climbed the stairs to the fort, it was five o’clock. The wind had died down altogether.
The  sky,  completely  clear, was  now  periwinkle  blue.  The  cold,  now  drier,  made  their  cheeks
smart.  Halfway  up  the  stairs  an  old  Arab,  stretched  out  against  the  wall,  asked  them  if  they
wanted  a  guide,  but  didn’t  budge,  as  if  he  had  been  sure  of [22]their  refusal  in  advance.  The
stai rs were long and steep despite several landings of packed earth. As they climbed, the space
widened and they rose into an ever broader light, cold and dry, in which every sound from the
oasis  reached  them  pure  and  dis-tinct.  The  bright  air  seemed  to  vibrat e  around  them  with  a
vibration increasing  in length as they advanced, as if their progress struck from the crys-tal of
light  a sound  wave that  kept  spreading out. And  as soon as they reached the  terrace and  their

gaze was lost in the vast horizon beyond th e palm grove, it seemed to Janine that the whole sky
rang with a single  short  and piercing  note, whose echoes gradually filled the space above  her,
then suddenly died and left her silently facing the limitless ex-panse.
From east to west, in fact, her ga ze swept slowly, without encountering a single obstacle, along
a  perfect  curve.  Beneath  her,  the  blue - and- - white  terraces  of  the  Arab  town  overlapped  one
another,  splattered  with the  dark - red  spots of pep-pers drying  in  the  sun.  Not  a  soul could  be
seen, b ut from the inner courts, together with the aroma of roasting coffee, there rose laughing
voices or in-comprehensible stamping of feet. Farther off, the palm grove, divided into uneven
squares by clay [23] walls, rustled  its upper  foliage  in a  wind  that  co uld  not  be  felt  up on the
terrace.  Still  farther  off and  all the  way to  the  horizon extended  the  ocher - and - -gray realm of
stones, in which no life was visible. At some distance from the oasis, however, near the wadi that
bordered the palm grove on the west could be seen broad black tents. All around them a flock of
motionless dromedaries, tiny at that dis-tance, formed against the gray ground the black signs of
a strange handwriting, the meaning of which had to be deciphered. Above the desert, the silence
w as as vast as the space.
Janine, leaning her whole body against the para-pet, was speechless, unable to tear herself away
from  the  void  opening  before  her.  Beside  her,  Marcel  was  getting  restless.  He  was  cold;  he
wanted to go back down. What was there to see here, after all? But she could not take her gaze
from the horizon. Over yonder, still farther south, at that point where sky and earth met in a pure
line — over yonder it suddenly seemed there was await-ing her something of which, though it had
always b een lacking, she had never been aware until now. In the advancing afternoon the light
relaxed  and  softened;  it  was passing  from the  crystalline  to  the  liquid.  Simultaneously,  in  the
heart  of a  woman  [24]brought  there  by pure  chance  a  knot  tightened  by the years,  habit,  and
boredom was slowly loosen-ing. She was looking at the nomads’ encampment. She had not even
seen the men living in it; nothing was stirring among the black tents, and yet she could think only
of them whose existence she had barely known un til this day. Homeless, cut off from the world,
they were a handful wandering over the vast territory she could see, which how-ever was but a
paltry part of an even greater ex-panse whose dizzying course stopped only thou-sands of miles
farther south, wher e the first river finally waters the forest. Since the beginning of time, on the
dry earth of this limitless land scraped to the bone, a few  men had  been ceaselessly trudg-ing,
possessing  nothing  but  serving  no  one,  pov-erty - stricken  but  free  lords  of a  st range  kingdom.
Janine did not know why this thought filled her with such a sweet, vast melancholy that it closed
her eyes. She knew that this kingdom had been eternally promised her and yet that it would never
be hers, never again, except in this fleeting moment perhaps when she opened her eyes again on
the suddenly motionless sky and on its waves of steady light, while the  voices rising  from the
Arab town [25] suddenly fell silent. It seemed to her that the world’s course had just stopped and
that, from th at moment on, no one would ever age any more or die. Everywhere, henceforth, life
was suspended- — except  in her heart, where, at the same  moment, someone was weeping with
affliction and wonder.
But the light began to move; the sun, clear and devoid of war mth, went down toward the west,
which became slightly pink, while a gray wave took shape in the east ready to roll slowly over
the vast expanse. A first dog barked and its distant bark rose in the now even colder air. Janine
no-ticed  that  her  teeth  were  ch attering.  “We  are  catching  our  death  of  cold,”  Marcel  said.

“You’re a fool. Let’s go back.” But he took her hand awk-wardly. Docile now, she turned away
from the parapet and followed him. Without moving, the old Arab on the stairs watched them go
down to-w ard the town. She walked along without seeing anyone, bent under a tremendous and
sudden fa-tigue, dragging her body, whose weight now seemed to her unbearable. Her exaltation
had left her. Now she felt too tall, too thick, too white too for this world she had just entered. A
child, the girl, the dry man, the furtive jackal were the only [26]creatures who could silently walk
that  earth.  What  would  she  do  there  henceforth  except  to  drag  her-self  toward  sleep,  toward
death?
She dragged herself, in fact, tow ard the restau-rant with a husband suddenly taciturn unless he
was telling how tired he was, while she was strug-gling weakly against a cold, aware of a fever
ris-ing within her. Then she dragged herself toward her bed, where Marcel came to join her and
pu t the light out at once without asking anything of her. The room was frigid. Janine felt the cold
creeping  up  while  the  fever  was  increasing.  She  breathed  with  difficulty,  her  blood  pumped
with-out warming her; a sort of fear grew within her. She turned ov er and the old iron bedstead
groaned under her weight. No, she didn’t want to fall ill. Her husband was already asleep; she
too  had  to  sleep;  it  was  essential.  The  muffled  sounds  of  the  town  reached  her  through  the
window - slit.  With  a  nasal  twang  old  phono graphs  in  the  Moorish  cafés  ground  out  tunes  she
recognized  vaguely; they reached  her  borne on the  sound of a  slow- - moving crowd. She  must
sleep. But  she was count-ing  black tents; behind  her eyelids motionless cam-els were grazing;
immense solitudes were whirling [27] within her. Yes, why had she come? She fell asleep on that
question.
She awoke a little later. The silence around her was absolute. But, on the edges of town, hoarse
dogs were howling in the soundless night. Janine shivered. She turned over , felt her husband’s
hard shoulder against hers, and suddenly, half asleep, huddled against him. She was drifting on
the  sur-face  of  sleep  without  sinking  in  and  she  clung  to  that  shoulder  with  unconscious
eagerness as her safest  haven. She  was talking, bu t  no  sound  issued  from her  mouth. She was
talking, but she herself hardly heard what she was saying. She could feel only Marcel’s warmth.
For more than twenty years every night thus, in his warmth, just the two of them, even when ill,
even when traveling, as at present . . . Besides, what would she have done alone at home? No
child! Wasn’t that  what  she  lacked? She didn’t  know. She simply followed  Marcel, pleased to
know  that  someone  needed  her.  The  only  joy  he  gave  her  was  the  knowledge  that  she  was
necess ary. Probably he didn’t love her. Love, even when filled with hate, doesn’t have that sullen
face. But what is his face like? They made love in the dark by feel, without seeing each other.
[28]Is there  another  love  than  that  of darkness,  a  love  that  would cry  aloud  in  daylight?  She
didn’t  know, but  she did know that  Marcel needed her and that  she  needed that  need, that  she
lived on it night and day, at night especially — every night, when he didn’t want to be alone, or to
age  or  die,  with  that  set  expression he  assumed  which  she  occasionally  recognized  on  other
men’s  faces,  the  only  common  expression  of  those  madmen  hiding  under  an  ap-pearance  of
wisdom until the  madness seizes them and  hurls  them desperately toward  a  woman’s  body to
bury in it, without desire , everything ter-rifying that solitude and night reveals to them.
Marcel stirred as if to move away from her. No, he didn’t love her; he was merely afraid of what
was not she, and she and he should  long ago have separated and slept alone until the end. B ut
who can always sleep alone? Some men do, cut off from others by a vocation or misfortune, who

go to bed every night in the same bed as death. Marcel never could do so — he above all, a weak
and  disarmed  child  always  frightened  by suffering,  her  own child indeed  who  needed  her  and
who, just at that moment, let out a sort of whimper. She cuddled a little closer and put her hand
on his chest. And to herself she called him with the little love - name she [29] had once given him,
which they still used from time t o time without even thinking of what they were saying.
She  called  him  with  all  her  heart.  After  all,  she  too  needed  him,  his  strength,  his  little
eccentrici-ties, and she too was afraid of death. “If I could overcome that fear, I’d be happy. . . .”
Immed i-ately,  a  nameless  anguish  seized  her.  She  drew  back  from  Marcel.  No,  she  was
overcoming  nothing,  she  was  not  happy,  she  was  going  to  die,  in  truth,  without  having  been
liberated.  Her  heart  pained  her;  she  was  stifling  under  a  huge  weight  that  she  suddenl y
discovered she had been dragging around for twenty years. Now she was struggling under it with
all her strength. She wanted to be liberated even if Marcel, even if the others, never were! Fully
awake, she  sat  up  in  bed and  listened  to  a call that  seemed very close. But  from the  edges of
night the exhausted and yet indefatigable voices of the dogs of the oasis were all that reached her
ears. A slight wind had risen and she heard its light waters flow in the palm grove. It came from
the  south,  where  desert and  night  mingled  now  under  the  again  unchanging  sky,  where  life
stopped, where no one would ever age or die any more. Then the waters of the wind dried up and
she was not even [30] sure of having heard anything except a mute call that she could, after all ,
silence  or  notice.  But  never  again  would  she  know  its  meaning  unless she  re-sponded  to  it  at
once. At once — yes, that much was certain at least!
She  got  up  gently  and  stood  motionless  beside  the  bed,  listening  to  her  husband’s  breathing.
Mar-cel was asl eep. The next moment, the bed’s warmth left her and the cold gripped her. She
dressed  slowly,  feeling  for  her  clothes  in  the  faint  light  coming  through  the  blinds  from  the
street - lamps.  Her  shoes  in  her  hand,  she  reached  the  door.  She  waited  a  moment  more in  the
darkness,  then gently opened  the  door.  The  knob  squeaked  and  she  stood  still.  Her  heart  was
beating madly. She lis-tened with her body tense and, reassured by the si-lence, turned her hand
a little more. The knob’s turning seemed to her interminable . At last she opened the door, slipped
outside, and closed the door with the same stealth. Then, with her cheek against the wood, she
waited. After a moment she made out, in the distance, Marcel’s breathing. She faced about, felt
the icy night air against her cheek, and ran the length of the balcony. The outer door was closed.
While she was slipping the bolt, the night  watchman appeared at the top of the [31] stairs, his
face blurred with sleep, and spoke to her in Arabic. “I’ll be back,” said Janine as she stepped out
into the night.
Garlands of stars hung down from the black sky over the palm trees and houses. She ran along
the short avenue, now empty, that led to the fort. The cold, no longer having to struggle against
the  sun,  had  invaded  the  night;  th e  icy  air  burned  her  lungs.  But  she  ran,  half  blind,  in  the
darkness.  At  the  top  of  the  avenue,  however,  lights  appeared,  then  descended  toward  her
zigzagging. She stopped, caught the whir of turning sprockets and, behind the enlarging lights,
soon  saw  vas t  burnooses  sur-mounting  fragile  bicycle  wheels.  The  burnooses  flapped  against
her;  then  three  red  lights  sprang  out  of  the  black  behind  her  and  disappeared  at  once.  She
continued  running  toward  the  fort.  Halfway  up  the  stairs,  the  air  burned  her  lungs  wit h  such
cutting effect that she wanted to stop. A final burst of energy hurled her despite herself onto the
ter-race, against the parapet, which was now pressing her belly. She was panting and everything

was hazy before her eyes. Her running had not warmed her and she was still trembling all over.
But  the  cold  air  she  was gulping  down  soon flowed  evenly inside  her  and  a  spark  of warmth
began to glow [32] amidst her shivers. Her eyes opened at last on the expanse of night.
Not a breath, not a sound — except a t intervals the muffled crackling of stones that the cold was
reducing  to  sand — disturbed  the  solitude  and  si-lence  surrounding  Janine.  After  a  moment,
how-ever, it seemed to her that the sky above her was moving in a sort of slow gyration. In the
vast  reac hes  of  the  dry,  cold  night,  thousands  of  stars  were  constantly  appearing,  and  their
sparkling ici-cles, loosened at once, began to slip gradually to-ward the horizon. Janine could not
tear herself away from contemplating those drifting flares. She was turn ing with them, and the
apparently station-ary progress little by little identified her with the core of her being, where cold
and  desire  were  now  vying  with each other.  Before  her the  stars were  falling  one  by one  and
being snuffed out among the stones of the desert, and each time Ja-nine opened a little more to
the  night.  Breathing  deeply,  she  forgot  the  cold,  the  dead  weight  of  others,  the  craziness  or
stuffiness  of  life,  the  long  anguish  of  living  and  dying.  After  so  many  years  of  mad,  aimless
fleeing fr om fear, she had come to a stop at last. At the same time, she seemed to re-cover her
roots  and  the  sap  again  rose  in  her  body,  [33]  which  had  ceased  trembling.  Her  whole  belly
pressed against the parapet as she strained toward the moving sky; she was mere ly waiting for
her  fluttering  heart  to  calm  down  and  establish  silence  within  her.  The  last  stars  of  the
constellations dropped their clusters a little lower on the desert horizon and became still. Then,
with  unbearable  gentleness,  the  water  of  night  began to  fill  Janine,  drowned  the  cold,  rose
gradually from the hidden core of her being and overflowed in wave after wave, rising up even to
her mouth full of moans. The next moment, the whole sky stretched out over her, fallen on her
back on the cold earth.
When Janine returned to the room, with the same precautions, Marcel was not awake. But he
whimpered as she got back in bed and a few sec-onds later sat up suddenly. He spoke and she
didn’t  understand  what  he  was  saying.  He  got  up,  turned  on  the  light,  whi ch  blinded  her.  He
staggered toward the washbasin and drank a long draught from the bottle of mineral water. He
was  about  to  slip  between  the  sheets  when,  one  knee  on  the  bed,  he  looked  at  her  without
understanding. She was weeping copiously, unable to res train herself.  “It’s nothing, dear,” she
said, “it’s nothing.”
THE RENEGADE
WHAT A JUMBLE! What a jumble! I  must tidy up  my mind. Since they cut out  my tongue,
another tongue,  it  seems, has been con stantly wagging somewhere  in  my skull,  something  has
been talking, or someone, that suddenly falls si-lent and then it all begins again — oh, I hear too
many  things  I  never  utter,  what  a  jumble,  and  if  I  open  my  mouth  it’s  like  pebbles  rattling
together. Order  and  method,  the  tongue  says,  and  then  goes  on  talk ing  of  other  matters
simultaneously — yes, I always longed for order. At least one thing is cer-tain, I am waiting for
the  missionary who  is to  come and take  my place. Here I am on the  trail, an hour away from
Taghâsa, hidden in a pile of rocks, [35] sitting on my old rifle. Day is breaking over the desert,
it’s still very cold, soon it will be too hot, this country drives men mad and I’ve been here I don’t

know how many years. . . . No, just a lit-tle longer. The missionary is to come this morning, or
this e vening.  I’ve  heard  he’ll come  with a  guide,  perhaps they’ll  have  but  one  camel  between
them. I’ll wait, I am waiting, it’s only the cold making me shiver. Just be patient a little longer,
lousy slave!
But I have been patient for so long. When I was home on that high plateau of the Massif Central,
my coarse father, my boorish mother, the wine, the pork soup every day, the wine above all, sour
and  cold,  and  the  long  winter,  the  frigid  wind,  the  snowdrifts,  the  revolting  bracken — oh,  I
wanted to get away, lea ve them all at once and be-gin to live at last, in the sunlight, with fresh
water. I believed the priest, he spoke to me of the semi-nary, he tutored me daily, he had plenty
of time in that Protestant region, where he used to hug the walls as he crossed th e village. He told
me of the future and of the sun, Catholicism is the sun, he used to say, and he would get me to
read, he beat Latin into my hard head (‘The kid’s bright but he’s pig - headed’), my head was so
hard that, despite all [36] my falls, it has n ever once bled in my life: ‘Bull-headed,’ my pig of a
father  used  to  say.  At  the  sem-inary  they  were  proud  as  punch,  a  recruit  from  the  Protestant
region was a victory, they greeted me like the sun at Austerlitz. The sun was pale and feeble, to
be  sure, be cause of the alcohol, they have drunk  sour wine and the  children’s teeth are set  on
edge, gra gra , one really ought to kill one’s father, but after all there’s no danger that he’ll hurl
him-self into missionary work since he’s now long dead, the tart wine eventually cut through his
stomach, so there’s nothing left but to kill the missionary.
I have something to settle with him and with his teachers, with my teachers who deceived me,
with the whole of lousy Europe, everybody de-ceived me. Missionary work, that’s all they could
say, go out to the savages and tell them: ‘Here is my Lord, just look at him, he never strikes or
kills, he issues his orders in a low voice, he turns the other cheek, he’s the greatest of masters,
choose  him,  just  see  how  much  bette r  he’s  made  me,  of-fend  me  and  you  will  see.’  Yes,  I
believed, gra gra , and I felt better, I had put on weight, I was almost handsome, I wanted to be
offended. When we would walk out  in tight  black rows, in summer, under Grenoble’s hot  sun
and  would  meet girls in [37] cotton dresses, I didn’t  look away, I despised them, I waited  for
them to  offend  me, and  sometimes they would  laugh.  At  such times I would  think:  ‘Let  them
strike  me  and  spit  in  my  face,’  but  their  laughter,  to  tell  the  truth,  came  to  the  sam e  thing,
bristling with teeth and quips that tore me to shreds, the offense and the suffering were sweet to
me!  My  confessor  couldn’t  understand  when  I  used  to  heap  accusations  on  myself:  ‘No,  no,
there’s good in you!’ Good! There was nothing but sour wine in me, and that was all for the best,
how can a man become better if he’s not bad, I had grasped that in everything they taught me.
That’s the  only thing  I  did  grasp,  a  single  idea,  and,  pig - headed  bright  boy,  I  carried  it  to  its
logical conclusion, I wen t out of my way for punishments, I groused at the normal, in short I too
wanted to be an example in order to be noticed and so that after noticing me people would give
credit to what had made me better, through me praise my Lord.
Fierce  sun!  It’s  rising, the  desert  is  changing,  it  has  lost  its  mountain - cyclamen  color,  O  my
moun-tain,  and  the  snow,  the  soft  enveloping  snow,  no,  it’s  a  rather  grayish  yellow,  the  ugly
moment  be-fore  the  great  resplendence.  Nothing,  still  nothing  from  here  to  the  horizon  over
yonder  where  the  [38]  plateau  disappears  in  a  circle  of  still  soft  colors.  Behind  me,  the  trail
climbs to the dune hiding Taghâsa, whose iron name has been beating in my head for so many
years.  The  first  to  mention  it  to  me  was  the  half - blind  old  priest  w ho  had  retired  to  our

monastery, but why do I say the first, he was the only one, and it wasn’t the city of salt, the white
walls  under  the  blinding  sun,  that  struck  me  in  his  account  but  the  cruelty  of  the  savage
inhab-itants and the town closed to all ou tsiders, only one of those who had tried to get in, one
alone, to his knowledge, had lived to relate what he had seen. They had whipped him and driven
him out into the desert after having put salt on his wounds and in his mouth, he had met nomads
who for o nce were compassionate, a stroke of luck, and since then I had been dreaming about his
tale, about the fire of the salt  and the sky, about the House of the Fetish and  his slaves, could
anything more barba-rous, more exciting be imagined, yes, that was my m ission and I had to go
and reveal to them my Lord.
They all expatiated on the subject at the semi-nary to discourage me, pointing out the necessity
of waiting, that  it was not missionary country, that I wasn’t ready yet, I had to prepare myself
[39] spec ially, know who I was, and even then I had to go through tests, then they would see!
But  go  on  waiting,  ah,  no! — yes,  if  they  insisted,  for  the  spe-cial  preparation  and  the  tryouts
because they took place at Algiers and brought me closer, but for all the re st I shook my pig - head
and repeated the same thing, to get among the most barbarous and live as they did, to show them
at  home,  and  even  in  the  House  of  the  Fetish,  through  example,  that  my  Lord’s  truth  would
prevail. They would offend me, of course, but I was not afraid of offenses, they were essential to
the  demonstration,  and  as a  result  of the  way I  endured  them I’d  get  the  upper  hand  of those
savages  like  a  strong  sun.  Strong,  yes,  that  was  the  word  I  constantly  had  on  the  tip  of  my
tongue,  I  dreamed  o f absolute  power, the  kind  that  makes  people  kneel down,  that  forces the
adver-sary to capitulate, converts him in short, and the blinder, the crueler he is, the more he’s
sure  of  himself,  mired  in  his  own  conviction,  the  more  his  consent  establishes  the  r oyalty  of
whoever  brought about his collapse. Converting  good folk who  had strayed somewhat was the
shabby ideal of our priests, I despised them for daring so little when they could do so much, they
lacked faith and I had it, I wanted to be acknowledged by the torturers [40] themselves, to fling
them on their  knees and  make them say:  ‘O  Lord, here  is thy victory,’ to  rule  in  short  by the
sheer force of words over an army of the wicked. Oh, I was sure of reasoning logically on that
subject, never quite sure of myself other-wise, but once I get an idea I don’t let go of it, that’s my
strong point, yes the strong point of the fellow they all pitied!
The  sun  has  risen  higher,  my  forehead  is  begin-ning  to  burn.  Around  me  the  stones  are
beginning to crack open w ith a dull sound, the only cool thing is the rifle’s barrel, cool as the
fields, as the evening rain long ago when the soup was simmer-ing, they would wait for me, my
father and mother who would occasionally smile at me, per-haps I loved them. But that’s a ll in
the past, a film of heat is beginning to rise from the trail, come on, missionary, I’m waiting for
you, now I know how to answer the message, my new masters taught me, and I know they are
right, you have to settle ac-counts with that question of love . When I fled the seminary in Algiers
I  had  a  different  idea  of the  savages and  only one  detail of my  imaginings was true, they are
cruel. I had robbed the treasurer’s office, cast off my habit, crossed the Atlas, the up-per plateaus
and the desert, the bu s - driver of the [41] Trans - Sahara line made fun of me: ‘Don’t go there,’ he
too, what had got into them all, and the gusts of sand for hundreds of wind - blown kilome-ters,
progressing  and  backing  in  the  face  of the  wind,  then  the  mountains  again  made  up  of black
peaks and ridges sharp as steel, and after them it  took a guide to  go out on the endless sea of
brown pebbles, screaming with heat, burning with the fires of a thousand mirrors, to the spot on
the con-fines of the white country and the land of the bl acks where stands the city of salt. And

the money the guide stole from me, ever naïve I had shown it to him, but he left me on the trail —
just  about  here,  it  so  happens — after  having  struck  me:  ‘Dog, there’s the  way,  the  honor’s all
mine, go ahead, go on, th ey’ll show you,’ and they did show me, oh yes, they’re like the sun that
never stops, except at night, beating sharply and proudly, that is beating me hard at this moment,
too hard, with a multitude of lances burst from the ground, oh shelter, yes shelter, under the big
rock, before everything gets muddled.
The shade here is good. How can anyone live in the city of salt, in the hollow of that basin full
of  dazzling  heat?  On  each  of  the  sharp  right - angle  walls  cut  out  with  a  pickax  and  coarsely
planed, [42 ]the gashes left by the pickax bristle with blinding scales, pale scattered sand yellows
them  somewhat  except  when  the  wind  dusts  the  upright  walls  and  terraces,  then  everything
shines with dazzling  whiteness under  a  sky  likewise  dusted  even to  its blue  ri nd.  I  was going
blind during those days when the  stationary fire  would crackle  for hours on the surface of the
white terraces that all seemed to meet as if, in the remote past, they had all to-gether tackled a
mountain of salt, flattened it first, and then had hollowed out streets, the insides of houses and
windows directly  in  the  mass,  or as  if — yes,  this  is  more  like  it, they had  cut  out  their  white,
burning hell with a powerful jet of boiling water just to show that they could live where no one
ever could , thirty days’ travel from any living thing,  in this hollow  in the  middle of the desert
where the  heat  of day prevents any contact  among creatures, separates them by a portcullis of
invisi-ble  flames  and  of  searing  crystals,  where  without  transition  the  co ld  of  night  congeals
them  individ-ually  in  their  rock - salt  shells,  nocturnal  dwellers  in  a  dried - up  icefloe,  black
Eskimos  suddenly  shiver-ing  in  their  cubical  igloos.  Black  because  they  wear  long  black
garments, and the salt that collects even under their nails, that they continue tasting bitterly [43]
and swallowing during the sleep of those polar nights, the salt they drink in the water from the
only spring in the hollow of a dazzling groove, of-ten spots their dark garments with something
like the trail of snails after a rain.
Rain, O Lord, just one real rain, long and hard, rain from your heaven! Then at last the hideous
city, gradually eaten away, would slowly and ir-resistibly cave in and, utterly melted in a slimy
tor-rent, would carry off its sava ge inhabitants toward the sands. Just one rain, Lord! But what do
I mean, what Lord, they are the lords and masters! They rule over their sterile homes, over their
black slaves that they work to death in the mines and each slab of salt that is cut out is w orth a
man in the region to the south, they pass by, silent, wearing their mourning veils in the mineral
whiteness of the  streets,  and  at  night,  when the  whole  town looks like  a  milky phantom,  they
stoop down and enter the shade of their homes, where the s alt walls shine dimly. They sleep with
a weightless sleep and, as soon as they wake, they give orders, they strike, they say they are a
united people, that their god is the true god, and that one must obey. They are my masters, they
are ignorant of pity an d, like masters, they want to be alone, to progress alone, [44] to rule alone,
because they alone had the daring to build in the salt and the sands a cold torrid city. And I...
What a jumble when the heat rises, I’m sweating, they never do, now the shade itself is heating
up, I feel the sun on the stone above me, it’s striking, striking like a hammer on all the stones and
it’s the music, the vast music of noon, air and stones vi-brating over hundreds of kilometers, gra
, I hear the silence as I did once b efore. Yes, it was the same silence, years ago, that greeted me
when  the  guards  led  me  to  them,  in  the  sunlight,  in  the  cen-ter  of  the  square,  whence  the
concentric  terraces  rose  gradually  toward  the  lid  of  hard  blue  sky  sit-ting  on  the  edge  of the

basin. There I was, thrown on my knees in the hollow of that white shield, my eyes corroded by
the swords of salt and fire issu-ing from all the walls, pale with fatigue, my ear bleeding from the
blow given by my guide, and they, tall and black, looked at me with out saying a word. The day
was at  its  midcourse.  Under the  blows of the  iron sun the  sky resounded  at  length,  a  sheet  of
white - hot tin, it was the same silence, and they stared at me, time passed, they kept on staring at
me, and I couldn’t  face their stare s, I panted more and  more violently, eventually I [45] wept,
and  suddenly  they  turned  their  backs  on  me  in  silence  and  all  together  went  off  in  the  same
di-rection. On my knees, all I could see, in the red- - and - black sandals, was their feet sparkling
with salt  as  they  raised  the  long  black  gowns,  the  tip  ris-ing  somewhat,  the  heel  striking  the
ground lightly, and when the square was empty I was dragged to the House of the Fetish.
Squatting, as I am today in the shelter of the rock and the fire above my he ad pierces the rock’s
thickness, I spent several days within the dark of the House of the Fetish, somewhat higher than
the others, surrounded by a wall of salt, but without windows, full of a sparkling night. Several
days, and I was given a basin of bracki sh water and some grain that was thrown before me the
way  chickens  are  fed,  I  picked  it  up.  By  day  the  door  remained  closed  and  yet  the  darkness
became less oppressive, as if the irresistible sun managed to flow through the masses of salt. No
lamp, but by feeling my way along the walls I touched garlands of dried palms decorating the
walls and, at the end, a small door, coarsely fitted, of which I could make out the bolt with my
fingertips. Several days, long after — I couldn’t count the days or the hours, bu t my hand-ful of
grain had been thrown me some ten times [46] and I had dug out a hole for my excrements that I
covered  up  in  vain,  the  stench  of  an  animal  den  hung  on  anyway — long  after,  yes,  the  door
opened wide and they came in.
One of them came toward me where I was squatting in a corner. I felt the burning salt against
my cheek, I smelled the dusty scent of the palms, I watched him approach. He stopped a yard
away  from  me,  he  stared  at  me  in  silence,  a  signal,  and  I  stood  up,  he  stared  at  me  with  his
metallic  eyes that  shone without  expression  in  his brown horse- - face, then he raised  his  hand.
Still impassive,  he seized  me  by the  lower  lip, which he twisted slowly until he tore my flesh
and, without letting go, made me turn around and back up to the ce nter of the room, he pulled on
my lip to make me fall on my knees there, mad with pain and my mouth bleeding, then he turned
away to join the others standing against the walls. They watched me moaning in the unbearable
heat  of  the  unbroken  daylight  that  ca me  in  the  wide - open  door,  and  in  that  light  suddenly
appeared the Sorcerer with his raffia hair, his chest covered with a breastplate of pearls, his legs
bare under a straw skirt, wearing a mask of reeds and wire with two square openings for the eyes.
He  w as  followed  by  musicians  and  [47]  women  wearing  heavy  motley  gowns  that  revealed
nothing  of  their  bodies.  They  danced  in  front  of  the  door  at  the  end,  but  a  coarse,  scarcely
rhythmi-cal dance, they just barely moved, and finally the Sorcerer opened the lit tle door behind
me, the  mas-ters did  not  stir, they were watching  me, I turned around and  saw the  Fetish,  his
double ax - head, his iron nose twisted like a snake.
I was carried before him, to the foot of the ped-estal, I was made to drink a black, bitter, bitter
wa-ter,  and  at  once  my  head  began  to  burn,  I  was  laughing,  that’s  the  offense,  I  have  been
offended. They undressed me, shaved my head and body, washed me in oil, beat  my face with
cords  dipped  in  water  and  salt,  and  I  laughed  and  turned  my  head  aw ay,  but  each  time  two
women would take me by the ears and offer my face to the Sorcerer’s blows while I could see

only his square eyes, I was still laughing, covered with blood. They stopped, no one spoke but
me, the jumble was beginning in my head, then t hey lifted me up and forced me to raise my eyes
toward the Fetish, I had ceased laughing. I knew that I was now consecrated to him to serve him,
adore him, no, I was not laugh-ing any more, fear and pain stifled me. And there, in that white
house, between those walls that  the [48] sun was assiduously burning on the outside,  my face
taut, my memory exhausted, yes, I tried to pray to the Fetish, he was all there was and even his
horrible face was less horrible than the rest of the world. Then it was that my a nkles were tied
with a cord that permitted just one step, they danced again, but this time in front of the Fetish, the
masters went out one by one.
The door once closed behind them, the music again, and the Sorcerer lighted a bark fire around
which he pr anced, his long silhouette broke on the angles of the white walls, fluttered on the flat
sur-faces, filled the room with dancing shadows. He traced a rectangle in a corner to which the
women dragged me, I felt their dry and gentle hands, they set before me a bowl of water and a
little pile of grain and pointed to the Fetish, I grasped that I was to keep my eyes fixed on him.
Then the Sor-cerer called them one after the other over to the  fire, he  beat  some of them who
moaned  and  who  then  went  and  prostrated themselves  before  the  Fetish  my  god,  while  the
Sorcerer  kept  on dancing  and  he  made  them all  leave  the  room until only one  was  left,  quite
young, squatting near the mu-sicians and not yet beaten. He held her by a shock of hair which he
kept twisting around his wrist, she [49] dropped backward with eyes popping until she fi-nally
fell on her back. Dropping  her, the Sorcerer screamed, the  musicians turned to the wall, while
behind the square - eyed mask the scream rose to an impossible pitch, and the woman roll ed on
the ground in a sort of fit and, at last on all fours, her head hidden in her locked arms, she too
screamed, but with a hollow, muffled sound, and in this posi-tion, without ceasing to scream and
to look at the Fetish, the Sorcerer took her nimbly an d nastily, without the woman’s face being
visible,  for  it  was  covered  with  the  heavy  folds  of  her  garment.  And,  wild  as  a  result  of  the
solitude, I screamed too, yes, howled with fright toward the Fetish until a kick hurled me against
the wall, biting the salt as I am biting this rock today with my tongueless mouth, while waiting
for the man I must kill.
Now the sun has gone a little beyond the mid-dle of the sky. Through the breaks in the rock I
can see the hole it makes in the white - hot metal of the sky , a mouth voluble as mine, constantly
vomiting rivers of flame over the colorless desert. On the trail in front of me, nothing, no cloud
of dust on the horizon, behind me they must be looking for me, no, not yet, it’s only in the late
afternoon that they o pened the door and I could go out a [50] lit-tle, after having spent the day
cleaning the House of the Fetish, set out fresh offerings, and in the evening the ceremony would
begin, in which I was sometimes beaten, at others not, but always I served the Fet ish, the Fetish
whose image is en-graved in iron in my memory and now in my hope also. Never had a god so
possessed or enslaved  me,  my whole  life day and night  was devoted to  him, and pain and the
absence of pain, wasn’t that joy, were due him and even, ye s, desire, as a result of being present,
almost every day, at that impersonal and nasty act which I heard without seeing it inas-much as I
now  had  to  face  the  wall or  else  be  beaten.  But,  my  face  up  against  the  salt, obsessed  by the
bestial shadows moving on the wall, I lis-tened to the long scream, my throat was dry, a burning
sexless  desire  squeezed  my  temples  and  my  belly  as  in  a  vise.  Thus  the  days  followed  one
an-other,  I  barely  distinguished  them  as  if  they  had  liquefied  in  the  torrid  heat  and  the
tre acherous re-verberation  from the  walls of salt, time  had  become  merely a  vague  lapping  of

waves in which there would burst out, at regular intervals, screams of pain or possession, a long
ageless day in which the Fetish ruled as this fierce sun does over m y house of rocks, and now, as
I did then, I weep with [51] un-happiness and longing, a wicked hope consumes me, I want to
betray, I lick the barrel of my gun and its soul inside, its soul, only guns have souls — oh, yes! the
day they cut out my tongue, I lea rned to adore the immortal soul of hatred!
What  a jumble, what  a rage, gra gra , drunk with heat  and wrath,  lying prostrate on my gun.
Who’s panting here? I can’t endure this endless heat, this waiting, I must kill him. Not a bird, not
a blade of grass, stone, an arid desire, their screams, this tongue within  me talking, and, since
they mutilated me, the long, flat, deserted suffering deprived even of the water of night, the night
of which I would dream, when locked  in with the god, in my den of salt. Nig ht alone with its
cool  stars  and  dark  fountains  could  save  me,  carry  me  off  at  last  from  the  wicked  gods  of
mankind, but ever locked up I could not contemplate it. If the newcomer tarries more, I shall see
it at least rise from the desert and sweep over th e sky, a cold golden vine that will hang from the
dark zenith and from which I can drink at length, moisten this black dried hole that no muscle of
live flexible flesh revives now, forget at last that day when madness took away my tongue.
How hot it was, really hot, the salt was melting [52] or so it seemed to me, the air was corroding
my eyes, and the Sorcerer came in without his mask. Almost naked under grayish tatters, a new
woman  followed  him and  her  face,  covered  with  a  tattoo  reproducing  the  mask  of the  Fetish,
expressed only an idol’s ugly stupor. The only thing alive about her was her thin flat body that
flopped at the foot of the god when the Sorcerer opened the door of the niche. Then he went out
without looking at  me, the heat rose, I didn’t sti r, the Fetish looked at me over that motionless
body whose muscles stirred gently and the woman’s idol - face didn’t change when I approached.
Only her eyes en-larged as she stared at me, my feet touched hers, the heat then began to shriek,
and the idol, wit hout a word, still staring at me with her dilated eyes, gradually slipped onto her
back, slowly drew her legs up and raised them as she gently spread her knees. But, immediately
afterward, gra , the  Sorcerer  was  lying  in  wait  for  me,  they all entered  and  t ore  me  from the
woman, beat me dreadfully on the sinful place, what sin, I’m laughing, where is it and where is
virtue,  they  clapped  me  against  a  wall,  a  hand  of  steel  gripped  my  jaws,  another  opened  my
mouth, pulled on my tongue until it bled, was it I sc reaming with that bestial scream, a cool [53]
cut-ting caress, yes cool at last, went over my tongue. When I came to, I was alone in the night,
glued to the wall, covered with hardened blood, a gag of strange - smelling dry grasses filled my
mouth, it had st opped bleeding, but it was vacant and in that absence the only living thing was a
tormenting pain. I wanted to rise, I fell back, happy, desper-ately happy to die at last, death too is
cool and its shadow hides no god.
I did not die, a new feeling of hat red stood up one day, at the same time I did, walked toward the
door of the niche, opened  it, closed  it  behind  me, I hated my people, the Fetish was there and
from the depths of the hole in which I was I did more than pray to him, I believed in him and
den ied all I had believed up to then. Hail! he was strength and power, he could be destroyed but
not con-verted, he stared over my head with his empty, rusty eyes. Hail! he was the master, the
only lord, whose indisputable attribute was malice, there are no g ood masters. For the first time,
as  a  result  of  offenses,  my  whole  body  crying  out  a  single  pain,  I  surrendered  to  him  and
approved his maleficent order, I adored in him the evil principle of the world. A prisoner of his
kingdom — the sterile city carved out of a mountain of salt, divorced from [54] nature, deprived

of those rare and  fleeting  flower-ings of the desert, preserved  from those  strokes of chance or
marks of affection such as an unexpected cloud or a brief violent downpour that are familiar even
to the sun or the sands, the city of order in short, right angles, square rooms, rigid men — I freely
became its tortured, hate - filled citizen, I re-pudiated the long history that had been taught me. I
had  been misled, solely the  reign of malice  was  devoid of defects, I had  been misled, truth is
square, heavy, thick, it does not admit distinctions, good is an idle dream, an intention constantly
postponed and pursued with exhausting effort, a limit never reached, its reign is impossible. Only
evil can reach its limits and reign absolutely, it must be served to establish its visible kingdom,
then we  shall see, but  what  does ‘then’ mean, only evil is present, down with Europe, reason,
honor, and the cross. Yes, I was to be converted to the religion of my masters, y es indeed, I was
a slave, but if I too become vi-cious I cease to be a slave, despite my shackled feet and my mute
mouth. Oh, this heat  is driving me crazy, the desert cries out everywhere under the unbearable
light, and he, the Lord of kindness, whose ver y name revolts me, I disown him, for I know him
now. He dreamed and wanted to lie, his [55] tongue was cut out so that his word would no longer
be able to deceive the world, he was pierced with nails even in his head, his poor head, like mine
now,  what  a  j umble,  how  weak  I  am,  and  the  earth  didn’t  tremble,  I  am  sure,  it  was  not  a
righteous man they  had  killed,  I  refuse  to  believe  it, there  are  no  righteous men  but  only evil
masters who bring about the reign of relentless truth. Yes, the Fetish alone has pow er, he is the
sole god of this world, hatred is his commandment, the source of all life, the cool water, cool like
mint that chills the mouth and burns the stomach.
Then it was that I changed, they realized it, I would kiss their hands when I met them, I was on
their  side,  never  wearying  of admiring  them,  I  trusted  them,  I  hoped  they would  mutilate  my
people as they had mutilated me. And when I learned that the missionary was to come, I knew
what I was to do. That day like all the others, the same blindin g daylight that had been going on
so  long! Late in the afternoon a guard was suddenly seen running along the edge of the  basin,
and, a few minutes later, I was dragged to the House of the Fetish and the door closed. One of
them held me on the ground in the dark, under threat of his cross - shaped sword, and the silence
lasted for a [56] long time until a strange sound filled the ordinarily peaceful town, voices that it
took me some time to recognize because they were speaking my lan-guage, but as soon as they
rang out the point of the sword was lowered toward my eyes, my guard stared at me in silence.
Then two voices came closer and I can still hear them, one asking why that house was guarded
and whether they should break in the door, Lieutenant, the other sai d: ‘No’ sharply, then added,
after a moment, that an agree-ment had been reached, that the town accepted a garrison of twenty
men on condition that they would camp outside the walls and respect the cus-toms. The private
laughed, ‘They’re knuckling un-der,’ but the officer didn’t know, for the first time in any case
they were willing to receive someone to take care of the children and that would be the chaplain,
later on they would see about the terri-tory. The other said they would cut off the chap-lain’s yo u
know what if the soldiers were not there. ‘Oh, no!’ the officer answered. ‘In fact, Fa-ther Beffort
will come before the garrison; he’ll be here in two days.’ That was all I heard, motionless, lying
under the sword, I was in pain, a wheel of needles and knives was whirling in  me. They were
crazy, they were crazy, they were allowing a hand [57] to be laid on the city, on their invincible
power, on the true god, and the fellow who was to come would not have his tongue cut out, he
would show off his insolent goodness without paying for it, without enduring any offense. The
reign  of  evil  would  be  postponed,  there  would  be  doubt  again,  again  time  would  be  wasted
dreaming of the im-possible good, wearing oneself out in fruitless ef-forts instead of hastening

the realization of the only possible kingdom and  I looked at the sword threatening  me, O sole
power to rule over the world! O power, and the city gradually emptied of its sounds, the door
finally opened, I remained alone, burned and bitter, with the Fetish, a nd I swore to him to save
my new faith, my true mas-ters, my despotic God, to betray well, whatever it might cost me.
Gra , the heat is abating a little, the stone has ceased to vibrate, I can go out of my hole, watch
the desert gradually take on yellow a nd ocher tints that will soon be mauve. Last night I waited
until they were asleep, I had blocked the lock on the door, I went out with the same step as usual,
meas-ured by the cord, I knew the streets, I knew where to  get the old rifle, what  gate wasn’t
g uarded, and I reached here just as the night was beginning to [58] fade around a handful of stars
while the  desert  was getting  a  little darker.  And  now  it  seems days and days that  I  have  been
crouching in these rocks. Soon, soon, I hope he comes soon! In a moment they’ll begin to look
for me, they’ll speed over the trails in all directions, they won’t know that I left for them and to
serve them better, my legs are weak, drunk with hunger and hate. Oh! over there, gra, at the end
of the trail, two camels are growing bigger, ambling along, already multiplied by short shadows,
they are running with that lively and dreamy gait they always have. Here they are, here at last!
Quick,  the  rifle,  and  I  load  it  quickly.  O  Fetish,  my  god  over  yonder,  may  your  power  be
pre-served, may the offense be multiplied, may hate rule pitilessly over a world of the damned,
may the wicked  forever be  masters, may the kingdom come, where in a single city of salt  and
iron black tyrants will enslave and possess without pity! And now, gra gra , fire on pity, fire on
impotence and its char-ity, fire on all that postpones the coming of evil, fire twice, and there they
are toppling over, falling, and the camels flee toward the horizon, where a geyser of black birds
has just risen in the un changed sky. I laugh, I laugh, the fellow is [59] writh-ing in his detested
habit, he is raising his head a lit-tle, he sees me — me his all - powerful shackled mas-ter, why does
he  smile  at  me,  I’ll crush that  smile! How  pleasant  is the  sound  of a  rifle  butt on the  face  of
goodness, today, today at last, all is consummated and everywhere in the desert, even hours away
from here,  jackals sniff the  nonexistent  wind, then set  out  in a patient  trot toward the  feast  of
carrion awaiting them. Victory! I raise my arm s to a heaven moved to pity, a lavender shadow is
just  barely  suggested  on the  opposite  side,  O  nights of Europe,  home,  childhood,  why  must  I
weep in the moment of triumph?
He stirred, no , the sound comes from somewhere else, and  from the other direction here they
come rushing like a flight of dark birds, my masters, who fall upon me, seize me, ah yes! strike,
they fear their city sacked and howling, they fear the aveng-ing soldiers I called forth, and this is
only right, upon the sacred city. Defend yours elves now, strike! strike me first, you possess the
truth!  O  my  masters,  they  will  then  conquer  the  soldiers,  they’ll  conquer  the  word  and  love,
they’ll  spread  over  the  deserts, cross the  seas,  fill the  light  of Europe  with their  black  veils —
strike  the  bel ly,  yes,  strike  the  eyes — sow  their  salt  on  the  continent,  all  [60]  vegeta-tion,  all
youth will die out, and dumb crowds with shackled feet will plod beside me in the world-wide
desert under the cruel sun of the true faith, I’ll not be alone. Ah! the pain, the pain they cause me,
their rage is good and on this cross - shaped war - -saddle where they are now quartering me, pity!
I’m laughing, I love the blow that nails me down crucified.

* * *
How silent the desert  is! Already night and I am alone, I’m th irsty. Still waiting, where is the
city, those sounds in the distance, and the soldiers per-haps the victors, no, it can’t be, even if the
soldiers are victorious, they’re not wicked enough, they won’t be able to rule, they’ll still say one
must become bet ter, and still millions of men between evil and good, torn, bewildered, O Fetish,
why hast thou forsaken me? All is over, I’m thirsty, my body is burning, a darker night fills my
eyes.
This long, this long dream, I’m awaking, no, I’m going to die, dawn i s breaking, the first light,
day-light for the living, and for me the inexorable sun, the flies. Who is speaking, no one, the sky
is not opening up, no, no, God doesn’t  speak  in the [61] des-ert, yet  whence comes that  voice
saying: ‘If you consent to die f or hate and power, who will for-give us?’ Is it another tongue in
me  or  still  that  other  fellow  refusing  to  die,  at  my  feet,  and  re-peating:  ‘Courage!  courage!
courage!’? Ah! sup-posing I were wrong again! Once  fraternal men, sole recourse, O solitude,
for sake  me  not!  Here,  here  who  are  you,  torn,  with  bleeding  mouth,  is  it  you,  Sorcerer,  the
soldiers defeated  you, the salt  is burning over there, it’s you  my beloved  master! Cast off that
hate - ridden face, be good now, we were mistaken, we’ll begin all over again, we’ll re-build the
city of mercy, I want to go back home. Yes, help me, that’s right, give me your hand. . . .”
A handful of salt fills the mouth of the garrulous slave.
THE SILENT MEN
IT WAS THE dead of winter and yet a radiant sun was risi ng over the already active city. At the
end of the jetty, sea and sky fused in a single dazzling light. But Yvars did not see them. He was
cycling  slowly  along  the  boulevards  above  the  harbor.  On  the  fixed  pedal  of  his  cycle  his
crip-pled  leg rested stiffl y while the other labored to cope with the slippery pavement still wet
with the night’s moisture. Without raising his head, a slight figure astride the saddle, he avoided
the rails of the  former car - line, suddenly turned the  handlebars to  [63] let  autos pa ss him, and
occasionally elbowed back into place the musette bag in which Fernande had put his lunch. At
such moments he would think  bitterly of the  bag’s contents. Between the two  slices of coarse
bread, instead of the Spanish omelet he liked or the beefs teak fried in oil, there was nothing but
cheese.
The  ride  to  the  shop  had  never  seemed  to  him  so  long.  To  be  sure,  he  was  aging.  At  forty,
though he had remained as slim as a vine shoot, a man’s muscles don’t warm up so quickly. At
times,  read-ing  sports commentaries  in  which  a  thirty - year - old  athlete  was  referred  to  as  a
veteran, he would shrug his shoulders. “If he’s a veteran,” he would say to Fernande, “then I’m
practically in a wheelchair.” Yet he knew that the reporter wasn’t altogether wrong. At th irty a
man  is  already  beginning  to  lose  his  wind  without  noticing  it.  At  forty  he’s  not  yet  in  a
wheelchair, but  he’s definitely heading  in that  direction.  Wasn’t that  just  why he  now avoided

looking toward the sea during the ride to the other end of town where the cooper’s shop was?
When  he  was  twenty  he  never  got  tired  of  watch-ing  it,  for  it  used  to  hold  in  store  a  happy
week-end  on  the  beach.  Despite  or  because  of his  lame-ness,  he  had  always  liked  swimming.
Then the [64] years had passed, there had bee n Fernande, the birth of the boy, and, to make ends
meet, the over-time, at  the shop on Saturdays and on various odd  jobs for others on Sundays.
Little by little he had lost the habit of those violent days that used to satiate him. The deep, clear
water,  t he  hot  sun,  the  girls,  the  physical  life — there  was  no  other  form  of  happiness  in  this
country. And that happiness disappeared with youth. Yvars continued to love the sea, but only at
the end of the day when the water in the bay became a little darker. The mo-ment was pleasant
on the terrace beside his house where he would sit down after work, grateful for his clean shirt
that Fernande ironed so well and for the glass of anisette all frosted over. Evening would fall, the
sky would become all soft and mel-low , the neighbors talking with Yvars would sud-denly lower
their voices. At those times he didn’t know whether he was happy or felt like crying. At least he
felt in harmony at such moments, he had nothing to do but wait quietly, without quite knowing
for wha t.
In the morning when he went back to work, on the other hand, he didn’t like to look at the sea.
Though it was always there to greet him, he re-fused to see it until evening. This morning he was
[65] pedaling along with head down, feeling even heavier than usual; his heart too was heavy.
When he had come back from the meeting, the night be-fore, and had announced that they were
going back to work, Fernande had gaily said: “Then the boss is giving you all a raise?” The boss
was not  giving any raise; the strike  had  failed. They hadn’t  managed things right,  it  had to  be
admitted. An impetuous walkout, and the union had been right to back it up only halfheartedly.
After  all,  some  fifteen  workers  hardly  counted;  the  union  had  to  consider  the  other  cooper’s
sh ops that  hadn’t  gone along. You couldn’t  really blame the union. Coop-erage, threatened  by
the building of tankers and tank trucks, was not thriving. Fewer and fewer barrels and large casks
were  being  made;  work  consisted  chiefly  in  repairing  the  huge  tuns already  in  existence.
Employers saw their business com-promised, to be sure, but even so they wanted to maintain a
margin of profit and the easiest way still seemed to them to block wages despite the rise in living
costs. What can coopers do when cooper-a ge disappears? You don’t change trades when you’ve
gone to the trouble of learning one; this one was hard and called for a long apprenticeship. The
good cooper, the one who fits his curved staves [66] and tightens them in the fire with an iron
hoop, al-mos t hermetically, without calking with raffia or oakum, was rare. Yvars knew this and
was  proud  of  it.  Changing  trades  is  nothing,  but  to  give  up  what  you  know,  your  master
craftsmanship, is not easy. A fine craft without employment and you’re stuck, you hav e to resign
yourself. But resignation isn’t easy either. It was hard to have one’s mouth shut, not to be able to
discuss really, and to take the same road every morning with an accumulating fatigue, in order to
receive at the end of every week merely what they are willing to give you, which is less and less
adequate.
So they had got angry. Two or three of them had hesitated, but the anger had spread to them too
after the first discussions with the boss. He had told them flatly, in fact, that they could ta ke it or
leave it. A man doesn’t talk that way. “What’s he expect of us?” Esposito had said. “That we’ll
stoop  over  and  wait  to  be  kicked  in  the  ass?”  The  boss  wasn’t  a  bad  sort,  however.  He  had
inherited from his father, had grown up in the shop, and had known almost all the workers for
years. Occasionally he  invited them to  have  a  snack  in the  shop; they would  cook sardines or

sausage meat over fires of shavings and, thanks partly to the wine, he was [67] really very nice.
At New Year’s he always gave fiv e bottles of vintage wine to each of the men, and often, when
one of them was ill or celebrated an event  like marriage or first communion, he would make a
gift of money. At the birth of his daughter, there had been sugar - coated almonds for everyone.
Two or three times he had invited Yvars to hunt on his coastal property. He liked his workmen,
no doubt, and often recalled the fact that his father had begun as an apprentice. But he had never
gone to their homes; he wasn’t aware. He thought only of himself bec ause he knew nothing but
him-self, and now you could take it or leave it. In other words, he had become obstinate likewise.
But, in his position, he could allow himself to be.
He had forced the union’s hand, and the shop had closed its doors. “Don’t go t o the trouble of
picketing,” the boss had said; “when the shop’s not working, I save money.” That wasn’t true,
but it didn’t help matters since he was telling them to their faces that he gave them work out of
charity.  Es-posito  was  wild  with  fury  and  had  t old  him  he  wasn’t  a  man.  The  boss  was  hot -
blooded and they had to be separated. But, at the same time, it had made an impression on the
workers. Twenty days on strike, the wives sad at home, two or three of [68] them discouraged,
and, in the end, the union had advised them to give in on the promise of arbitra-tion and recovery
of the lost days through over-time. They had decided to go back to work. Swag-gering, of course,
and  saying  that  it  wasn’t  all set-tled,  that  it  would  have  to  be  reconsidered.  But  thi s  morning,
with a fatigue that resembled defeat, cheese instead of meat, the illusion was no longer possible.
No matter how the sun shone, the sea held forth no more promises. Yvars pressed on his single
pedal and with each turn of the wheel it seemed to h im he was aging a little. He couldn’t think of
the shop, of the fellow workers and the boss he would soon be seeing again without feeling his
heart  become  a  trifle  heavier.  Fernande  had  been  worried:  “What  will  you  men  say  to  him?”
“Noth-ing.” Yvars had st raddled his bicycle, and had shaken his head. He had clenched his teeth;
his small, dark, and wrinkled face with its delicate features had become hard. “We’re going back
to  work.  That’s  enough.”  Now  he  was  cycling  along,  his  teeth  still  clenched,  with  a  sa d,  dry
anger that darkened even the sky itself.
He left the boulevard, and the sea, to attack the moist streets of the old Spanish quarter. They led
to an area occupied solely by sheds, junkyards, and [69] garages, where the shop was — a sort of
low shed t hat was faced with stone up to a halfway point and then glassed in up to the corrugated
metal roof. This shop opened onto the former cooperage, a courtyard surrounded by a covered
shed  that  had  been  abandoned  when  the  business  had  enlarged  and  now  served  o nly  as  a
storehouse for worn - out machines and old casks. Beyond the courtyard, sep-arated from it by a
sort of path covered with old tiles, the boss’s garden began, at the end of which his house stood.
Big  and  ugly,  it  was  nevertheless  prepossessing  becaus e  of  the  Virginia  creeper  and  the
straggling honeysuckle surrounding the outside steps.
Yvars saw at once that the doors of the shop were closed. A group of workmen stood silently in
front of them. This was the first time since he had been working here t hat he had found the doors
closed when he arrived. The  boss had wanted to emphasize that  he had the upper hand. Yvars
turned toward the left, parked his bicycle under the lean - to that prolonged the shed on that side,
and walked to-ward the door. From a dis tance he recognized Es-posito, a tall dark, hairy fellow
who worked beside him, Marcou , the union delegate, with his tenor’s profile, Saïd, the only Arab
in the shop, then all [70] the others who silently watched him approach. But before he had joined

them, they all suddenly looked in the direction of the shop doors, which had just begun to open.
Ballester, the foreman, appeared in the opening. He opened one of the heavy doors and, turning
his back to the workmen, pushed it slowly on its iron rail.
Ballest er,  who  was the  oldest  of all,  disapproved  of the  strike  but  had  kept  silent  as  soon  as
Esposito had told him that he was serving the boss’s interests. Now he stood near the door, broad
and  short  in  his  navy - blue  jersey,  already  barefoot  (he  was  the  only  o ne  besides  Saïd  who
worked barefoot), and he watched them go  in one by one with his eyes that were so pale they
seemed colorless in his old tanned face, his mouth downcast under his thick, drooping mustache.
They were silent, humiliated by this return of t he defeated, furious at their own silence, but the
more it was prolonged the less ca-pable they were of breaking it. They went in with-out looking
at Ballester, for they knew he was carrying out an order in making them go in like that, and his
bitter  and  d owncast  look  told  them  what  he  was  thinking.  Yvars,  for  one,  looked  at  him.
Ballester, who liked him, nodded his head without saying a word.
[71]  Now  they  were  all  in  the  little  locker - room  on  the  right  of  the  entrance:  open  stalls
separated  by  unpainted boards  to  which  had   been  attached,  on  either  side,   little  locked
cupboards;  the  farthest  stall  from  the  entrance,  up  against  the  walls  of  the  shed,  had  been
transformed into a shower above a gutter hollowed out of the earthen floor. In the center of the
s hop could be seen work in various stages, al-ready finished large casks, loose - hooped, waiting
for the forcing in the fire, thick benches with a long slot hollowed out in them (and in some of
them had been slipped circular wooden bottoms waiting to be plan ed to a sharp edge), and finally
cold  fires.  Along  the  wall,  on the  left  of the  entrance,  the  workbenches extended  in  a  row. In
front of them stood piles of staves to be planed. Against the right wall, not far from the dressing -
room, two large power saws, thoroughly oiled, strong and silent, gleamed.
Some time ago, the workshop had become too  big  for the handful of men who  worked there.
This was an advantage in the hot season, a disad-vantage in winter. But today, in this vast space,
the work dropped half finished, the casks abandoned in every corner with a single hoop holding
the base of the staves spreading at the top like coarse wooden [72] flowers, the sawdust covering
the  benches,  the  tool-boxes  and  machines — everything  gave  the  shop  a  look  of neglect. They
looked  at  it,  dressed  now  in  their  old  jumpers  and  their  faded  and  patched  pants,  and  they
hesitated. Ballester was watching them. “So,” he said, “we pitch in?” One by one, they went to
their posts without saying a word. Ballester went from one to an other, briefly reminding them of
the work to be begun or finished. No one an-swered. Soon the first hammer resounded against
the iron - tipped wedge sinking a hoop over the convex part of a barrel, a plane groaned as it hit a
knot, and one of the saws, start ed up by Esposito, got under way with a great whirring of blade.
Saïd would bring staves on request or light fires of shavings on which the casks were placed to
make  them  swell  in  their  corset  of  iron  hoops.  When  no  one  called  for  him,  he  stood  at  a
workbe nch  riv-eting  the  big  rusty  hoops  with  heavy  hammer  blows.  The  scent  of  burning
shavings  began  to  fill  the  shop.  Yvars,  who  was  planing  and  fitting  the  staves  cut  out  by
Esposito, recognized the old scent and his heart relaxed somewhat. All were working in silence,
but  a  warmth,  a  life  was  gradually  be-ginning  to  reawaken  in  the  shop.  Through  the  broad
windows a  clean,  fresh  light  began to  fill the  shed.  [73] The  smoke  rose  bluish  in the  golden
sunlight; Yvars even heard an insect buzz close to him.

At th at moment the door into the former shop opened in the end wall and M. Lassalle, the boss,
stopped on the threshold. Thin and dark, he  was scarcely  more than thirty. His white coverall
hang-ing open over a tan gabardine  suit, he  looked at  ease  in his body. Despite  his very bony
face cut like a hatchet, he generally aroused liking, as do most people who exude vitality. Yet he
seemed somewhat embarrassed as he came through the door. His greeting was less sonorous than
usual; in any case, no one answered it. Th e sound of the  hammers hesitated, lost the beat, and
resumed even louder. M. Lassalle took a few hesitant steps, then he headed toward little Valery,
who  had  been working with them for only a  year. Near the power saw, a  few  feet  away from
Yvars,  he was put ting a  bottom on a big hogshead and the boss watched  him. Valery went on
working  without  saying  anything.  “Well,  my  boy,”  said  M.  Lassalle,  “how  are  things?”  The
young  man suddenly be-came  more  awkward  in  his  movements.  He  glanced  at  Esposito,  who
was clos e to him, picking up a pile of staves in his huge arms to take them to Yvars. Esposito
looked at him too while going on with his [74] work, and Valery peered back into his hogshead
without answering the boss. Lassalle, rather non-plused, remained a moment planted in front of
the young man, then he shrugged his shoulders and turned toward Marcou . The latter, astride his
bench, was giving the finishing touches, with slow, careful strokes, to sharpening the edge of a
bottom.  “ Hello, Marcou ,”  Lassalle  said  in  a  f latter voice. Marcou did  not  answer,  entirely
occupied with taking very thin shavings off his wood. “What’s got into you?” Lassalle asked in a
loud voice as he turned toward the other workmen. “We didn’t agree, to be sure. But that doesn’t
keep  us  from hav- ing  to  work together.  So  what’s  the  use  of this?”Marcou  got  up,  raised  his
bottom piece, verified the circular sharp edge with the palm of his hand, squinted his languorous
eyes with a look of sat-isfaction, and, still silent, went toward another workman w ho was putting
together  a  hogshead.  Throughout  the  whole  shop  could  be  heard  noth-ing  but  the  sound  of
hammers and of the power saw.  “O.K.,” Lassalle  said.  “When you  get  over this,  let  me  know
through Ballester.” Calmly, he walked out of the shop.
Almost immediately afterward, above the din of the shop, a bell rang out twice. Ballester, who
[75] had just sat down to roll a cigarette, got up slowly and went to the door at the end. After he
had  left, the  hammers resounded  with less  noise; one of the workmen had  even stopped when
Ballester came back. From the door he said merely: “The boss wants you, Marcou and Yvars.”
Yvars’s first im-pulse was to go and wash his hands, but Marcou grasped him by the arm as he
went by and Yvars limped out behind him.
Outside in the courtyard, the light was so clear, so liquid, that Yvars felt it on his face and bare
arms.  They went  up  the  outside  stairs,  under  the  honeysuckle  on  which a  few  blossoms were
already visible. When they entered the corridor, whose walls were covered with diplomas, they
heard a child crying and M. Lassalle’s voice saying: “Put her to bed after lunch. We’ll call the
doctor if she doesn’t get over it.” Then the boss appeared sud-denly in the corridor and showed
them into  the  little  office  they  already  k new,  furnished  with  imita-tion - rustic  furniture  and  its
walls decorated with sports trophies. “Sit down,” Lassalle said as he took his place behind the
desk. They remained standing. “I called you in because you, Marcou , are the dele-gate and you,
Yvars,  my oldest  employee  after  Ballester.  I  don’t  want  to  get  back  to  the  [76]  discus-sions,
which  are  now  over.  I  cannot,  absolutely  not,  give  you  what  you  ask.  The  matter  has  been
set-tled, and we reached the conclusion that  work had to  be resumed. I see that  you are angry
with me, and that hurts me, I’m telling you just as I feel it. I merely want to add this: what I can’t
do today I may perhaps be able to do when business picks up. And if I can do it, I’ll do it even

before you ask me. Meanwhile, let’s try to wo rk together.” He stopped talking, seemed to reflect,
then looked up at them. “Well?” he said. Marcou was looking out the window. Yvars, his teeth
clenched, wanted to speak but couldn’t. “Listen,” said Lassalle, “you have all closed your minds.
You’ll get  ov er  it. But  when you  become reasonable  again, don’t  forget  what  I’ve  just  said to
you.” He rose, went toward Marcou , and held out his hand. “Chao!” he said. Marcou suddenly
turned  pale,  his popular  tenor’s  face  hardened  and,  for  a  second  only,  became  mean - -lo oking.
Then  he  abruptly  turned  on  his  heel  and  went  out.  Lassalle,  likewise  pale,  looked  at  Yvars
without holding out his hand. “Go to hell!” he shouted.
When they went  back  into  the  shop,  the  men were  lunching.  Ballester  had  gone out.  Marcou
sim-ply said : “Just wind,” and returned to his bench. [77] Esposito stopped biting into his bread
to ask what they had answered; Yvars said they hadn’t answered anything. Then he went to get
his musette bag and came back and sat down on his workbench. He was beginning to eat when,
not  far  from  him,  he  noticed  Saïd  lying  on  his  back  in  a  pile  of  shavings,  his  eyes  looking
vaguely at the windows made blue by a sky that had become less luminous. He asked him if he
had already finished. Saïd said he had eaten his figs. Yva rs stopped eating. The uneasy feeling
that hadn’t left him since the interview with Lassalle suddenly disappeared to make room for a
pleasant warmth. He broke his bread in two as he got up and, faced with Saïd’s refusal, said that
everything would  be  bette r next  week.  “Then  it’ll be  your turn to treat,” he said. Saïd  smiled.
Now  he  bit  into  the  piece  of  Yvars’s  sandwich,  but  in  a  gingerly  way  like  a  man  who  isn’t
hungry.
Esposito took an old pot and lighted a little fire of shavings and chips. He heated s ome coffee
that he had brought in a bottle. He said it was a gift to the shop that his grocer had made when he
learned  of  the  strike’s  failure.  A  mustard  jar  passed  from  hand  to  hand.  Each  time  Esposito
poured out the al-ready sugared coffee. Saïd swallowe d it with more pleasure than he had taken
in eating. Esposito [78] drank the rest of the coffee right from the burn-ing pot, smacking his lips
and swearing. At that moment Ballester came in to give the back - to - work signal.
While they were rising and gath ering papers and utensils into their musette bags, Ballester came
and stood in their midst and said suddenly that it was hard for all, and for him too, but that this
was no reason to act like children and that there was no use in sulking. Esposito, the pot in his
hand, turned toward him; his long, coarse face had suddenly be-come flushed. Yvars knew what
he  was  about  to  say — and  what  everyone  was  thinking  at  the  same  time — that  they  were  not
sulking,  that  their  mouths  had  been  closed,  they  had  to  take  it  or  l eave  it,  and  that  anger  and
helplessness sometimes hurt so much that you can’t even cry out. They were men, after all, and
they  weren’t  going  to  begin  smiling  and  simpering.  But  Esposito  said  none  of  this,  his  face
finally relaxed,  and  he  slapped  Ballester ’s shoulder  gently while  the  others went  back  to their
work. Again the  hammers rang out, the big shed filled with the  familiar din, with the smell of
shavings and of old clothes damp with sweat. The big saw whined and bit into the fresh wood of
the  stave  t hat  Esposito  was  slowly  pushing  in  front  of  him.  [79]  Where  the  saw  bit,  a  damp
sawdust  spurted out and covered with something  like bread - crumbs the  big  hairy hands firmly
gripping the wood on each side of the moaning blade. Once the stave was ripped, you could hear
only the sound of the motor.
At  present  Yvars  felt  only  the  strain  in  his  back  as  he  leaned  over  the  plane.  Generally  the

fatigue didn’t come until later on. He had got out of train-ing during these weeks of inactivity, it
was  clear.  But  he  th ought  also  of age,  which  makes  manual  labor  harder  when  it’s  not  mere
precision work. That strain also foreshadowed old age. Wherever the muscles are involved, work
eventually be-comes hateful, it precedes death, and on evenings following great physical ef fort
sleep itself is like death. The boy wanted to become a school-teacher, he was right; those who
indulge in clichés about manual work don’t know what they’re talk-ing about.
When Yvars straightened up to catch his breath and also to drive away these e vil thoughts, the
bell rang out again. It was insistent, but in such a strange way, with stops and imperious starts,
that  the  men  interrupted  their  work.  Ballester  listened,  surprised,  then  made  up  his  mind  and
went slowly to the door. He had disappeared  f or several seconds when the [80] ringing finally
ceased. They resumed work. Again the door was flung open and Ballester ran toward the locker -
room. He came out wearing canvas shoes and, slipping on his jacket, said to Yvars as he went
by: “The kid has had an attack. I’m off to get Germain,” and he ran toward the main door. Dr.
Germain took care of the shop’s health; he lived in this outlying quarter. Yvars repeated the news
without  commentary.  They  gathered  around  him  and  looked  at  one  another,  embarrassed.
Noth-ing could be heard but the motor of the power saw running freely. “It’s perhaps nothing,”
one of them said. They went back to their places, the shop filled again with their noises, but they
were working slowly, as if waiting for something.
A quarte r of an hour later, Ballester came  in again, hung up  his  jacket, and, without  saying  a
word, went  out through the  little  door. On the windows the  light  was getting dimmer.  A little
later, in the intervals when the saw was not ripping into the wood, the dul l bell of an ambulance
could  be  heard,  at  first  in  the  distance,  then  nearer,  finally  just  outside.  Then  silence.  After  a
moment Ballester came back and everyone went up to him. Esposito had turned off the motor.
Ballester said that while undressing in her room the child  had [81] sud-denly keeled over as if
mowed down. “Did  you ever hear anything  like  it!”Marcou said. Ballester shook his head and
gestured  vaguely  toward  the  shop;  but  he  looked  as  if  he  had  had  quite  a  turn.  Again  the
ambulance bell was hear d. They were all there, in the silent shop, under the yellow light coming
through the glass panels, with their rough, useless hands hanging down along their old saw-dust -
covered pants.
The rest of the afternoon dragged. Yvars now felt only his fatigue an d his still heavy heart. He
would   have   liked   to   talk.   But   he   had   nothing   to   say,   nor   did   the   others.   On   their
uncommunicative  faces  could  be  read  merely  sorrow  and  a  sort  of ob-stinacy.  Sometimes the
word “calamity” took shape in him, but just barely, for it disappeared immedi-ately — as a bubble
forms and  bursts simultaneously.  He  wanted  to  get  home,  to  be  with Fernande  again,  and  the
boy, on the terrace. As it  happened, Balles-ter announced closing - time. The machines stopped.
Without hurrying, they began to put out the fires and to put everything in order on their benches,
then they went one by one to the locker - room. Saïd remained behind; he was to clean up the shop
and water down the dusty soil. When Yvars reached the locker - room, Esposito, huge and hairy,
was [82] already under the shower. His back was turned to them as he soaped himself noisily.
Generally, they kidded him about his modesty; the big bear, indeed, obstinately hid his pudenda.
But no one seemed to notice on this occasion. Esposito backed out of the shower and wrapped a
towel  around  him  like  a  loincloth.  The  others  took  their  turns, and Marcou was  vigorously
slapping  his  bare  sides when they  heard  the  big  door  roll slowly open on  its cast - iron wheel.

Lassalle came in.
He was dressed as at the time of his first visit, but his hair was rather disheveled. He stopped on
the  threshold,  looked  at  the  vast  deserted  shop,  took  a  few  steps,  stopped  again,  and  looked
toward the  locker - room. Esposito, still covered with his  loin-cloth, turned toward him. Naked,
embarrassed, he teetered from one foot to the other. Yvars thought that it was up to Marcou to
say something. But Marcou remained invisible behind the sheet of wa-ter that surrounded him.
Esposito grabbed a shirt and was nimbly slipping  it on when La ssalle said: “Good night,” in a
rather toneless voice and began to  walk toward the  little door. When it  occurred to  Yvars that
someone ought to call him, the door had already closed.
[83]  Yvars  dressed  without  washing,  said  good - night  likewise,  but  with his  whole  heart,  and
they  an-swered  with  the  same  warmth.  He  went  out  rap-idly,  got  his  bicycle,  and,  when  he
straddled it, he felt the strain in his back again. He was cycling along now in the late afternoon
through the trafficky city. He was going fast b ecause he was eager to get back to the old house
and the terrace. He would wash in the wash - house before sitting down to look at the sea, which
was already accompanying him, darker than in the morning, above the parapet of the boulevard.
But the little gir l accompanied him too and he couldn’t stop thinking of her.
At  home,  his  boy  was  back  from  school  and  read-ing  the  pictorials.  Fernande  asked  Yvars
whether everything had gone all right. He said nothing, cleaned up in the wash - house, then sat
down on the bench against the low wall of the terrace. Mended washing hung above his head and
the  sky  was  be-coming  transparent;  over  the  wall  the  soft  evening  sea  was  visible.  Fernande
brought the anisette, two glasses, and the jug of cool water. She sat down be-sid e her husband.
He told  her  everything,  holding  her  hand  as  in the  early days of their  marriage.  When  he  had
finished, he didn’t stir, looking toward [84] the sea where already, from one end of the horizon to
the other, the twilight was swiftly falling. “Ah ! it’s his own fault!” he said. If only he were young
again, and Fernande too, they would have gone away, across the sea.
THE GUEST
THE SCHOOLMASTER was watching the two men climb toward him. One was on horseback,
the other on foot. They had not yet tac kled the abrupt rise leading to the schoolhouse built on the
hillside. They were toiling onward, making slow progress in the snow, among the stones, on the
vast  expanse  of  the  high,  deserted  plateau.  From  time  to  time  the  horse  stumbled.  Without
hearing an ything yet, he could see the breath issuing from the horse’s nostrils. One of the men, at
least, knew the region. They were following the trail although it had disappeared days ago under
a layer of dirty white snow. The schoolmaster calculated that it woul d take them half an hour to
get onto the hill. [86]It was cold; he went back into the school to get a sweater.
He crossed the empty, frigid classroom. On the blackboard the four rivers of France, drawn with
four different  colored chalks,  had  been flowing to-ward their estuaries for the past  three days.
Snow had suddenly fallen in mid - October after eight months of drought without the transition of
rain, and the twenty pupils, more or less, who lived in the villages scattered over the plateau had

stopped co ming. With fair weather they would return. Daru now heated only the single room that
was his lodging, adjoining the classroom and giving also onto the plateau to the east. Like the
class  win-dows,  his  window  looked  to  the  south  too.  On  that  side  the  school was  a  few
kilometers from the point  where the plateau began to  slope toward the south. In clear weather
could be seen the purple mass of the mountain range where the gap opened onto the desert.
Somewhat  warmed, Daru returned to the win-dow from which he had  first  seen the two  men.
They were no longer visible. Hence they must have tackled the rise. The sky was not so dark, for
the snow had stopped falling during the night. The morning had opened with a dirty light which
had  [87]  scarcely  become  brighter  a s  the  ceiling  of  clouds  lifted.  At  two  in  the  afternoon  it
seemed as if the day were merely beginning. But still this was better than those three days when
the thick  snow was fall-ing  amidst  unbroken darkness with little gusts of wind that  rattled the
doub le door of the classroom. Then Daru had spent long hours in his room, leav-ing it only to go
to the shed and feed the chickens or get some coal. Fortunately the delivery truck from Tadjid,
the nearest village to the north, had brought his supplies two days before the blizzard. It would
return in forty - eight hours.
Besides, he had enough to resist a siege, for the little room was cluttered with bags of wheat that
the administration left as a stock to distribute to those of his pupils whose families had suf fered
from the  drought.  Actually  they  had  all  been  victims  be-cause  they  were  all poor.  Every day
Daru would  distribute a ration to the children. They had  missed  it,  he knew, during these  bad
days. Possibly one of the fathers or big brothers would come thi s afternoon and he could supply
them with grain. It was just a matter of carrying them over to the next harvest. Now shiploads of
wheat  were  arriving  from France  and  the  worst  was over.  But  it  would  be  hard  to  forget  that
poverty,  that  army of [88]  ragged ghosts wandering  in  the  sunlight,  the  pla-teaus  burned  to  a
cinder  month after  month,  the  earth shriveled  up  little  by  little,  literally  scorched,  every stone
bursting into dust under one’s foot. The sheep had died then by thousands and even a few men,
her e and there, sometimes without anyone’s knowing.
In  contrast  with  such  poverty,  he  who  lived  al-most  like  a  monk  in  his  remote  schoolhouse,
none-theless satisfied with the little he had and with the rough life, had felt like a lord with his
white-washed walls, his narrow couch, his unpainted shelves, his well, and his weekly provision
of water and food. And suddenly this snow, without warn-ing, without the foretaste of rain. This
is the way the region was, cruel to live  in, even without men — who didn’t  hel p matters either.
But Daru had been born here. Everywhere else, he felt exiled.
He stepped out onto the terrace in front of the schoolhouse. The two men were now halfway up
the slope. He recognized the horseman as Balducci, the old gendarme he had known for a long
time.  Balducci was  holding  on the  end  of a  rope  an  Arab who  was  walking  behind  him with
hands bound and head lowered. The gendarme waved a greeting to which Daru did not reply, lost
as he was in [89] contemplation of the Arab dressed in a faded blue jellaba, his feet  in sandals
but  covered  with socks of heavy raw  wool,  his  head  surmounted  by a  nar-row,  short  ch èche.
They were approaching. Bal-ducci was holding back his horse in order not to hurt the Arab, and
the group was advancing slowly.
Wi thin earshot, Balducci shouted: “One hour to do the three kilometers from El Ameur!” Daru

did not answer. Short and square in his thick sweater, he watched them climb. Not once had the
Arab raised his head. “Hello,” said Daru when they got up onto the terr ace. “Come in and warm
up.”  Balducci  painfully  got  down  from  his  horse  without  letting  go  the  rope.  From under  his
bris-tling mustache he smiled at the schoolmaster. His little dark eyes, deep - set under a tanned
forehead, and his mouth surrounded with wrin kles made him look attentive and studious. Daru
took the bridle, led the horse to the shed, and came back to the two men, who were now waiting
for him in the school. He led them into his room. “I am going to heat up the classroom,” he said.
“We’ll be more comfortable there.” When he entered the room again, Balducci was on the couch.
He had undone the rope tying him to the Arab, who had squatted near the stove. [90] His hands
still bound, the ch èche pushed back on his head, he was looking toward the window. At  first
Daru noticed only his huge lips, fat, smooth, almost Negroid; yet his nose was straight, his eyes
were dark and full of fever. The ch èche revealed an obstinate forehead and, under the weathered
skin  now  rather  discolored  by the  cold,  the  whole  f ace  had  a  restless and  rebellious  look that
struck Daru when the Arab, turning his face toward him,  looked him straight  in the eyes.  “Go
into  the  other  room,”  said  the  schoolmaster,  “and  I’ll  make  you  some  mint  tea.”  “Thanks,”
Balducci  said.  “What  a  chore! How  I  long  for  retirement.”  And  addressing  his  prisoner  in
Arabic: “Come on, you.” The Arab got up and, slowly, holding his bound wrists in front of him,
went into the classroom.
With the tea, Daru brought a chair. But Bal-ducci was already enthroned on the nearest pupil’s
desk  and  the  Arab  had  squatted  against  the  teach-er’s  platform  facing  the  stove,  which  stood
between  the  desk  and  the  window.  When  he  held  out  the  glass  of  tea  to  the  prisoner,  Daru
hesitated at the sight of his bound hands. “He might perhaps be un-tied.” “Sure,” said Balducci.
“That was for the trip.” He started to get to his feet. But Daru, setting the glass on the floor, had
knelt  beside  the  Arab.  [91]  Without  saying  anything,  the  Arab watched  him with  his  feverish
eyes. Once his han ds were free, he rubbed his swollen wrists against each other, took the glass of
tea, and sucked up the burning liquid in swift little sips.
“Good,” said Daru. “And where are you headed?”
Balducci withdrew his mustache from the tea. “Here, son.”
“Odd pupils! And you’re spending the night?”
“No. I’m going back to El Ameur. And you will deliver this fellow to Tinguit. He is expected at
police headquarters.”
Balducci was looking at Daru with a friendly little smile.
“What’s this story?” asked the s choolmaster. “Are you pulling my leg?”
“No, son. Those are the orders.”
“The orders? I’m not . . .” Daru hesitated, not wanting to hurt the old Corsican. “I mean, that’s
not my job.”

“What! What’s the meaning of that? In wartime people do all kinds o f jobs.”
“Then I’ll wait for the declaration of war!” Balducci nodded.
“O.K. But the orders exist and they concern you [92] too. Things are brewing, it appears. There
is talk of a forthcoming revolt. We are mobilized, in a way.”
Daru still had his ob stinate look.
“Listen, son,” Balducci said. “I like you and you must understand. There’s only a dozen of us at
El Ameur to patrol throughout the whole territory of a small department and I must get back in a
hurry.  I  was told  to  hand  this guy over  to  you and  return without  delay.  He  couldn’t  be  kept
there. His vil-lage was beginning to  stir; they wanted to take him back. You must  take him to
Tinguit tomorrow be-fore the day is over. Twenty kilometers shouldn’t faze a husky fellow like
you. After that, all will be over. You’ll come back to your pupils and your comfortable life.”
Behind the wall the horse could be heard snorting and pawing the earth. Daru was looking out
the window. Decidedly, the weather was clearing  and the  light  was increasing over the snowy
plateau.  When all the  snow  was  melted,  the  sun  would  take  over  again and  once  more  would
burn  the  fields  of  stone.  For  days,  still,  the  unchanging  sky  would  shed  its  dry  light  on  the
solitary expanse where nothing had any connection with man.
“Afte r all,”  he said, turning around toward [93] Bal-ducci, “what did he do?” And, before the
gendarme had opened his mouth, he asked: “Does he speak French?”
“No, not a word. We had been looking for him for a month, but they were hiding him. He killed
his co usin.”
“Is he against us?”
“I don’t think so. But you can never be sure.”
“Why did he kill?”
“A family squabble, I think. One owed the other grain, it seems. It’s not at all clear. In short, he
killed his cousin with a billhook. You know, like a sh eep, kreezk!”
Balducci  made  the  gesture  of  drawing  a  blade  across  his  throat  and  the  Arab,  his  attention
at-tracted, watched him with a sort of anxiety. Daru felt a sudden wrath against the man, against
all men with their rotten spite, their tireless hat es, their blood lust.
But the kettle was singing on the stove. He served Balducci more tea, hesitated, then served the
Arab again, who, a second time, drank avidly. His raised arms made the jellaba fall open and the
schoolmaster saw his thin, muscular ch est.
“Thanks, kid,” Balducci said. “And now, I’m off.”

[94] He got up and went toward the Arab, taking a small rope from his pocket.
“What are you doing?” Daru asked dryly.
Balducci, disconcerted, showed him the rope.
“Don’t bother.”
The old ge ndarme hesitated. “It’s up to you. Of course, you are armed?”
“I have my shotgun.”
“Where?”
“In the trunk.”
“You ought to have it near your bed.”
“Why? I have nothing to fear.”
“You’re crazy, son. If there’s an uprising, no one is safe, we’re al l in the same boat.”
“I’ll defend myself. I’ll have time to see them coming.”
Balducci began to laugh, then suddenly the mus-tache covered the white teeth.
“You’ll have time? O.K. That’s just what I was saying. You have always been a little cracked.
That’s why I like you, my son was like that.”
At the same time he took out his revolver and put it on the desk.
“Keep it; I don’t need two weapons from here to El Ameur.”
The revolver shone against the black paint of [95] the table. When the gendarme turned toward
him, the schoolmaster caught the smell of leather and horseflesh.
“Listen,  Balducci,”  Daru  said  suddenly,  “every  bit  of  this  disgusts  me,  and  first  of  all  your
fellow here. But I won’t hand him over. Fight, yes, if I have to. But not that. ”
The old gendarme stood in front of him and looked at him severely.
“You’re being a fool,” he said slowly. “I don’t like it either. You don’t get used to putting a rope
on a man even after years of it, and you’re even ashamed — yes, ashamed. But you can ’t let them
have their way.”

“I won’t hand him over,” Daru said again.
“It’s an order, son, and I repeat it.”
“That’s right. Repeat to them what I’ve said to you: I won’t hand him over.”
Balducci made a visible effort to reflect. He looked at the A rab and at Daru. At last he decided.
“No, I won’t tell them anything. If you want to drop us, go ahead; I’ll not denounce you. I have
an order to deliver the prisoner and I’m doing so. And now you’ll just sign this paper for me.”
“There’s no need. I’ll n ot deny that you left him with me.”
[96] “Don’t be mean with me. I know you’ll tell the truth. You’re from hereabouts and you are a
man. But you must sign, that’s the rule.”
Daru opened his drawer, took out a little square bottle of purple ink, the red wooden penholder
with  the  “sergeant - major”  pen  he  used  for  making  models  of  penmanship,  and  signed.  The
gendarme carefully folded the paper and put it into his wallet. Then he moved toward the door.
“I’ll see you off,” Daru said.
“No,” said Balducci. “There’s no use being polite. You insulted me.”
He looked at the Arab, motionless in the same spot, sniffed peevishly, and turned away toward
the  door.  “Good - by,  son,”  he  said.  The  door  shut  behind  him.  Balducci  appeared  suddenly
outside the window and t hen disappeared. His footsteps were  muffled  by the snow. The  horse
stirred  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  and  several  chickens  fluttered  in  fright.  A  moment  later
Balducci reappeared outside the window leading the horse by the bridle. He walked toward the
l ittle rise without turning around and disappeared from sight with the horse following him. A big
stone  could  be  heard  bouncing  down.  Daru  walked  back  toward  the  prisoner,  who,  without
stirring,  never  took  his  eyes  off  him.  [97]  “Wait,”  the  schoolmaster  sai d  in  Arabic  and  went
toward the bedroom. As he was going through the door, he had a second thought, went to the
desk, took the revolver, and stuck it in his pocket. Then, without looking back, he went into his
room.
For  some  time  he  lay  on  his  couch  watc hing  the  sky  gradually  close  over,  listening  to  the
silence. It  was this silence that  had seemed painful to  him during the  first  days here, after the
war. He had requested a post in the little town at the base of the foothills separating the upper
plateaus from the desert. There, rocky walls, green and black to the north, pink and lavender to
the south, marked the frontier of eternal summer. He had been named to a post farther north, on
the plateau itself. In the beginning, the solitude and the silence had been hard for him on these
wastelands  peopled  only  by  stones.  Occasionally,  furrows  suggested  cultivation,  but  they  had
been dug  to  uncover  a  certain kind  of stone  good  for  building.  The  only plowing  here  was to
harvest rocks. Elsewhere a thin layer of soi l accumulated in the hollows would be scraped out to
enrich  paltry  village  gardens.  This  is  the  way  it  was:  bare  rock  covered  three  quarters of the
region.  Towns  sprang  up,  flourished,  then  disappeared;  men  came  by,  loved  one  another  or

fought [98] bitterl y, then died. No one in this desert, neither he nor his guest, mattered. And yet,
outside this desert neither of them, Daru knew, could have really lived.
When  he  got  up,  no  noise  came  from the  class-room.  He  was amazed  at  the  unmixed  joy  he
de-rived fro m the mere thought that the Arab might have fled and that he would be alone with no
de-cision to make. But the prisoner was there. He had merely stretched out between the stove and
the  desk.  With  eyes  open,  he  was  staring  at  the  ceiling.  In  that  position, his  thick  lips  were
particularly  noticeable,  giving  him  a  pouting  look.  “Come,”  said  Daru.  The  Arab  got  up  and
followed  him.  In  the  bedroom,  the  schoolmaster  pointed  to  a  chair  near  the  table  under  the
window. The Arab sat down without taking his eyes off Daru.
“Are you hungry?”
“Yes,” the prisoner said.
Daru set the table for two. He took flour and oil, shaped a cake in a frying - pan, and lighted the
little stove that functioned on bottled gas. While the cake was cooking, he went out to the shed to
ge t cheese, eggs, dates, and condensed milk. When the cake was done he set it on the window sill
to  cool,  heated  some  condensed  milk  diluted  with  [99] water,  and beat  up  the  eggs  into  an
omelette. In one of his motions he knocked against the revolver stuck in his right pocket. He set
the bowl down, went into the classroom, and put the revolver in his desk drawer. When he came
back to the room, night was falling. He put on the light and served the Arab. “Eat,” he said. The
Arab took a piece of the cake, lifted it eagerly to his mouth, and stopped short.
“And you?” he asked.
“After you. I’ll eat too.”
The thick lips opened slightly. The Arab hesi-tated, then bit into the cake determinedly.
The meal over, the Arab looked at the school-master. “Are you the judge?”
“No, I’m simply keeping you until tomorrow.”
“Why do you eat with me?”
“I’m hungry.”
The Arab fell silent. Daru got up and went out. He brought back a folding bed from the shed, set
it up between the table and the stove, perpendicular to hi s own bed. From a large suitcase which,
up-right in a corner, served as a shelf for papers, he took two blankets and arranged them on the
camp bed. Then he stopped, felt useless, and sat down on his bed. There was nothing more to do
or to get [100] ready. He had to look at this man. He looked at him, therefore, trying to imagine
his face bursting with rage. He couldn’t do so. He could see nothing but the dark yet shining eyes
and the animal mouth.

“Why did you kill him?” he asked in a voice whose hostile tone surprised him.
The Arab looked away.
“He ran away. I ran after him.”
He raised his eyes to Daru again and they were full of a sort of woeful interrogation. “Now what
will they do to me?”
“Are you afraid?”
He stiffened, turning his eyes away.
“Are you sorry?”
The Arab stared at him openmouthed. Obviously he did not understand. Daru’s annoyance was
grow-ing.  At  the  same  time  he  felt  awkward  and  self - -conscious  with  his  big  body  wedged
between the two beds.
“Lie down there,” he said impati ently. “That’s your bed.”
The Arab didn’t move. He called to Daru:
“Tell me!”
The schoolmaster looked at him.
“Is the gendarme coming back tomorrow?”
“I don’t know.”
[101] “Are you coming with us?”
“I don’t know. Why?”
The prisoner got up a nd stretched out on top of the blankets, his feet toward the window. The
light from the electric bulb shone straight into his eyes and he closed them at once.
“Why?” Daru repeated, standing beside the bed.
The Arab opened his eyes under the blinding li ght and looked at him, trying not to blink.
“Come with us,” he said.

In  the  middle  of  the  night,  Daru  was  still  not  asleep.  He  had  gone  to  bed  after  undressing
completely; he generally slept naked. But when he suddenly realized that he had nothing on, he
hesitated. He felt vulnerable and the temptation came to him to put his clothes back on. Then he
shrugged his shoulders; after all, he wasn’t a child and, if need be, he could break his adversary
in  two.  From  his  bed  he  could  observe  him,  lying  on  h is  back,  still  motionless  with  his  eyes
closed under the harsh light. When Daru turned out the light, the dark-ness seemed to coagulate
all of a sudden. Little by little, the night came back to life in the window where the starless sky
was stirring gently. The schoolmaster soon made out the body lying at his [102] feet. The Arab
still did not move, but his eyes seemed open. A faint wind was prowling around the schoolhouse.
Perhaps it would drive away the clouds and the sun would reappear.
During the night the wind increased. The hens fluttered a little and then were silent. The Arab
turned over on his side with his back to Daru, who thought he heard him moan. Then he listened
for his guest’s breathing, become heavier and more regular. He listened to that b reath so close to
him and mused without being able to go to sleep. In this room where he had been sleeping alone
for a  year, this presence  bothered him. But  it  bothered  him also  by imposing on him a sort of
brotherhood he knew well but refused to accept in the present circumstances. Men who share the
same rooms, soldiers or prisoners, develop a strange al-liance as if, having cast off their armor
with  their  clothing,  they  fraternized  every  evening,  over  and  above  their  differences,  in  the
ancient community of dream and fatigue. But Daru shook himself; he didn’t like such musings,
and it was essential to sleep.
A  little  later,  however,  when  the  Arab  stirred  slightly,  the  schoolmaster  was  still  not  asleep.
When the prisoner made a second move, he stiffened, on [103] the alert. The Arab was lifting
himself slowly on his arms with almost the motion of a sleepwalker. Seated upright  in bed, he
waited  motionless  without  turning  his  head  toward  Daru,  as  if  he  were  listen-ing  attentively.
Daru did not stir; it had j ust oc-curred to him that the revolver was still in the drawer of his desk.
It was better to act at once. Yet he continued to observe the prisoner, who, with the same slithery
motion, put his feet on the ground, waited again, then began to stand up slowly. Daru was about
to call out to him when the Arab be-gan to walk, in a quite natural but extraordinarily silent way.
He was heading toward the door at the end of the room that opened into the shed. He lifted the
latch with precaution and went out, push-ing the door behind him but without shutting it. Daru
had  not  stirred.  “He  is  running  away,”  he  merely  thought.  “Good  riddance!”  Yet  he  listened
attentively. The hens were not fluttering; the guest must be on the plateau. A faint sound of water
reached him, an d he didn’t know what it was until the Arab again stood framed in the doorway,
closed the door carefully, and came back to bed without a sound. Then Daru turned his back on
him  and  fell  asleep.  Still  later  he  seemed,  from  the  depths  of  his  sleep,  to  hear  f urtive  steps
around the [104] school-house. “I’m dreaming! I’m dreaming!” he repeated to himself. And he
went on sleeping.
When  he  awoke,  the  sky  was  clear;  the  loose  window  let  in  a  cold,  pure  air.  The  Arab  was
asleep,  hunched  up  under  the  blankets  now, his  mouth  open,  utterly  relaxed.  But  when  Daru
shook him, he started dreadfully, staring at Daru with wild eyes as if he had never seen him and
such a frightened expression that the schoolmaster stepped back. “Don’t be afraid. It’s me. You
must  eat.”  The Arab  nodded  his  head  and  said  yes.  Calm  had  re-turned  to  his  face,  but  his
expression was vacant and listless.

The coffee was ready. They drank it seated to-gether on the folding bed as they munched their
pieces of the cake. Then Daru led the Arab under the shed and showed him the faucet where he
washed. He went back into the room, folded the blankets and the bed, made his own bed and put
the room in order. Then he went through the classroom and out onto the terrace. The sun was
already rising in the blue sky; a soft, bright light was bathing the deserted plateau. On the ridge
the snow was melting in spots. The stones were about to reappear. Crouched on the edge of the
plateau, the schoolmaster looked at the deserted expanse. [105] He thought of Balducci. He had
hurt  him,  for he  had sent  him off in a way as if he didn’t  want to  be associated with him. He
could still hear the gen-darme’s farewell and, without knowing why, he felt strangely empty and
vulnerable. At that mo-ment, from the other side of the sch oolhouse, the prisoner coughed. Daru
listened to him almost de-spite himself and then, furious, threw a pebble that whistled through
the air before sinking into the snow. That man’s stupid crime revolted him, but to hand him over
was contrary to honor. Mer ely thinking of it made him smart with humilia-tion. And he cursed at
one and the same time his own people who  had sent him this Arab and the Arab too who had
dared to kill and not man-aged to get away. Daru got up, walked in a circle on the terrace, waite d
motionless, and then went back into the schoolhouse.
The  Arab,  leaning over the cement  floor of the shed, was washing  his teeth with two  fingers.
Daru  looked at  him and said:  “Come.” He went  back  into the room ahead of the prisoner. He
slipped  a  hunt-i ng - jacket  on over  his  sweater  and  put  on walking- - shoes.  Standing,  he  waited
until  the  Arab  had  put  on  his  chèche  and  sandals.  They  went  into  the  classroom  and  the
schoolmaster  pointed  to  the  exit,  [106]  saying:  “Go  ahead.”  The  fellow  didn’t  budge.  “I’m
co ming,” said Daru. The Arab went out. Daru went back into the room and made a package of
pieces of rusk,  dates,  and  sugar.  In the  classroom,  before  go-ing  out,  he  hesitated  a  second  in
front of his desk, then crossed the threshold and locked the door. “That ’s the way,” he said. He
started toward the east, followed by the prisoner. But, a short distance from the schoolhouse, he
thought   he  heard  a  slight   sound  behind  them.   He  retraced  his  steps  and  examined  the
surroundings of the house; there was no one there . The Arab watched him without seem-ing to
understand. “Come on,” said Daru.
They walked  for an hour and rested beside a  sharp peak of limestone. The snow was melting
faster and faster and the sun was drinking up the puddles at once, rapidly cleaning the plateau,
which gradually dried and  vibrated  like the air  itself.  When they resumed walking, the ground
rang un-der their feet. From time to time a bird rent the space in front of them with a joyful cry.
Daru breathed in deeply the fresh morning light. He felt a sort of rapture before the vast familiar
expanse,  now  almost  entirely  yellow  under  its dome  of blue  sky.  They  walked  an  hour  more,
descending  to-ward  the  south.  They  reached  a  level  height  made  [107]  up  of  crumbly  rocks.
From there on, the plateau s loped down, eastward, toward a low plain where there were a  few
spindly trees and, to the south, toward outcroppings of rock that gave the land-scape a chaotic
look.
Daru  surveyed  the  two  directions.  There  was  nothing  but  the  sky on the  horizon.  Not  a  ma n
could be seen. He turned toward the Arab, who was looking at him blankly. Daru held out the
package to him. “Take it,” he said. “There are dates, bread, and sugar. You can hold out for two
days. Here are a thousand francs too.” The Arab took the package and the money but kept his full

hands at chest level as if he didn’t know what to do with what was being given him. “Now look,”
the schoolmaster said as he pointed in the direction of the east, “there’s the way to Tinguit. You
have  a  two - hour  walk.  At  Ting uit  you’ll  find  the  adminis-tration  and  the  police.  They  are
expecting  you.”  The  Arab  looked  toward  the  east,  still  holding  the  package  and  the  money
against  his chest. Daru took his elbow and turned him rather roughly toward the south. At the
foot of the height  on which they stood  could  be  seen a  faint  path.  “That’s the  trail across the
plateau. In a day’s walk from here you’ll find pasturelands and the first nomads. [108] They’ll
take you in and shelter you according to their law.” The Arab had now turned toward Daru and a
sort of panic was visible in his expression. “Listen,” he said. Daru shook his head: “No, be quiet.
Now I’m leaving you.” He turned his back on him, took two long steps in the direction of the
school,  looked  hesitantly at  the  motionless Arab,  and  started  off again.  For  a  few  minutes  he
heard  nothing  but  his  own  step  resounding  on  the  cold  ground  and  did  not  turn  his  head.  A
moment  later, however, he turned around. The Arab was still there on the edge of the hill,  his
arms  hanging  now,  and he  was  looking  at  the  schoolmaster.  Daru  felt  something  rise  in  his
throat.  But  he  swore  with  im-patience,  waved  vaguely,  and  started  off  again.  He  had  already
gone some distance when he again stopped and looked. There was no longer anyone on the hill.
Daru hesitated. The sun was now rather high in the sky and was beginning to beat down on his
head.  The  schoolmaster  retraced  his  steps,  at  first  somewhat  uncertainly,  then  with  decision.
When he reached the  little  hill,  he was bathed  in  sweat. He climbed  i t  as fast  as he could and
stopped, out of breath, at the top. The rock - fields to the south stood out sharply against the blue
sky, but on the [109] plain to the east a steamy heat was already rising. And in that slight haze,
Daru, with heavy heart, made ou t the Arab walking slowly on the road to prison.
A little later, standing before the window of the classroom, the schoolmaster was watching the
clear  light  bathing  the  whole  surface  of the  plateau,  but  he  hardly  saw  it.  Behind  him  on  the
blackboard, amon g the winding  French rivers, sprawled the clumsily chalked - up words he had
just  read:  “You  handed  over  our  brother.  You  will pay  for  this.”  Daru  looked  at  the  sky,  the
plateau, and, beyond, the invisible lands stretching all the way to the sea. In this vas t landscape
he had loved so much, he was alone.
THE ARTIST AT WORK
Exile and the Kingdom
Take me up and cast me forth
into the sea ... for I know
that for my sake this great
tempest is upon you.

— JONAH 1, 12
GILBERT JONAS, the painter , believed in his star. Indeed, he believed solely in it, although he
felt respect, and even a sort of admiration, for other people’s religion. His own faith, however,
was not [111] lacking in virtues since it consisted in acknowledg-ing obscurely that he would be
granted much with-out ever deserving anything. Consequently when, around his thirty - fifth year,
a dozen critics suddenly disputed as to which had discovered his talent, he showed no surprise.
But  his  serenity,  attributed  by  some  to  smugness,  resul ted,  on  the  contrary,  from  a  trusting
modesty. Jonas credited everything to his star rather than to his own merits.
He was somewhat more astonished when a pic-ture dealer offered him a monthly remittance that
freed him from all care. The architect Rateau , who had loved Jonas and his star since their school
days, vainly pointed out to him that the remittance would provide only a bare living and that the
dealer was taking no risk. “All the same . . .” Jonas said. Rateau — who succeeded, but by dint of
hard wo rk, in everything he did — chided his friend. “What do you mean by ‘all the same’? You
must bargain.” But nothing availed. In his heart Jonas thanked his star. “Just as you say,” he told
the dealer. And he gave up his job in the paternal publishing - house to devote himself altogether
to painting. “What luck!” he said.
In reality he thought: “It’s the same old luck.” As far back as he could remember, he found the
[112] same luck at work. He felt, for instance, an affectionate gratitude toward his parents, fir st
because  they  had  brought  him up  carelessly  and  this  had  given  free  rein  to  his  daydreaming,
secondly because they had separated, on grounds of adultery. At least that was the pretext given
by his father, who forgot to specify that it was a rather peculi ar adultery: he could not endure the
good works indulged in by his wife, who, a veritable lay saint, had, without seeing any wrong in
it, given herself body and soul to suffering humanity. But the husband intended to be the master
of  his  wife’s  virtues.  “I ’m  sick  and  tired,”  that  Othello  used  to  say,  “of  sharing  her  with  the
poor.”
This  misunderstanding  was  profitable  to  Jonas.  His  parents,  having  read  or  heard  about  the
many cases of sadistic murderers who were children of divorced parents, vied with eac h other in
pampering him with a view to stamping out the spark of such an unfortunate evolution. The less
obvious were the effects of the trauma experienced, according to them, by the child’s psyche, the
more worried they were, for invisible havoc must be deepest. Jonas had merely to announce that
he was pleased with himself or his day for his parents’ ordinary anxiety [113] to become panic.
Their attentions multiplied and the child wanted for nothing.
His alleged misfortune finally won Jonas a devoted br other in the person of his friend Rateau.
Rateau’s  parents  often  entertained  his  little  schoolmate  because  they  pitied  his  hapless  state.
Their commiserating remarks inspired their strong and athletic son with the desire to take under
his  protection  the  ch ild  whose  nonchalant  successes  he  already  admired.  Admiration  and
condescension  mixed  well to  form a  friendship  that  Jonas  received,  like  everything  else,  with
encouraging simplicity.

When without any special effort Jonas had finished his formal studies, he again had the luck to
get into his father’s publishing - house, to find a job there and, indirectly, his vocation as a painter.
As the leading publisher in France, Jonas’s father was of the opinion that books, because of the
very  slump  in  culture,  repres ented  the  future.  “History  shows,”  he  would  say,  “that  the  less
people  read,  the  more  books  they  buy.”  Consequently,  he  but  rarely  read  the  manuscripts
submitted to him and decided to publish them solely on the basis of the author’s personality or
the subj ect’s topical interest  (from this point  of view, sex being the only subject  always [114]
topical, the publisher  had eventually gone  in  for specialization) and spent  his time  looking  for
novel formats and  free publicity. Hence at  the same time  he took over the  manuscript - reading
department, Jonas also took over considerable leisure time that had to be filled up. Thus it was
that he made the acquaintance of painting.
For  the  first  time  he  discovered  in  himself  an  un-suspected  and  tireless  enthusiasm,  soon
d evoted  his  days  to  painting,  and,  still  without  effort,  excelled  in  that  exercise.  Nothing  else
seemed to interest him, and he was barely able to get married at the suitable age, since painting
consumed  him  wholly.  For  human  beings  and  the  ordinary  circums tances  of  life  he  merely
reserved  a  kindly  smile,  which  dis-pensed  him  from  paying  attention  to  them.  It  took  a
motorcycle accident when Rateau was riding too exuberantly with his friend on the rear seat to
in-terest Jonas — bored and with his right hand in- ert and bandaged — in love. Once again, he was
in-clined to  see  in that  serious accident  the good effects of his star, for without it  he wouldn’t
have taken the time to look at Louise Poulin as she deserved.
According  to  Rateau,  it  must  be  added,  Louise  di d  not  deserve  to  be  looked  at.  Short  and
strapping  himself,  he  liked  nothing  but  tall women. “I don’t  [115] know what  you find  in that
insect,” he would say. Louise was in fact small and dark in skin, hair, and eye, but well built and
pretty in the face. J onas, tall and rugged, was touched at the sight of the in-sect, especially as she
was  industrious.  Louise’s  vo-cation  was  activity.  Such  a  vocation  fitted  well  with  Jonas’s
preference for inertia and its advan-tages. Louise dedicated herself first to liter ature, so long at
least as she thought that publishing inter-ested Jonas. She read everything, without order, and in
a  few  weeks  became  capable  of  talking  about  everything.  Jonas  admired  her  and  considered
him-self definitely dispensed from reading, since Louise informed him sufficiently and made it
possible for him to know the essence of contemporary discov-eries. “You mustn’t say,” Louise
asserted, “that so- - and - so is wicked or ugly, but that he poses as wicked or ugly.” The distinction
was important  and might  even lead, as Rateau pointed out, to the condemnation of the  human
race.  But  Louise  set-tled  the  question  once  and  for  all  by  showing  that  since  this  truth  was
supported  simultaneously  by  the  sentimental  press  and  the  philosophical  reviews,   it  was
un iversal and not open to discussion. “Just as you say,” said Jonas, who immediately forgot that
cruel discovery to dream of his star.
[116]  Louise  deserted  literature  as  soon  as  she  realized  that  Jonas  was  interested  only  in
painting.  She  dedi-cated  herse lf  at  once  to  the  visual  arts,  visited  mu-seums  and  exhibitions,
dragged Jonas to them though he didn’t quite understand what his contemporaries were painting
and  felt  bothered  in  his  artistic  simplicity.  Yet  he  rejoiced  to  be  so  well  in-formed  about
every thing that concerned his art. To be sure, the next day he forgot even the name of the painter
whose works he had just seen. But Louise was right when she peremptorily reminded him of one

of the certainties she had kept from her literary period, namely that in reality one never forgets
anything.   His   star   decidedly  protected  Jo-nas,   who   could  thus,   without   suffering   in   his
con-science, combine the certainties of remembering and the comforts of forgetting.
But  the  treasures  of  self - sacrifice  that  Louise  show ered  upon  him  shone  most  brilliantly  in
Jonas’s daily  life.  That  angel spared  him the  purchases of shoes,  suits,  and  shirts that,  for the
normal man, shorten the days of an already too short life. She resolutely took upon herself the
thousand  inventions  of the  machine  for  killing  time,  from  the  her-metic  brochures  of  social
security  to  the  constantly  changing  moods  of  the  internal - revenue  office.  [117]“O.K.,”  said
Rateau,  “but  she  can’t  go  to  the  den-tist  in  your  place.”  She  may  not  have  gone,  but  she
telep honed and made the appointments, at the most convenient hours; she took care of changing
the oil in the tiny car, of booking rooms in vacation hotels, of the coal for his stove; she herself
bought the gifts Jonas wanted to give, chose and sent his flowers, and even found time, certain
evenings, to go by his house in his absence and open his bed to spare him the trouble when he
came home.
With the  same enthusiasm, of course, she entered that  bed, then took care of the appointment
with the mayor, led Jonas to the town hall two years be-fore his talent was at last recognized, and
arranged the wedding trip so that they didn’t miss a museum. Not without having first found, in
the midst of the housing shortage, a three - room apartment into which they settled on t heir return.
Then she pro-duced, in rapid succession, two children, a boy and a girl. Her intention of going up
to  three  was  real-ized  soon  after  Jonas  had  left  the  publishing - house  to  devote  himself  to
painting.
As soon as she  had  become  a  mother,  it  mu st  be  added,  Louise  devoted  herself  solely to  her
child, and later to her children. She still tried to help her husband, but didn’t have the time. To be
sure, she [118] regretted her neglect of Jonas, but her resolute character kept her from wasting
time i n such re-grets. “It can’t be helped,” she would say, “each of us has his workbench.” Jonas
was, in any case, de-lighted with this expression, for, like all the artists of his epoch, he wanted
to be looked upon as an artisan. Hence the artisan was somewhat neglected and had to buy his
shoes himself. However, besides the fact that this was in the nature of things, Jonas was again
tempted  to  rejoice.  Of course,  he  had  to  make  an effort  to  visit  the  shops,  but  that  effort  was
rewarded by one of those hours of solitude that give such value to marital bliss.
The problem of living - space was, however, by far the greatest of their problems, for time and
space  shrank  simultaneously  around  them.  The  birth  of the  children,  Jonas’s  new  occupation,
their  restricted  qua rters,  the  modesty  of  the  monthly  remittance  which  prevented  them  from
getting a larger apartment did not leave much room for the double activity of Louise and Jonas.
The  apartment  was  on  the  second  floor  of  what  had  been  a  private  house  in  the  eighteenth
century,  in  the  old  section  of  the  capital.  Many  artists  lived  in  that  quarter,  faithful  to  the
principle that in art the pursuit of the new can take place only in an old [119] setting. Jonas, who
shared that conviction, was delighted to live in that quart er.
There  could   be   no   question  as  to  the  apartment’s   being  old.   But   a   few   very  modern
arrangements had given it an original appearance resulting chiefly from the fact that it provided a
great  volume  of  air  while  occupying  but  a  limited  surface.  The  rooms ,  particularly  high  and

graced with magnificent tall windows, had certainly been intended, to judge from their majestic
proportions,  for  receptions  and  ceremonies.  But  the  necessities  of  urban  con-gestion  and  of
income from real estate had forced the succe ssive owners to cut up those over - large rooms with
partitions and thus to multiply the stalls they rented at exorbitant prices to their flock of tenants.
They nonetheless talked up what they called “the considerable cubic space.” No one could deny
the  adva ntage.  It  simply  had  to  be  attributed  to  the  impossibility  of  partitioning  the  rooms
hori-zontally  as  well.  Otherwise  the  landlords  would  certainly  not  have  hesitated  to  make  the
neces-sary  sacrifices   in  order  to   provide   a   few   more  shelters   for   the  rising generation,
particularly in-clined at that moment  to marry and reproduce. Besides, the cubic air - space was
not all to the good. It had the inconvenience of making the rooms hard [119] to heat in winter,
and this unfortunately forced the landlords to increa se the rent supplement for heat. In summer,
because  of the  great  window  surface,  the  apartment  was  literally  flooded  with  light,  for  there
were no blinds. The landlords had neglected to put them in, doubtless discouraged by the height
of  the  windows  and  th e  cost  of  carpentry.  After  all,  thick  draperies  could  perform  the  same
service  and  presented  no  problem  as  to  the  cost,  since  they  were  the  tenants’  responsibility.
Furthermore, the  landlords were  not  unwilling  to  help  them by  fur-nishing  curtains  from the ir
own stores at cost prices. Real - estate philanthropy, in fact, was merely their avocation. In their
regular daily life those new princes sold percale and velvet.
Jonas had gone  into  raptures over the apartment’s advantages and  had accepted  its drawback s
with-out difficulties. “Just as you say,” he said to the landlord about the supplement for heat. As
for the curtains, he agreed with Louise that it was enough to provide them just for the bedroom
and to leave the other windows bare. “We have nothing to h ide,” that pure heart said. Jonas had
been  par-ticularly  entranced  by  the  largest  room,  the  ceiling  of which  was  so  high  that  there
could be no question of installing a lighting system. The entrance [121] door opened directly into
that room, which was join ed  by a narrow hall to the two others, much smaller and strung  in a
row. At the end of the hall were the kitchen, the water - closet, and a nook graced with the name
of  shower - room.  Indeed,  it  might  have  been  a  shower  if  only  the  fixture  had  been  installed,
vertically of course, and one were willing to stand utterly motionless under the spray.
The  really extraordinary  height  of the  ceilings  and  the  narrowness  of the  rooms  made  of the
apart-ment  an  odd  assortment  of  parallelepipeds  almost  entirely  glassed  in ,  all  doors  and
windows,  with  no  wall space  for  the  furniture,  and  with the  human  beings  floating  about  like
bottle imps in a vertical aquarium. Furthermore, all the windows opened onto a court — in other
words, onto other windows in the same style just acro ss the way, behind which one could discern
the lofty outline of other windows opening onto a second court. “It’s the hall of mirrors,” Jonas
said in delight. On Rateau’s ad-vice, it was decided to locate the master bedroom in one of the
small rooms, the ot her to be for the already expected baby. The big room served as a studio for
Jonas during  the  day,  as a  living - room in the  evening  and  at  mealtimes.  They could  also  in a
pinch eat in the kitchen, provided that Jonas or [122] Louise was willing to remain st anding. For
his  part,  Rateau  had  outdone  himself  in  ingenious  inventions.  By  means  of  sliding  doors,
retractable shelves, and folding tables, he had managed to make up for the paucity of furniture
while emphasizing the jack - -in - the - box appearance of that u nusual apartment.
But when the rooms were full of paintings and children, they had to think up a new arrangement.
Before the birth of the third child, in fact, Jonas worked in the big room, Louise knitted in the

bedroom, while the two children occupied t he  last room, raised a great  rumpus there, and also
tumbled at will throughout the rest of the apartment. They agreed to put the newborn in a corner
of the studio, which Jonas walled off by propping up his canvases like a screen; this offered the
advantage of having the baby within earshot and being able to answer his calls. Besides, Jonas
never  needed  to  bestir  him-self,  for  Louise  forestalled  him.  She  wouldn’t  wait  until  the  baby
cried  before  entering  the  studio,  though  with  every possible  precaution  and always  on  tiptoe.
Jonas, touched by such discretion, one day assured Louise that he was not so sensitive and could
easily go on working despite the noise of her steps. Louise replied that she was also aiming not
to  waken  the  baby.  Jonas,  full  of admiration for  [123]  the  workings  of  the  maternal  instinct,
laughed  heartily  at  his  misunderstanding.  As  a  result,  he  didn’t  dare  confess  that  Louise’s
cautious  entries  bothered  him  more  than  an  out - and - out  invasion.  First,  because  they  lasted
longer,   and   secondly   b e-cause   they   followed   a   pantomime   in   which   Louise — her   arms
outstretched, her shoulders thrown back, and her leg raised high — could not go un-noticed. This
method  even  went  against  her  avowed  intentions,  since  Louise  constantly  ran  the  risk  of
bumping  into  o ne  of the  canvases  with  which  the  studio  was  cluttered.  At  such  moments  the
noise  would  waken the  baby,  who  would  manifest  his displeasure  according  to  his capacities,
which were considerable. The father, delighted by his son’s pulmonary prowess, would rus h to
cuddle him and soon be relieved in this by his wife. Then Jonas would pick up his canvases and,
brushes in hand, would listen ecstatically to his son’s insistent and sovereign voice.
This  was  just  about  the  time  that  Jonas’s  success  brought  him  many friends.  Those  friends
turned up on the telephone or in impromptu visits. The telephone, which, after due deliberation,
had been put in the studio, rang often and always to the detriment of the baby’s sleep, who would
then [124] min-gle his cries with the urgent ringing of the phone. If it so happened that Louise
was busy caring for the other children, she strove to get to the tele-phone with them, but most of
the time she would find Jonas holding the baby in one arm and in his other hand his brushes and
t he receiver, which was extending a friendly invitation to lunch. Jonas was always amazed that
anyone was willing to lunch with him, for his conversation was dull, but he pre-ferred going out
in  the  evening  in  order  to  keep  his  workday  unbroken.  Most  of  the time,  unfortu-nately,  the
friend  would  be  free  only  for  lunch,  and  just  for  this  particular  lunch;  he  would  insist  upon
holding it for his dear Jonas. His dear Jonas would accept: “Just as you say!” and after hanging
up would add: “Isn’t he thoughtful!” w hile hand-ing the baby to Louise. Then he would go back
to work, soon interrupted by lunch or dinner. He had to move the canvases out of the way, unfold
the special table, and sit down with the children. Dur-ing the meal Jonas would keep an eye on
the pain t-ing he was working on and occasionally, in the be-ginning at least, he would find his
children rather slow in chewing and swallowing, so that each meal was excessively long. But he
read  in  his  newspa-per  that  it  was  essential  to  eat  slowly  in  order  to  [1 25]  assimilate,  and
thenceforth each meal provided rea-sons for rejoicing at length.
On  other  occasions  his  new  friends  would  drop  in.  Rateau,  for  one,  never  came  until  after
dinner. He was at his office during the day and, besides, he knew that painters work during the
daylight hours. But Jonas’s new friends almost all belonged to the species of artists and critics.
Some had painted, oth-ers were about to paint, and the remainder were concerned with what had
been, or would be, painted. All, to be sure, h eld the labors of art in high esteem and complained
of the organization of the modern world that  makes so difficult the pur-suit of those labors, as
well as the exercise of medi-tation, indispensable to the artist. They complained of this for whole

afterno ons,  begging  Jonas to  go  on working,  to  behave  as  if they weren’t  there, to  treat  them
cavalierly, for they weren’t philistines and knew the value of an artist’s time. Jonas, pleased to
have friends capable of allowing one to go on working in their presenc e, would go back to his
picture without ceasing to answer the questions asked him or to laugh at the anecdotes told him.
Such simplicity put his friends more and more at ease. Their good spirits were so genuine that
they  forgot  the  meal  hour.  But  the  chi ldren  had  a  better  [126]  memory.  They  would  rush  in,
mingle with the guests, howl, be  cuddled  by the  visitors, and pass from lap to  lap. At  last  the
light  would dwindle  in the square of sky outlined by the court, and Jonas would  lay down his
brushes. There was nothing to do but to invite the friends to share pot - luck and to go on talking,
late into the night, about art of course, but especially about the untalented painters, plagiarists or
self - advertisers, who weren’t there. Jonas liked to get up early to take advantage of the first hours
of daylight. He knew that this would be difficult, that breakfast wouldn’t be ready on time and
that he himself would be tired. But on the other hand he rejoiced to learn in an evening so many
things that could not fail to be helpful to him, though in an invisible way, in his art. “In art, as in
nature, nothing is ever wasted,” he used to say. “This is a result of the star.”
To the friends were sometimes added the dis-ciples, for Jonas now had a following. At first he
had been  surprised,  not  seeing  what  anyone  could  learn  from him who  still  had  everything  to
discover. The artist in him was groping in the darkness; how could he have pointed out the right
paths?  But  he  readily  realized  that  a  disciple  is  not  necessarily  some one  who  longs  to  learn
something.  Most  often,  [127]  on  the  contrary,  one  became  a  disciple  for  the  dis-interested
pleasure of teaching one’s master. Thenceforth he could humbly accept such a surfeit of honors.
Jonas’s disciples explained  to  him at  length w hat  he  had  painted,  and  why.  In this way Jonas
discovered in his work many intentions that rather surprised him, and a host of things he hadn’t
put there. He had thought himself poor and, thanks to his pupils, suddenly found himself rich. At
times,   faced  w ith  such  hitherto  unsuspected  wealth,  Jonas  would  feel  a  tingle  of  pride.
“Nonetheless  it’s  true,”  he  would  say.  “That  face  in  the  background  stands  out.  I  don’t  quite
understand  what  they  mean  by  indirect  humanization.  Yet,  with  that  effect  I’ve  really  go ne
somewhere.” But  very soon he would transfer that  uncomfortable  mastery to  his star. “It’s the
star,” he would say, “that’s gone some-where. I’m staying home with Louise and the chil-dren.”
In  addition,  the  disciples  had  another  advantage:  they  forced Jonas  to  be  more  severe  with
himself.  They  ranked  him  so  high  in  their  conversations,  and  especially  in  regard  to  his
conscientiousness and energy, that henceforth no weakness was per-mitted him. Thus he lost his
old habit of nibbling a piece of sugar or c hocolate when he had finished a [128] difficult passage
and  before  he  went  back  to  work.  If  he  were  alone,  he  would  nevertheless  have  given  in
clandestinely to that weakness. But he was helped in his moral progress by the almost constant
presence of his di sciples and friends in whose sight he would have been embarrassed to nibble
choco-late  and  whose  interesting  conversation  he  couldn’t  interrupt  anyway  for  such  a  petty
idiosyncrasy.
Furthermore, his disciples insisted on his remain-ing faithful to his es thetic. Jonas, who labored
at length only to get a very occasional fleeting flash in which reality would suddenly appear to
him in a new light, had only a very vague idea of his own esthetic. His disciples, on the other
hand,  had  several ideas, contradicto ry and  categorical,  and they would allow  no  joking on the

subject. Jonas would have liked, at times, to resort to his whim, that humble friend of the artist.
But his disciples’ frowns in the face of certain pictures that strayed from their idea forced him to
reflect a little more about his art, and this was all to his advantage.
Finally,  the  disciples  helped  Jonas  in  another  way by obliging  him to  give  his  opinion about
their  own  production.  Not  a  day  went  by,  in  fact,  without  someone’s  bringing  him  a  pic ture
barely  sketched  in,  which  its  author  would  set  between  Jonas  and  [129]  the  canvas  he  was
working on, in order to take ad-vantage of the best light. An opinion was ex-pected. Until then
Jonas  had  always  been  secretly  ashamed  at  his  fundamental  inabilit y  to  judge  a  work  of  art.
Except  for  a  handful  of  pictures  that  carried  him  away,  and  for  the  obviously  coarse  daubs,
everything  seemed  to  him equally  interesting  and  indifferent.  Consequently  he  was obliged  to
build up a stock of judgments, which had to b e varied because his disciples, like all the artists of
the capital, after all had a measure of talent and, when they were around, he had to draw rather
fine  lines  of  distinction  to  satisfy  each.  Hence  that  happy  obligation  forced  him  to  amass  a
vocabulary and opinions about his art. Yet his natural kindness was not embittered by the effort.
He soon realized that  his disciples were  not  asking  him for criti-cisms,  for which they had  no
use, but only for en-couragement and, if possible, praise. The praises me rely had to be different.
Jonas was not satisfied to be his usual agreeable self. He showed ingenuity in his ways of being
so.
Thus the time  went  by for Jonas, who  painted amidst  friends and pupils seated on chairs that
were  now  arranged  in concentric  ci rcles around  his easel.  Often,  in addition,  neighbors would
appear at the [130] windows across the way and swell his public. He would discuss, exchange
views, examine the paint-ings submitted to  him,  smile as Louise went  by,  soothe the children,
and enthus iastically answer tel-ephone calls, without ever setting down his brushes with which
he would from time to time add a stroke to a half - finished painting. In a way, his life was very
full,  not  an hour was wasted, and  he gave thanks to  fate that  spared  him b oredom. In another
way,  it  took  many  brush - strokes  to  finish  a  picture  and  it  occasionally  occurred  to  him  that
boredom had  the  one  advantage  that  it  could  be  avoided  through strenuous work.  But  Jonas’s
production slowed  down  in  proportion to  his  friends’ becoming  more  interesting.  Even  in  the
rare moments when he was altogether alone, he felt too tired to catch up. And at such moments
he  could  but  dream of a  new regime that  would  reconcile the pleasures of friendship with the
virtues of boredom.
He  broac hed  the  subject  to  Louise,  who  was  in-dependently  beginning  to  worry  about  the
growth of the two older children and the smallness of their room. She suggested putting them in
the big room with their bed hidden by a screen and moving the baby into the small room where
he would not be wakened by the telephone. As the baby took up [131] no room, Jonas could turn
the  little  room  into  his  studio.  Then  the  big  one  would  serve  for  the  daytime  gatherings,  and
Jonas could  wander  back and  forth, either chat  with his friends or work, since  he was sure of
being  understood  in  his  need  for  isolation.  Furthermore,  the  necessity  of  putting  the  older
children  to  bed  would  allow  them  to  cut  the  evenings  short.  “Wonderful,”  Jonas  said  after  a
moment’s reflection. “Besides,” sa id Louise, “if your friends leave early, we’ll see a little more
of  each  other.”  Jonas  looked  at  her.  A  suggestion  of  melancholy  passed  over  Louise’s  face.
Touched,  he  put  his  arms  around  her  and  kissed  her  in  his  most  affectionate  way.  She
surrendered to him and for a moment they were happy as they had been in the beginning of their

marriage. But she shook her-self free; the room was perhaps too  small for Jonas. Louise got  a
folding rule and they discovered that because of the congestion caused by his canv ases and those
of his pupils, by far the more numerous, he generally worked in a space hardly any larger than
the one that was about to be assigned to him. Jonas hastened to move the furniture.
Luckily, the  less he worked, the  more his reputa-tion grew. Each exhibit  was eagerly awaited
and  extolled  in  advance.  To  be  sure,  a  small  number  of [132]  critics,  among  whom were  two
regular visitors to the studio, tempered the warmth of their reviews with some reservations. But
the  disciples’  indigna-tion  more  tha n  made  up  for  this  little  misfortune.  Of  course,  the  latter
would emphatically assert, they ranked the pictures of the first period above everything else, but
the present  experiments fore-shadowed a real revolution. Jonas would rather re-proach himself
for the slight annoyance he felt ev-ery time his first works were glorified and would thank them
effusively. Only Rateau would grum-ble: “Weird ones . . . They like you inert, like a statue. And
they deny you the right to live!” But Jonas would defend his dis ciples: “You can’t under-stand,”
he told Rateau, “because you like every-thing I do.” Rateau laughed: “Of course! It’s not your
pictures I like; it’s your painting.”
The pictures continued to be popular in any event and, after an exhibit that was enthusi astically
received,  the  dealer  suggested,  on  his  own,  an  in-crease  in  the  monthly  remittance.  Jonas
accepted, declaring how grateful he was. “Anyone who heard you now,” the dealer said, “would
think money meant something to you.” Such good - heart-edness dis armed the painter. However,
when he asked the dealer’s permission to give a canvas to a [133] charity sale, the dealer wanted
to  know  whether  or  not  it  was  a  “paying  charity.”  Jonas  didn’t  know.  The  dealer  therefore
suggested sticking squarely to the terms of the contract which granted him the exclusive right of
sale. “A contract’s a contract,” he said. In theirs, there was no provision for char-ity. “Just as you
say,” the painter said.
The new arrangement was a source of constant satisfaction to Jonas. H e could, in fact, get off by
himself often enough to answer the many letters he now received, which his courtesy could not
leave unanswered. Some concerned Jonas’s art, while others, far more plentiful, concerned the
cor-respondent, who either wanted to be encouraged in his artistic vocation or else needed advice
or fi-nancial aid. The more Jonas’s name appeared in the press, the more he was solicited, like
everyone, to take an active part in exposing most revolting in-justices. Jonas would reply, write
abo ut art, thank people, give his advice, go without a necktie in or-der to send a small financial
contribution, finally sign the just protests that were sent him. “You’re indulging in politics now?
Leave that to writers and ugly old maids,” said Rateau. No, he would sign only the protests that
insisted they had no con-nection with any particular party line. But they all [134] laid claim to
such beautiful independence. For weeks on end, Jonas would go about with his pock-ets stuffed
with  correspondence,  consta ntly  neg-lected  and  renewed.  He  would  answer  the  most  urgent,
which generally came from unknowns, and keep for a better moment those that called for a more
leisurely reply — in other words, his friends’ letters. So many obligations at least kept him from
daw dling and from yielding to a carefree spirit. He always felt  behindhand, and always guilty,
even when he was working, as he was from time to time.
Louise was ever more mobilized by the children and wore herself out doing everything that, in
other circums tances,  he could  have done  in the  home. This made him suffer. After all, he was

working for his pleasure whereas she had the worst end of the bargain. He became well aware of
this  when  she  was  out  marketing.  “The  telephone!”  the  eldest  child  would  shout,  a nd  Jonas
would  drop  his  picture  right  there,  only  to  return  to  it,  beaming,  with  another  invitation.
“Gasman!” the meter - reader would shout from the door one of the chil-dren had opened for him.
“Coming! Coming!” And when Jonas would leave the telephone or the door, [135] a friend or a
disciple,  sometimes  both,  would  fol-low  him  to  the  little  room  to  finish  the  interrupted
conversation. Gradually they all became regular  frequenters of the  hallway.  They would  stand
there, chat among themselves, ask Jonas’s o pinion from a distance, or else overflow briefly into
the little room. “Here at  least,” those who entered would exclaim,  “a  fellow can see  you a bit,
and without interruption.” This touched Jonas. “You’re right,” he would say. “After all, we never
get a ch ance to see each other.” At the same time he was well aware that he disappointed those
he didn’t see, and this saddened him. Often they were friends he would have preferred to meet.
But he didn’t have time, he couldn’t accept everything. Conse-quently, his reputation suffered.
“He’s become proud,” people said, “now that he’s a success. He doesn’t see anyone anymore .”
Or else: “He doesn’t  love anyone, except himself.” No, he loved Louise, and his children, and
Rateau, and a few others, and he had a liking f or all. But life is short, time races by, and his own
energy  had  limits.  It  was hard  to  paint  the  world  and  men and,  at  the  same  time,  to  live  with
them. On the other hand, he couldn’t complain, or explain the things that stood in his [136] way.
For, if he did, people slapped him on the back, saying: “Lucky fellow! That’s the price of fame!”
Consequently,  his  mail piled  up,  the  disciples  would  allow  no  falling  off,  and  society people
now  thronged  around  him.  It  must  be  added  that  Jonas  admired  them  for  be ing  interested  in
painting when, like everyone else, they might have got excited about the English Royal Family
or gastronomic tours. In truth, they were mostly society women, all very simple in manner. They
didn’t  buy any pictures themselves and  introduce d  their  friends to  the  artist  only  in  the  hope,
often  groundless,  that they would  buy  in  their  place.  On  the  other  hand,  they  helped  Louise,
especially in serving tea to the visitors. The cups passed from hand to hand, traveled along the
hallway from the k itchen to the big room, and then came back to roost in the little studio, where
Jonas, in the center of a handful of friends and visitors, enough to fill the room, went on painting
until he had to lay down his brushes to take, gratefully, the cup that a fa scinating lady had poured
especially for him.
He would drink his tea, look at the sketch that a disciple had just put on his easel, laugh with his
friends, interrupt himself to ask one of them to [137] please mail the pile of letters he had written
durin g  the  night,  pick  up  the  second  child,  who  had  stum-bled  over  his  feet,  pose  for  a
photograph, and then at “Jonas, the telephone!” he would wave his cup in the air, thread his way
with many an excuse through the crowd standing  in the hall, come back, fill in a corner of the
picture, stop to answer the fascinating lady that certainly he would be happy to paint her portrait,
and would get back to his easel. He worked, but “Jonas! A signature!” “What is it, a registered
letter?”  “No,  the  Kashmir  pris-oners.”  “ Coming!  Corning!”  Then  he  would  run to  the  door to
receive  a  young  friend  of  the  prisoners  and  listen  to  his  protest,  worry  briefly  as  to  whether
politics were involved, and sign after receiving complete assurance on that score, together with
ex-postulatio ns about the duties inseparable from his privileges as an artist, and at last he would
reappear only to meet, without being able to catch their names, a recently victorious boxer or the
greatest  dramatist  of  some  foreign  country.  The  dramatist  would  stand facing  him  for  five
minutes,  expressing  through  the  emotion  in  his  eyes  what  his  ignorance  of  French  would  not

allow  him  to  state  more  clearly,  while  Jonas  would  nod  his  head  with  a  real  feeling  of
brotherhood. Fortunately, he would [138] suddenly be saved from that dead - end situation by the
bursting - in  of  the  latest  spellbinder  of  the  pulpit  who  wanted  to  be  introduced  to  the  great
painter.  Jonas would  say that  he  was  delighted,  which  he  was,  feel the  packet  of unanswered
let-ters in his pocket, take up hi s brushes, get ready to go on with a passage, but would first have
to thank someone for the pair of setters that had just been brought him, go and close them in the
master  bedroom,  come  back  to  accept  the  lady  donor’s  invitation  to  lunch,  rush  out  again  in
answer to Louise’s call to see for himself without a shadow of doubt that the setters had not been
broken  in  to  apartment  life,  and  lead  them  into  the  shower- - room,  where  they  would  bark  so
persistently  that  eventually  no  one  would  even  hear  them.  Every  o nce  in  a  while,  over  the
visitors’ heads, Jonas would catch a glimpse of the look in Louise’s eyes and it seemed to him
that that  look was sad. Finally the day would  end, the  visitors would take  leave, others would
tarry  in  the  big  room  and  wax  emo-tional as  they  watched  Louise  put  the  children  to  bed,
obligingly aided by an elegant, overdressed lady who would complain of having to return to her
luxurious home where life, spread out over [139] two floors, was so much less close and homey
than at the Jonases ’.
One Saturday afternoon Rateau came to bring an ingenious clothes - drier that could be screwed
onto the kitchen ceiling. He found the apartment packed and, in the little room, surrounded by
art - lovers, Jonas painting the lady who had given the dogs, whi le he was being painted himself
by an official artist. According to Louise, the latter was working on order from the Government.
“It  will  be  called  The  Artist  at  Work.”  Rateau  withdrew  to  a  corner of the  room to  watch his
friend,  obvi-ously  absorbed  in  his effort.  One  of  the  art - lovers,  who  had  never  seen  Rateau,
leaned over toward him and said: “He looks well, doesn’t he?” Rateau didn’t reply. “You paint, I
suppose,” h e continued. “So  do I. Well, take my word for it, he’s on the decline.”  “Already?”
Rateau asked. “Yes. It’s suc-cess. You can’t resist success. He’s finished.” “He’s on the decline
or he’s finished?” “An artist who is on the decline is finished. Just see, he has nothing in him to
paint any more. He’s being painted him-self and will be hung in a museum.”
Later on, in the middle of the night, Louise, Ra-teau, and Jonas, the latter standing and the other
[140] two  seated on a corner of the  bed, were silent. The children were asleep, the dogs were
boarding  in  the  country,  Louise  had  just  washed, and  Jonas  and  Rateau  had  dried,  the  many
dishes, and their fa-tigue felt good. “Why don’t you get a servant?” Rateau had asked when he
saw the  stack of dishes. But  Louise  had  answered sadly:  “Where would  we put  her?” So  they
were  silent.  “Are  you  happy?”  R ateau  had  suddenly asked.  Jonas  smiled,  but  he  looked  tired.
“Yes. Everybody is kind to me.” “No,” said Rateau. “Watch out. They’re not all good.” “Who
isn’t?”  “Your  painter  friends,  for  in-stance.”  “I  know,”  Jonas  said.  “But  many  artists  are  that
way. The y’re not sure of existing, not even the greatest. So they look for proofs; they judge and
condemn.  That  strengthens  them;  it’s  a  begin-ning  of  existence.  They’re  so  lonely!”  Rateau
shook his head. “Take my word for it,” Jonas said; “I know them. You have t o love them.” “And
what about you?” Rateau said. “Do you exist? You never say anything bad about anyone.” Jonas
be-gan to laugh. “Oh! I often think bad of them. But then I forget.” He became serious. “No, I’m
not sure of existing. But someday I’ll exist, I ’m sure.”
Rateau asked Louise her opinion. Shaking off her fatigue, she said she thought Jonas was right:
their [141]  visitors’ opinion was of no  importance. Only Jonas’s work  mattered. And  she was

aware  that  the  child  got  in  his  way.  He  was  growing  anyw ay,  and  they  would  have  to  buy a
couch that would take up space. What could they do until they got a big-ger apartment? Jonas
looked at the master bed-room. Of course, it was not the ideal; the bed was very wide. But the
room was empty all day long. He sai d this to Louise, who reflected. In the bed-room, at  least,
Jonas would not be bothered; after all, people wouldn’t dare lie down on their bed. “What do you
think of it?” Louise in turn asked Rateau. He looked at Jonas. Jonas was looking at the windows
acr oss the  way.  Then  he  raised  his  eyes to  the  starless sky,  and  went  and  pulled  the  curtains.
When  he  returned,  he  smiled  at  Rateau  and  sat  down beside  him on the  bed  without  saying  a
word. Louise, obviously done in, declared that she was going to take her s hower. When the two
friends were  alone,  Jonas  felt  Rateau’s shoulder  touch his.  He  didn’t  look at  him,  but  said:  “I
love to paint. I’d like to paint all my life, day and night. Isn’t that lucky?” Rateau looked at him
affection-ately: “Yes,” he said, “it’s lucky.”
The children were growing and Jonas was glad to see them happy and healthy. They were now
in [142] school and came home at four o’clock. Jonas could still enjoy them Saturday afternoons,
Thursdays, and also for whole days during their frequent an d prolonged vacations. They were not
yet big enough to play quietly but were hardy enough to fill the apartment with their squabbles
and  their  laughter.  He  had  to  quiet  them,  threaten them,  sometimes  even  pretend  to  hit  them.
There was also  the  laun-dry to be done, the buttons to  be sewed on. Louise couldn’t  do  it  all.
Since they couldn’t house a serv-ant, nor even bring one into the close intimacy in which they
lived, Jonas suggested calling on the  help of Louise’s sister, Rose, who had been left a widow
w ith a grown daughter. “Yes,” Louise said, “with Rose we’ll not have to stand on ceremony. We
can put her out when we want to.” Jonas was delighted with this solution, which would relieve
Louise at the same time that it relieved his con-science, embarrassed by his wife’s fatigue. The
re-lief  was  even  greater  since  the  sister  often  brought  along  her  daughter  as  a  reinforcement.
Both were as good as gold; virtue and unselfishness predomi-nated in their honest natures. They
did everything possible to help out a nd didn’t begrudge their time. They were helped in this by
the boredom of their solitary lives and their delight in the easy [143] circum-stances prevailing at
Louise’s.  As  it  was  foreseen,  no  one  stood on ceremony and  the  two  relatives,  from the  very
begi nning,  felt  at  home.  The  big  room  became  a  common  room,  at  once  dining- - room,  linen
closet, and nursery. The little room, in which the  last - born slept, served as a storeroom for the
paintings  and  a  folding  bed  on  which  Rose  sometimes  slept,  when  she  happen ed  to  come
with-out her daughter.
Jonas  occupied  the  master  bedroom  and  worked  in  the  space  separating  the  bed  from  the
window. He merely had to wait until the room was made up in the morning, after the children’s
room.  From then  on,  no  one  came  to  bothe r  him  except  to  get  a  sheet  or  towel,  for  the  only
cupboard  in  the  house  happened  to  be  in  that  room.  As  for  the  visitors,  though  rather  less
numerous, they had de-veloped certain habits and, contrary to Louise’s hope, they didn’t hesitate
to lie down on t he double bed to be more comfortable when chatting with Jonas. The children
would  also  come  in  to  greet  their  father.  “Let’s  see  the  picture.”  Jonas would  show  them the
picture he was painting and would kiss them affectionately. As he sent them away, he fe lt that
they  filled  his  heart  fully,  without  any  reservation.  Deprived  of  them,  he  would  have  [144]
merely an empty solitude. He  loved them as much as his painting  because they were the only
things in the world as alive as it was.

Nevertheless Jonas was working less, without really knowing why. He was always diligent, but
he  now had trouble painting, even in the moments of solitude. He would spend such moments
look-ing  at  the  sky.  He  had  always  been  absent - minded,  easily  lost  in  thought,  but  now  he
became a dreamer. He would think of painting, of his voca-tion, instead of painting. “I love to
paint,”  he  still  said  to  himself,  and  the  hand  holding  the  brush  would  hang  at  his  side  as  he
listened to a distant radio.
At  the same time,  his reputation declined . He was brought  articles full of reservations, others
frankly unfriendly, and some so nasty that they deeply distressed him. But he told himself that he
could  get  some  good  out  of  such  attacks  that  would  force  him  to  work  better.  Those  who
con-tinued to c ome treated him more familiarly, like an old friend with whom you don’t have to
put yourself out. When he wanted to go back to his work, they would say: “Aw, go on! There’s
plenty of time.” Jonas realized that in a certain way they were already identifying him with their
own [145] fail-ure. But, in another way, there was something salu-tary about this new solidarity.
Rateau shrugged his shoulders, saying: “You’re a fool. They don’t care about you at all!” “They
love me a little now,” Jonas replied. “A littl e love is wonderful. Does it matter how you get it?”
He  therefore  went  on talking,  writing  letters,  and  painting  as  best  he  could.  Now  and  then  he
really would paint, es-pecially Sunday afternoons when the children went  out with Louise and
Rose. In the eve ning he would rejoice at having made a little progress on the pic-ture under way.
At that time he was painting skies.
The day when the dealer told him that, because of the considerable falling - off in sales, he was
re-gretfully obliged  to  reduce  the  remit tance,  Jonas approved,  but  Louise  was  worried.  It  was
Septem-ber  and  the  children  had  to  be  outfitted  for  school.  She  set  to  work  herself  with  her
customary courage and was soon swamped. Rose, who  could  mend and sew on buttons, could
not make things. But h er husband’s cousin could; she came to help Lou-ise. From time to time
she would settle  in Jonas’s room on a corner chair, where the silent  woman would  sit  still for
hours. So still that Louise sug-gested to Jonas painting a Seamstress . “Good idea,” Jonas said. He
tried, spoiled two canvases, then [146] went back to a half - finished sky. The next day, he walked
up and down in the apartment  for some time and  meditated instead of painting.  A disciple, all
excited,  came  to  show  him  a  long  article  he  would  not  h ave  seen  otherwise,  from  which  he
learned that  his painting was not only overrated but out of date. The dealer phoned him to tell
him again how worried he was by the decline in sales. Yet he continued to dream and meditate.
He told the disciple that there was some truth in the article, but that he, Jonas, could still count on
many good working years. To the dealer he replied that he understood his worry without sharing
it. He had a big work, really new, to create; everything was going to begin all over agai n. As he
was talking, he felt that he was telling the truth and that his star was there. All he needed was a
good system.
During the  ensuing days  he tried to  work in the  hall, two  days later  in the shower - room with
electric light, and the following day i n the kitchen. But, for the first time, he was bothered by the
peo-ple he kept bumping into everywhere, those he hardly knew and his own family, whom he
loved. For a little while he stopped working and medi-tated. He would have painted landscapes
out of do ors if the weather had been propitious. [147] Unfor-tunately, it was just the beginning of
winter and it was hard to do landscapes before spring. He tried, however, and gave up; the cold
pierced  him to  the  marrow. He  lived  several days with his canvases,  m ost  often seated beside

them or else planted in front of the window; he didn’t paint any more. Then he got in the habit of
going out in the morn-ing. He would give himself the assignment of sketching a detail, a tree, a
lopsided  house, a profile  as it  went by.  At  the end of the day,  he  had done  nothing. The  least
temptation — the  newspapers, an encounter, shop windows , the warmth of a café — -would  lead
him astray. Each evening he would keep providing good excuses to a bad conscience that never
left him. He was going to paint, that was certain, and paint better, after this period of appar-ent
waste.  It  was  all  just  working  within  him,  and  the  star  would  come  out  newly  washed  and
spar-kling from behind these black clouds. Meanwhile he never left the cafés. He had discovered
that al-cohol gave him the same exaltation as a day of good productive work at the time when he
used to think of his picture with the affection and warmth that he had never felt except toward his
children. With the second cognac he recovered tha t poignant emotion that made him at one and
the  same  time  [148]  master  and  servant  of the  whole  world.  The  only  difference  was  that  he
enjoyed  it  in  a  vacuum,  with  idle  hands,  without  communicating  it  to  a  work.  Still,  this  was
closest to the joy for which he lived, and he now spent long hours sitting and dreaming in smoke -
filled, noisy places.
Yet he fled the places and sections frequented by artists. Whenever he met an acquaintance who
spoke to him of his painting, he would  be seized with panic. He want ed to get away, that was
obvious,  and  he  did  get  away.  He  knew  what  was  said  behind  his  back:  “He  thinks  he’s
Rembrandt,”  and  his  discomfort  increased.  In  any  event,  he  never  smiled  any  more,  and  his
former friends drew an odd and inevitable conclusion fro m this: “If he has given up smiling, this
is because he’s very satis-fied with himself.” Knowing that, he became more and more elusive
and skittish. It was enough for him, on entering a café, to  have the  feeling that  someone there
recognized  him  for  everyt hing  to  cloud  over  within  him.  For  a  second,  he  would  stand  there,
powerless and filled with a strange sadness, his inscrutable face hiding both his uneasiness and
his avid and sudden need  for friendship. He would think of Rateau’s cheering  look and would
rush out in a hurry. “Just look at that guy’s [149] hang-over!” he heard someone say close to him
one day as he was disappearing.
He now frequented only the outlying sections, where no one knew him. There he could talk and
smile  and  his  kindliness  came  b ack,  for  no  one  ex-pected  anything  of  him.  He  made  a  few
friends, who were not very hard to please. He particularly enjoyed the company of one of them,
who used to serve him in a station buffet where he often went. That fellow had asked him “what
he  did  in life.”  “Painter,”  Jonas  had  replied.  “Picture - painter  or  house - painter?”  “Picture.”
“Well,” said the fel-low, “that’s not easy.” And they had never broached the subject again. No, it
was not  easy, but  Jonas would  manage all right, as soon as he  had  found how to organize  his
work.
Day after day and drink after drink, he had many encounters, and women helped him. He could
talk  to  them,  before  or  after  the  love - making,  and  especially  boast  a  little,  for  they  would
understand him even if they weren’t convinc ed. At times it seemed to him that his old strength
was returning. One day when he  had  been encouraged by one of his female acquaintances, he
made up his mind. He returned home, tried to work again in the bed-room, the seamstress being
absent. But after an hour [150] of it he put his canvas away, smiled at Louise with. out seeing
her,  and  went  out.  He  drank  all  day  long  and  spent  the  night  with  his  acquaintance,  though
without  being  in  any  condition  to  desire  her.  In  the  morning,  the  image  of  suffering  with its

tortured  face  received  him in  the  person of Lou-ise.  She  wanted  to  know  if he  had  taken that
woman. Jonas said that, being drunk, he had not, but that he had taken others before. And for the
first  time,  his  heart  torn  within  him,  he  saw  that  Louise  su ddenly  had  the  look of a  drowned
woman, that  look that comes from surprise and an excess of pain. It dawned upon him that he
had  not  thought  of  Louise  during  this  whole  time,  and  he  was  ashamed.  He  begged  her
forgiveness, it was all over, tomorrow everythi ng would begin again as it had been in the past.
Louise could not speak and turned away to hide her tears.
The following day Jonas went out very early. It was raining. When he returned, wet to the skin,
he was loaded down with boards. At home, two old fr iends, come to ask after him, were drinking
coffee in the big room. “Jonas is changing  his tech-nique. He’s going to paint on wood!” they
said. Jonas smiled. “That’s not it. But I am beginning something  new.” He went  into the little
hall [151] lead-ing to the shower - room, the toilet, and the kitchen. In the right angle where the
two halls joined, he stopped and studied at  length the high walls rising to the dark ceiling. He
needed a stepladder, which he went down and got from the concierge.
When he came b ack up, there were several addi-tional people  in the apartment, and  he had to
strug-gle against the affection of his visitors, delighted to find him again, and against his family’s
ques-tions in order to reach the end of the hall. At that moment his wife c ame out of the kitchen.
Setting down his ladder, Jonas hugged her against him. Louise looked at him. “Please,” she said,
“never do it again.” “No, no,” Jonas said, “I’m going to paint. I must paint.” But he seemed to be
talking to him-self, for he was look ing elsewhere. He got to work. Halfway up the walls he built
a flooring to get a sort of narrow, but high and deep, loft. By the late afternoon, all was finished.
With the help of the ladder, Jonas hung from the floor of the loft and, to test the solidity of his
work,  chinned  him-self  several  times.  Then  he  mingled  with  the  others  and  everyone  was
delighted  to  find  him  so  friendly  again.  In  the  evening,  when  the  apartment  was  rel-atively
empty, Jonas got an oil lamp, a chair, a stool, and a frame. He took t hem all up into the [152] loft
before  the  puzzled  gaze  of the  three  women  and  the  children.  “Now,”  he  said  from  his  lofty
perch, “I’ll be able to work without being in any-one’s way.” Louise asked him if he were sure of
it. “Of course,” he replied. “I don’ t need much room. I’ll be freer. There have been great painters
who painted by candlelight, and . . .” “Is the floor solid enough?” It was. “Don’t worry,” Jonas
said, “it’s a very good solution.” And he came back down.
Very early the next day he climbed into the loft, sat down, set the frame on the stool against the
wall,  and  waited  without  lighting  the  lamp.  The  only  direct  sounds  he  heard  came  from  the
kitchen or the toilet. The other noises seemed distant, and the visits, the ringing of the doorbell
an d  the telephone, the comings and  goings, the  conversations, reached  him half muffled, as if
they came from out on the street or from the farther court. Besides, although the whole apartment
was  overflowing  with  blinding  sunlight,  the  darkness  here  was  rest -ful.  From  time  to  time  a
friend would come and plant himself under the loft. “What are you doing up there, Jonas?” “I’m
working.” “Without light?” “Yes, for the moment.” He was not painting, but he was meditating.
In the darkness and this half - -silence wh ich, by contrast with what he had known [153] before,
seemed to him the silence of the desert or of the tomb, he listened to his own heart. The sounds
that reached the loft seemed not to con-cern him anymore , even when addressed to him. He was
like  those men who  die  alone  at  home  in  their  sleep,  and  in  the  morning  the  telephone  rings,
feverish  and  insistent,  in  the  deserted  house,  over  a  body  forever  deaf.  But  he  was  alive,  he

listened to this silence within himself, he was waiting for his star, still hidd en but ready to rise
again, to burst forth at last, unchanged and unchanging, above the disorder of these empty days.
“Shine, shine,” he said. “Don’t deprive me of your light.” It would shine again, of that he was
sure. But  he would  have  to  meditate still longer, since at  last  the chance  was given  him to  be
alone  without  separating  from his  family. He  still had  to  discover what  he  had  not  yet  clearly
understood, although he had always known it and had always painted as if he knew it. He had to
grasp at last that secret which was not merely the secret of art, as he could now see. That is why
he didn’t light the lamp.
Every day now Jonas would climb back into his loft. The visitors became less numerous because
Louise, preoccupied, paid little attention to th e con-versation. Jonas would come down for meals
and [154] then climb back to his perch. He would sit mo-tionless in the darkness all day long. At
night he would go to his wife, who was already in bed. After a few days he asked Louise to hand
up his lunch, which she did with such pains that Jonas was stirred. In order not to disturb her on
other occasions, he suggested her preparing some sup-plies that he could store in the loft. Little
by little he got to the point of not coming down all day long. But he h ardly touched his supplies.
One  evening  he  called  Louise  and  asked  for  some  blankets.  “I’ll  spend  the  night  up  here.”
Louise looked at him with her head bent backward. She opened her mouth and then said nothing.
She  was  merely  scrutinizing  Jonas  with  a  w orried  and  sad  expression.  He  suddenly  saw  how
much she had aged and how deeply the trials of their life had marked her too. It occurred to him
that he had never really helped her. But before he could say a word, she smiled at him with an
affection that wr ung his heart. “Just as you say, dear,” she said.
Henceforth he spent his nights in the loft, al-most never coming down any more. As a result, the
apartment was emptied of visitors since Jonas couldn’t be seen any more either by day or night.
Some were t old that he was in the country; others, [155] when lying  became an effort, that he
had found a studio. Rateau alone came faithfully. He would climb up on the ladder until his big,
friendly   head   was   just   over   the   level   of   the   flooring.   “How   goes   it?”   he   wou ld   ask.
“Wonderfully.”  “Are  you working?”  “It  comes to the same thing.” “But  you have  no  canvas!”
“I’m working  just  the  same.”  It  was hard  to  prolong  this dialogue  from ladder  to  loft.  Rateau
would shake his head, come back down, help Louise replace fuses or repair a lock, then, without
climbing onto the ladder, say good night to Jonas, who would reply in the darkness: “So  long,
old boy.” One evening Jonas added thanks to his good - night. “Why thanks?” “Be-cause you love
me.” “That’s really news!” Rateau sai d as he left.
Another  evening  Jonas  called  Rateau,  who  came  running.  The  lamp  was  lighted  for  the  first
time. Jonas was leaning, with a tense  look, out of the  loft. “Hand  me a canvas,” he said. “But
what’s the matter with you? You’re so much thinner; you look like a ghost.” “I’ve hardly eaten
for the last two days. But that doesn’t  matter. I must work.” “Eat first.” “No, I’m not hungry.”
Rateau brought a canvas. On the point of disappearing into the loft, Jonas asked him: “How are
they?” “Who?” [156] “Lou ise and the children.” “They’re all right. They’d be better if you were
with  them.”  “I’m  still  with  them.  Tell  them  above  all  that  I’m  still  with  them.”  And  he
disappeared. Rateau came and told Louise how worried he was. She admitted that she herself had
b een  anxious  for  several  days.  “What  can  we  do?  Oh,  if  only  I  could  work  in  his  place!”
Wretched, she faced Rateau. “I can’t live without him,” she said. She looked like the girl she had

been, and this surprised Rateau. He sud-denly realized that she had bl ushed.
The  lamp  stayed  lighted  all  night  and  all  the  next  morning.  To  those  who  came,  Rateau  or
Louise, Jonas answered merely: “Forget it, I’m working.” At noon he asked for some kerosene.
The lamp, which had been smoking, again shone brightly un-til eve ning. Rateau stayed to dinner
with Louise  and the children.  At  midnight  he went  to  say good-night  to  Jonas. Under the  still
lighted loft he waited a moment, then went away without saying a word. On the morning of the
second day, when Louise got up, the lam p was still lighted.
A beautiful day was beginning, but Jonas was not aware of it. He had turned the canvas against
the wall. Exhausted, he was sitting there waiting, [157] with his hands, palms up, on his knees.
He  told  himself  that  now  he  would  never  a gain  work,  he  was  happy.  He  heard  his  children
grumbling,  wa-ter  running,  and  the  dishes  clinking  together.  Lou-ise  was  talking.  The  huge
windows rattled as a truck passed on the boulevard. The world was still there, young and lovable.
Jonas listened to th e wel-come murmur rising from mankind. From such a distance, it did not run
counter  to  that  joyful  strength  within  him,  his  art,  these  forever  silent  thoughts  he  could  not
express but  which set  him above  all things,  in a  free and crisp  air. The children we re running
through the apartment, the little girl was laughing, Louise too now, and he hadn’t heard her laugh
for so long. He loved them! How he loved them! He put out the lamp and, in the dark-ness that
suddenly returned, right there! wasn’t that his star still shining? It was the star, he recog-nized it
with his heart full of gratitude, and he was still watching it when he fell, without a sound.
“It’s nothing,” the doctor they had called de-clared a little later. “He is working too much. In a
week he wi ll be on his feet again.” “You are sure he will get well?” asked Louise with distorted
face. “He will get well.” In the other room Rateau was [158] looking at the canvas, completely
blank, in the cen-ter of which Jonas had merely written in very small lett ers a word that could be
made out, but without any certainty as to whether it should be read solitary or solidary .
THE GROWING STONE
THE AUTOMOBILE swung clumsily around the curve in the red sandstone trail, now a mass of
mud. The headlights suddenly p icked out in the night — first on one side of the road, then on the
other — two  wooden huts with sheet - metal roofs.  On the  right  near  the  second  one,  a  tower of
coarse  beams  could  be  made  out  in  the  light  fog.  From  the  top  of  the  tower  a  metal  cable,
invisible at  its  starting - point,  shone  as  it  sloped  down  into  the  light  from  the  car  before
disappearing  behind  the  [160]  em-bankment  that  blocked  the  road.  The  car  slowed  down  and
stopped a few yards from the huts.
The man who emerged from the seat to the right of the driver labored to extricate himself from
the  car.  As  he  stood  up,  his  huge,  broad  frame  lurched  a  little.  In  the  shadow  beside  the  car,
sol-idly planted on the ground and weighed down by fatigue, he  seemed to  be  listening to the
idling mo-tor. Then he walked in the direction of the em-bankment and entered the cone of light
from  the  headlights.  He  stopped  at  the  top  of  the  slope,  his  broad  back  outlined  against  the
darkness.  After  a  moment  he  turned  around.  In the  light  from the  dashboard  he  could  see the

chauffeur’s  black  face,  smiling.  The  man  signaled  and  the  chauffeur  turned  off the  motor.  At
once a vast cool silence fell over the trail and the forest. Then the sound of the water could be
heard.
The  man  looked  at  the  river  below  him,  visible  solel y  as  a  broad  dark  motion,  flecked  with
occa-sional  shimmers.  A denser  motionless darkness,  far  beyond,  must  be  the  other  bank.  By
looking fix-edly, however, one could see on that still bank a yellowish light like an oil lamp in
the distance. The big man tu rned back toward the car and nodded. The chauffeur switched off the
lights, turned them [161] on again, then blinked them regularly. On the em-bankment  the  man
appeared and disappeared, taller and more massive each time he came back to life. Suddenly, on
t he other bank of the river, a lantern held up by an invisible arm swung back and forth several
times. At a final signal from the lookout, the chauffeur turned off his lights once and for all. The
car and the man disappeared into the night. With the lights out, the river was almost visible — or
at least a few of its long liquid muscles shining intermittently. On each side of the road, the dark
masses of forest foliage stood out against the sky and seemed very near. The fine rain that had
soaked the trail an ho ur earlier was still hover-ing in the warm air, intensifying the silence and
immobility of this broad clearing in the virgin for-est. In the black sky misty stars flickered.
But from the other bank rose sounds of chains and muffled plashings. Above the b ut on the right
of the man still waiting there, the cable stretched taut. A dull creaking began to run along it, just
as  there  rose  from the  river  a  faint  yet  quite  audible  sound  of  stirred - up  water.  The  creaking
became more regular, the sound of water spr ead farther and then became localized, as the lantern
grew  larger. Now its yellowish halo  could  be clearly [162] seen. The  halo  gradually expanded
and again contracted while the lantern shone through the mist and began to light up from beneath
a  sort  of  sq uare  roof  of  dried  palms  supported  by  thick  bamboos.  This  crude  shelter,  around
which vague shadows were moving, was slowly approaching the bank. When it was about in the
middle of the river, three  little  men, almost  black, were distinctly outlined  in the yellow  light,
naked  from  the  waist  up  and  wearing  conical  hats.  They  stood  still  with  feet  apart,  leaning
somewhat to offset  the strong drift  of the river pressing with all its invisible  water against  the
side  of a  big  crude  raft  that  eventually emerged  fr om the  darkness.  When the  ferry came  still
closer, the man could see behind the shelter on the downstream side two tall Negroes likewise
wearing  nothing  but  broad  straw  hats and  cotton trousers.  Side  by  side  they weighed  with all
their might on long poles that sank slowly into the river toward the stern while the Negroes, with
the same slow motion, bent over the water as far as their balance would allow. In the bow the
three mulattoes, still and silent, watched the bank approach without raising their eyes t oward the
man waiting for them.
The ferry suddenly bumped against something. [163] And the lantern swaying from the shock
lighted up a pier jutting into the water. The tall Negroes stood still with hands above their heads
gripping  the  ends  of the  poles, which were  barely  stuck  in  the  bottom,  but  their  taut  muscles
rippled  constantly with  a  motion  that  seemed  to  come  from the  very  thrust  of the  water.  The
other ferrymen looped chains over the posts on the dock, leaped onto the boards, and lowered a
sort of gangplank that covered the bow of the raft with its inclined plane.
The man returned to the car and slid in while the chauffeur stepped on the starter. The car slowly
climbed the embankment, pointed its hood toward the sky, and then lowered it toward th e river

as  it  tackled  the  downward  slope.  With brakes on,  it  rolled  forward,  slipped  somewhat  on the
mud, stopped, started up again. It rolled onto the pier with a noise of bouncing planks, reached
the end, where the mulattoes, still silent, were standing on either side, and plunged slowly toward
the raft. The raft  ducked  its nose  in the water as soon as the  front  wheels struck it  and almost
immediately bobbed back to receive the car’s full weight. Then the chauffeur ran the vehicle to
the stern, in front o f the square roof where the lantern [164] was hanging. At once the mulattoes
swung the in-clined plane back onto the pier and jumped simul-taneously onto the ferry, pushing
it off from the muddy bank. The river strained under the raft and raised it on the surface of the
water, where it drifted slowly at the end of the long drawbar run-ning along the cable overhead.
The tall Negroes relaxed their effort and drew in their poles. The man and the chauffeur got out
of the car and came over to stand on the edge o f the raft facing up-stream. No one had spoken
during the maneuver, and even now each remained in his place, motion-less and quiet except for
one of the tall Negroes who was rolling a cigarette in coarse paper.
The man was looking at the gap through whic h the river sprang from the vast Brazilian forest
and swept down toward them. Several hundred yards wide at that point, the muddy, silky waters
of the river pressed against the side of the ferry and then, unimpeded at the two ends of the raft,
sheered  off and  again  spread  out  in  a  single  powerful  flood  gently  flowing  through  the  dark
forest toward the sea and the night. A stale smell, come from the wa-ter or the spongy sky, hung
in the air. Now the slapping of the water under the ferry could be heard, and a t intervals the calls
of bullfrogs from [165] the two banks or the strange cries of birds. The big man approached the
small, thin chauffeur, who was leaning against one of the bamboos with his hands in the pockets
of his dungarees, once  blue but  now covere d with the same red dust  that had been blowing  in
their faces all day long. A smile spread over his face, all wrinkled in spite of his youth. Without
really seeing them, he was staring at the faint stars still swimming in the damp sky.
But  the  birds’ cri es  became  sharper,  unfamiliar  chatterings  mingled  with them,  and  almost  at
once the cable  began to creak. The tall Negroes plunged their poles into the water and groped
blindly  for  the  bottom.  The  man  turned  around  toward  the  shore  they  had  just  left.  Now that
shore was ob-scured by the darkness and the water, vast and savage like the continent of trees
stretching  beyond  it  for  thousands  of  kilometers.  Between  the  near - by  ocean  and  this  sea  of
vegetation, the handful of men drifting at that moment on a wild river seemed lost. When the raft
bumped the new pier it was as if, having cast off all moorings, they were landing on an island in
the darkness after days of frightened sailing.
Once on land, the men’s voices were at last heard. The chauffeur had just p aid them and, with
[166]  voices  that  sounded  strangely  gay  in  the  heavy  night,  they  were  saying  farewell  in
Portuguese as the car started up again.
“They  said  sixty,  the  kilometers  to  Iguape.  Three  hours  more  and  it’ll  be  over.  Socrates  is
happy,” the ch auffeur announced.
The man laughed with a warm, hearty laugh that resembled him.
“Me too, Socrates, I’m happy too. The trail is hard.”

“Too heavy, Mr. D’Arrast, you too heavy,” and the chauffeur laughed too as if he would never
stop.
The  car  had  ta ken  on  a  little  speed.  It  was  ad-vancing  between  high  walls  of  trees  and
inextrica-ble   vegetation,   amidst   a  soft,   sweetish  smell.   Fire-flies  on  the  wing  constantly
crisscrossed in the darkness of the forest, and every once in a while red - eyed birds would b ump
against the windshield. At times a strange, savage sound would reach them from the depths of
the night and the chauffeur would roll his eyes comically as he looked at his passenger.
The road kept turning and crossed little streams on bridges of wobbl y boards. After an hour the
fog  began to thicken.  A fine drizzle  began to  fall,  [167] dimming the  car’s lights. Despite the
jolts, D’Arrast was half asleep. He was no longer riding in the damp forest but on the roads of
the  Serra that  they  had  taken  in  the morning  as  they left São Paulo.  From  those  dirt  trails
constantly rose the red dust which they could still taste, and on both sides, as far as the eye could
see,  it  covered the  sparse  veg-etation of the  plains. The  harsh sun, the  pale  moun-tains  full of
rav ines, the starved zebus encountered along the  roads, with a tired  flight  of ragged uru bus as
their only escort, the long, endless crossing of an endless desert . . . He gave a start. The car had
stopped. Now they were  in Japan:  fragile  houses on both sides of the road and,  in the  houses,
furtive  kimonos.  The  chauffeur  was  talking  to  a  Japanese  wearing  soiled  dungarees  and  a
Brazilian straw hat. Then the car started up again.
“He said only forty kilometers.”
“Where were we? In Tokyo?”
“No. Registro. In Brazil all the Japanese come here.”
“Why?”
“Don’t know. They’re yellow, you know, Mr. D’Arrast.”
But the forest was gradually thinning out, and the road was becoming easier, though slippery.
[168] The car was skidding  on sand. The  window  let  in a  wa rm, damp  breeze that  was rather
sour.
“You smell it?” the chauffeur asked, smacking his lips. “That’s the good old sea. Soon, Iguape.”
“If we have enough gas,” D’Arrast said. And he went back to sleep peacefully.
Sitting up in bed early in the mo rning, D’Arrast looked in amazement at the huge room in which
he had just awakened. The lower half of the big walls was newly painted brown. Higher up, they
had  once  been painted  white,  and  patches of yel-lowish paint  covered  them up  to  the  ceiling.
Two ro ws of beds faced each other. D’Arrast saw only one bed unmade at the end of his row and
that bed was empty. But he heard a noise on his left and turned toward the door, where Socrates,

a  bottle  of  mineral  water  in  each  hand,  stood  laughing,  “Happy  memory!” he  said.  D’Arrast
shook  him-self.  Yes,  the  hospital  in  which  the  Mayor  had  lodged  them  the  night  before  was
named  “Happy  Memory.”  “Sure  memory,”  Socrates  continued.  “They  told  me  first  build
hospital,   later   build   wa-ter.   Meanwhile,   happy   memory,   take   fizz water   to   wash.”   He
disappeared,  laughing  and  singing,  not  at  all  exhausted  apparently  by  the  cataclysmic  [169]
sneezes that had shaken him all night long and kept D’Arrast from closing an eye.
Now  D’Arrast  was completely  awake.  Through  the  iron - latticed window  he  could  see  a  little
red - earth courtyard  soaked  by the  rain  that  was  noise-lessly  pouring  down on  a  clump  of tall
aloes. A woman passed holding a yellow scarf over her head. D’Arrast lay back in bed, then sat
up  at  once  and  got  out  of the  bed,  whi ch  creaked  under  his  weight.  Socrates  came  in  at  that
moment:  “For  you,  Mr.  D’Arrast.  The  Mayor  is  waiting  outside.”  But,  seeing  the  look  on
D’Arrast’s face, he added: “Don’t worry; he never in a hurry.”
After shaving with the mineral water, D’Arrast wen t out under the portico of the building. The
Mayor — who  had the proportions and, under  his  gold - rimmed glasses, the  look of a  nice  little
weasel — seemed lost in dull contemplation of the rain. But a charming smile transfigured him as
soon as he saw D’Arrast. Holding his little body erect, he rushed up and tried to stretch his arms
around the engineer. At that moment an automobile drove up in front of them on the other side of
the  low  wall,  skidded  in the  wet  clay,  and  came  to  a stop on an angle.  “The  Judge!” said  the
Mayor. Like the Mayor, the Judge was dressed in navy blue. But he [170] was much younger, or
at least seemed so because of his elegant  figure and his look of a startled ado-lescent. Now he
was crossing the courtyard in their direction, gracefully avoiding the puddles. A few steps from
D’Arrast, he was already holding out his arms and welcoming him. He was proud to greet the
noble engineer who was honoring their poor village; he was delighted by the priceless serv-ice
the  noble  engineer  was going  to do  Iguape  by building  that  little  jetty to  prevent  the  periodic
flooding  of the  lower  quarters of town.  What  a  noble  profession,  to  command  the  waters and
dom-inate  rivers!  Ah,  surely  the  poor  people  of  Iguape  would  long  remember  the  noble
engineer’s  name and  many  years  from  now  would  still  mention  it  in  their  prayers.  D’Arrast,
captivated  by  such  charm  and  eloquence,  thanked  him  and  didn’t  dare  wonder  what  possible
connection a judge could have with a jetty. Besides, according to the Mayor, it was time to go to
the  club,  where  the  leading  citizens wanted  to  receive  the  noble  engineer  appropriately  before
going to inspect the poorer quarters. Who were the leading citizens?
“Well,” the Mayor said, “myself as Mayor, Mr. Carvalho here, the Harbor Captain, and a few
others  less  important.  Besides,  you  won’t  have  to  [171]  pay  much attention to  them,  for  they
don’t speak French.”
D’Arrast called Socrates and told him he would meet him when the morning was over.
“All right,” Socrates said, “I’ll go to the Gard en of the Fountain.”
“The Garden?”
“Yes, everybody knows. Have no fear, Mr. D’Arrast.”

The  hospital, D’Arrast  noticed as he  left  it, was built on the edge of the  forest, and the heavy
foli-age almost  hung over the roofs. Over the whole surface of the trees was falling a sheet of
fine rain which the dense forest was noiselessly absorbing like a huge sponge. The town, some
hundred  houses  roofed  with  faded  tiles,  extended  between  the  forest  and  the  river,  and  the
water’s distant murmur reached the hospit al. The car entered drenched streets and almost at once
came out on a rather large rectangular square which showed, among numerous puddles in its red
clay, the marks of tires, iron wheels, and horseshoes. All around, brightly plastered low houses
closed  of f  the  square,  behind  which  could  be  seen  the  two  round  towers  of a  blue - and - white
church of colonial style.  A smell of salt  water coming  from the  estuary [172] domi-nated this
bare setting. In the center of the square a few wet silhouettes were wandering. Along the houses
a  motley crowd of gauchos, Japanese,  half- - breed Indians, and elegant  leading citizens, whose
dark  suits  looked  exotic  here,  were  sauntering  with  slow  gestures.  They  stepped  aside  with
dignity to make way for the car, then stopped and watc hed it. When the car stopped in front of
one of the houses on the square, a circle of wet gauchos si-lently formed around it.
At the club — a sort of small bar on the second floor furnished with a bamboo counter and iron
café  tables — the  leading  citizens  we re  numerous.  Sugar - cane  alcohol  was  drunk  in  honor  of
D’Ar-rast after the Mayor, glass in hand, had wished him welcome and all the happiness in the
world.  But  while  D’Arrast  was  drinking  near  the  window,  a  huge  lout  of  a  fellow  in  riding -
breeches and leg-g ings came over and, staggering somewhat, deliv-ered himself of a rapid and
obscure speech in which the engineer recognized  solely the word “passport.” He hesitated and
then took out the document, which the fellow seized greedily. After having thumbed throu gh the
passport,  he  mani-fested  obvious  displeasure.  He  resumed  his  speech,  shaking  the  document
under the nose of the [173] engi-neer, who, without getting excited, merely looked at the angry
man.  Whereupon  the  judge,  with  a  smile,  came  over  and  asked  wha t  was  the  matter.  For  a
moment the drunk scrutinized the frail crea-ture who dared to interrupt him and then, stagger-ing
even  more  dangerously,  shook  the  passport  in  the  face  of  his  new  interlocutor.  D’Arrast  sat
peacefully beside a café table and waited. The dia-logue became  very lively, and suddenly the
Judge broke out in a deafening voice that one would never have suspected in him. Without any
fore-warning, the lout suddenly backed down like a child caught in the act. At a final order from
the Judge, he sidled toward the door like a punished schoolboy and disappeared.
The  Judge  immediately  came  over  to  explain  to  D’Arrast,  in  a  voice  that  had  become
harmonious again, that the uncouth individual who had just left was the Chief of Police, that he
had dar ed to claim the passport was not in order, and that he would be punished for his outburst.
Judge Car valho then addressed himself to the leading citi-zens, who stood in a circle around him,
and seemed to be questioning them. After a brief discussion, the J udge expressed solemn excuses
to  D’Arrast,  asked  him  to  agree  that  nothing  but  drunkenness  [174]  could  explain  such
forgetfulness of the sentiments of respect and gratitude that the whole town of Iguape owed him,
and,  finally,  asked  him  to  decide  himself, on  the  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  the  wretched
individual. D’Arrast said that he didn’t want any punishment, that it was a trivial incident, and
that he was particularly eager to go to the river. Then the Mayor spoke up to assert with much
simple good - h umor that a punishment was really mandatory, that the guilty man would re-main
incarcerated, and that they would all wait until their distinguished visitor decided on his fate. No
protest could soften that smiling severity, and D’Arrast had to promise that he would think the
matter over. Then they agreed to visit the poorer quarters of the town.

The river was already spreading its yellowish waters over the low, slippery banks. They had left
behind  them  the  last  houses  of  Iguape  and  stood  be-tween  the  rive r  and  a   high,   steep
embankment to which clung huts made of clay and branches. In front of them, at the end of the
embankment,  the  forest  began again  abruptly,  as  on the  other  bank.  But  the  gap  made  by the
water  rapidly  widened  between  the  trees  until  reach ing  a  vague  grayish  line  that  marked  the
beginning of the sea. Without [175] saying a word, D’Arrast walked toward the slope, where the
various flood levels had left marks that were still fresh. A muddy path climbed toward the huts.
In front of them, Negro es stood silently staring at the newcomers. Several couples were holding
hands, and on the edge of the mound, in front of the adults, a row of black children with bulging
bellies and spindly legs were gaping with round eyes.
When he arrived in front of t he huts, D’Arrast beckoned to the Harbor Captain. He was a fat,
laughing Negro wearing a white uniform. D’Ar-rast asked him in Spanish if it were possible to
visit a hut. The Captain was sure it was, he even thought it a good idea, and the noble engineer
w ould see very interesting things. He harangued the Negroes at length, pointing to D’Arrast and
to the river. They listened without saying a word. When the Captain had finished, no one stirred.
He spoke again, in an impatient voice. Then he called upon one of the men, who shook his head.
Whereupon the Captain said  a  few  brief words in a tone of command. The  man stepped  forth
from  the  group,  faced  D’Arrast,  and  with  a  gesture  showed  him  the  way.  But  his  look  was
hostile. He was an elderly man with short, gray ing hair and a thin, wizened [176] face; yet his
body was still young, with hard wiry shoulders and muscles visible through his cotton pants and
torn shirt. They went ahead, followed by the Captain and the crowd of Negroes, and climbed a
new, steeper emban kment where the huts made of clay, tin, and reeds clung to the ground with
such difficulty that they had to be strengthened at the base with heavy stones. They met a woman
going down the path, sometimes slipping in her bare feet, who was carrying on her he ad an iron
drum full of water. Then they reached a small irregular square bordered by three huts. The man
walked toward one of them and pushed open a bamboo door on hinges made of tropical liana. He
stood aside without saying a word, staring at the enginee r with the same im-passive look. In the
hut, D’Arrast saw nothing at first but a dying fire built right on the ground in the exact center of
the room. Then in a back cor-ner he made out a brass bed with a bare, broken mattress, a table in
the  other  corner covered  with  earthenware  dishes,  and,  between  the  two,  a  sort  of  stand
supporting a color print representing Saint George. Nothing else but a pile of rags to the right of
the  entrance  and,  hanging  from the  ceiling,  a  few  loincloths of various colors drying over  the
[177] fire. Standing still, D’Arrast breathed in the smell of smoke and poverty that rose from the
ground and choked him. Behind him, the Captain clapped his hands. The engineer turned around
and, against the light, saw the graceful silhouette of a black girl approach and hold out something
to  him.  He  took  a  glass  and  drank  the  thick  sugar - cane  alcohol.  The  girl  held  out  her  tray to
receive the empty glass and went out with such a supple mo-tion that D’Arrast suddenly wanted
to hold her back.
Bu t on following her out he didn’t recognize her in the crowd of Negroes and leading citizens
gath-ered around the hut. He thanked the old man, who bowed without a word. Then he left. The
Captain,  behind him, resumed  his explanations and asked when the Frenc h company from Rio
could begin work and whether or not the jetty could be built  before the rainy season. D’Arrast
didn’t  know; to tell the  truth, he  wasn’t  thinking  of that. He went  down toward the cool river

under  the  fine  mist.  He  was  still  listening  to that  great  per-vasive  sound  he  had  been  hearing
continually since his arrival, which might have been made by the rustling of either the water or
the trees, he could not tell. Having reached the bank, he looked out [178] in the distance at the
vague  line  of the  sea,  the  thousands  of  kilometers  of  solitary  waters  leading  to  Africa  and,
beyond, his native Europe.
“Captain,” he asked, “what do these people we have just seen live on?”
“They work when they’re needed,” the Captain said. “We are poor.”
“Are t hey the poorest?”
“They are the poorest.”
The Judge, who arrived at that moment, slip-ping somewhat in his best shoes, said they already
loved the noble engineer who was going to give them work.
“And, you know, they dance and sing every day.”
Then, without transition, he asked D’Arrast if he had thought of the punishment.
“What punishment?”
“Why, our Chief of Police.”
“Let him go.” The Judge said that this was not possible; there had to be a punishment. D’Arrast
was already walking toward Igua pe.
In  the  little  Garden  of  the  Fountain,  mysterious  and  pleasant  under  the  fine  rain,  clusters  of
exotic [179] flowers hung down along the lianas among the banana trees and pandanus. Piles of
wet stones marked the intersection of paths on which a mo tley crowd was strolling. Half - breeds,
mulattoes, a few gauchos were chatting in low voices or sauntering along the bamboo paths to
the point where groves and bush became thicker and more impenetrable. There, the forest began
abruptly.
D’Arrast  was  looki ng  for  Socrates  in  the  crowd  when  Socrates  suddenly  bumped  him  from
behind. “It’s holiday,” he said, laughing, and clung to D’Arrast’s tall shoulders to jump up and
down.
“What holiday?”
“Why, you not know?” Socrates said in surprise as he faced D’Arra st. “The feast of good Jesus.
Each year they all come to the grotto with a hammer.”

Socrates  pointed  out,  not  a  grotto,  but  a  group  that  seemed  to  be  waiting  in  a  corner  of  the
garden.
“You see? One day the good statue of Jesus,  it  came upstream from t he sea. Some  fishermen
found it. How beautiful! How beautiful! Then they washed it here in the grotto. And now a stone
grew up in the grotto. Every year it’s the feast. With the hammer you break, you break off pieces
[180] for blessed happiness. And then i t keeps growing and you keep breaking. It’s the miracle!”
They had reached the grotto and could see its low entrance beyond the waiting men. Inside, in
the darkness studded with the flickering flames of candles, a squatting figure was pounding with
a ham mer. The man, a thin gaucho with a long mus-tache, got up and came out holding in his
open palm, so  that  all might  see, a small piece of moist  schist, over which he  soon closed his
hand carefully before going away. Another man then stooped down and entered the grotto.
D’Arrast turned around. On all sides pilgrims were waiting, without looking at him, impassive
under the water dripping from the trees in thin sheets. He too was waiting in front of the grotto
under the same film of water, and he didn’t know for what. He had been waiting constantly, to
tell the truth, for a month since he had arrived in this country. He had been waiting — in the red
heat of humid days, under the little stars of night, despite the tasks to be accomplished, the jetties
to be built , the roads to be cut through — as if the work he had come to do here were merely a
pretext for a sur-prise or for an encounter he did not even imagine but which had been waiting
patiently for him at [181] the end of the world. He shook himself, walked away without anyone
in the little group paying at-tention to him, and went toward the exit. He had to go back to the
river and go to work.
But  Socrates  was  waiting  for  him  at  the  gate,  lost  in  voluble  conversation  with  a  short,  fat,
strap-ping  man  whose  skin was  yellow  rather  than  black.  His  head,  completely  shaved,  gave
even  more  sweep  to a  considerable forehead.  On the  other  hand,  his  broad,  smooth  face  was
adorned with a very black beard, trimmed square.
“He’s champion!” Socrates said by way of in-troduct ion. “Tomorrow he’s in the procession.”
The man, wearing a sailor’s outfit of heavy serge, a blue - and - white jersey under the pea jacket,
was examining D’Arrast attentively with his calm black eyes. At the same time he was smiling,
show-ing all his very w hite teeth between his full, shiny lips.
“He  speaks  Spanish,”  Socrates  said  and,   turning  toward  the  stranger,   added:  “Tell  Mr.
D’Arrast.” Then  he  danced  off t oward another  group. The  man ceased  to  smile  and  looked  at
D’Arrast with outright curiosity.
“ You are interested, Captain?”
“I’m not a captain,” D’Arrast said.
[182] “That doesn’t matter. But you’re a noble. Soc-rates told me.”

“Not I. But my grandfather was. His father too and all those before his father. Now there is no
more nobility in our country.”
“Ah!” the Negro said, laughing. “I understand; everybody is a noble.”
“No, that’s not it. There are neither noblemen nor common people.”
The fellow reflected; then he made up his mind. “No one works? No one suffers?”
“Yes, millions of me n.”
“Then that’s the common people.”
“In that way, yes, there is a common people. But the masters are policemen or merchants.” The
mulatto’s kindly face  closed  in a  frown. Then he  grumbled:  “Humph! Buying  and  selling, eh!
What filth! And with the polic e, dogs com-mand.”
Suddenly, he burst out laughing.
“You, you don’t sell?”
“Hardly at all. I make bridges, roads.”
“That’s good. Me, I’m a ship’s cook. If you wish, I’ll make you our dish of black beans.”
“All right.”
[183] The cook came closer to D’Arrast and took his arm.
“Listen, I like what you tell. I’m going to tell you too. Maybe you will like.”
He drew him over near the gate to a damp wooden bench beneath a clump of bamboos.
“I was at  sea, off Iguape, on a  small coastwise tanker th at  supplies the  harbors along  here. It
caught fire on board. Not by my fault! I know my job! No, just bad luck. We were able to launch
the lifeboats. During the night, the sea got rough; it capsized the boat and I went down. When I
came  up,  I  hit  the  boat with  my  head.  I  drifted.  The  night  was dark, the  waters are vast,  and,
besides, I don’t swim well; I was afraid. Just then I saw a light in the distance and recognized the
church of the good Jesus in Iguape. So I told the good Jesus that at his procession I would carry a
hundred- - pound stone on my head if he saved me. You don’t have to believe me, but the waters
became calm and my heart too. I swam slowly, I was happy, and I reached the shore. Tomorrow
I’ll keep my promise.”
He looked at D’Arrast in a sud denly suspicious manner.
[184] “You’re not laughing?”

“No, I’m not laughing. A man has to do what he has promised.”
The fellow clapped him on the back.
“Now, come to my brother’s, near the river. I’ll cook you some beans.”
“No,” D’Arrast said, “I have things to do. This evening, if you wish.”
“Good. But tonight there’s dancing and praying in the big hut. It’s the feast for Saint George.”
D’Arrast asked him if he danced too. The cook’s face hardened suddenly; for the first time his
eyes became sh ifty.
“No, no, I won’t  dance. Tomorrow I must  carry the stone. It  is heavy. I’ll go  this evening to
cele-brate the saint. And then I’ll leave early.”
“Does it last long?”
“All night and a little into the morning.”
He looked at D’Arrast with a vague ly shameful look.
“Come  to  the  dance.  You  can  take  me  home  afterward.  Otherwise,  I’ll  stay  and  dance.  I
prob-ably won’t be able to keep from it.”
“You like to dance?”
“Oh, yes! I like. Besides, there are cigars, saints, [185] women. You forget everyt hing and you
don’t obey anymore .”
“There are women too? All the women of the town?”
“Not of the town, but of the huts.”
The ship’s cook resumed his smile. “Come. The Captain I’ll obey. And you will help me keep
my promise tomorrow.”
D’Arrast felt slightly annoyed. What did that absurd promise mean to him? But he looked at the
handsome frank face smiling trustingly at him, its dark skin gleaming with health and vitality.
“I’ll come,” he said. “Now I’ll walk along with you a little.”
Without know ing why, he had a vision at the same time of the black girl offering him the drink
of welcome.
They  went  out  of  the  garden,  walked  along  sev-eral  muddy  streets,  and  reached  the  bumpy

square, which looked even larger because of the low structures surround ing it. The humidity was
now dripping down the plastered walls, although the rain had not increased. Through the spongy
ex-panse of the sky, the sound of the river and of the trees reached them somewhat muted. They
were [186] walking in step, D’Arrast heav ily and the cook with elastic tread. From time to time
the  latter  would  raise  his  head  and  smile  at  his  companion.  They  went  in the  direction  of the
church, which could be seen above the houses, reached the end of the square, walked along other
muddy stree ts now filled with aggressive smells of cooking. From time to time a woman, holding
a plate or kitchen utensil, would peer out inquisitively from one of the doors and then disappear
at once. They passed in front of the church, plunged into an old section o f similar low houses,
and  suddenly  came  out  on  the  sound  of  the  invisible  river  behind  the  area  of  the  huts  that
D’Arrast recognized.
“Good. I’ll leave you. See you this evening,” he said.
“Yes, in front of the church.”
But the cook did not let go of D’Arrast’s hand. He hesitated. Finally he made up his mind.
“And you, have you never called out, made a promise?”
“Yes, once, I believe.”
“In a shipwreck?”
“If you wish.” And D’Arrast pulled his hand away roughly. But as he was about to turn on hi s
[187] heels, he met the cook’s eyes. He hesitated, and then smiled.
“I  can  tell  you,  although  it  was  unimportant.  Someone  was  about  to  die  through  my  fault.  It
seems to me that I called out.”
“Did you promise?”
“No. I should have liked to promise.”
“Long ago?”
“Not long before coming here.”
The cook seized his beard with both hands. His eyes were shining.
“You are a captain,” he said. “My house is yours. Besides, you are going to help me keep my
prom-ise, and it’s as if you had made it yours elf. That will help you too.”
D’Arrast smiled, saying: “I don’t think so.”
“You are proud, Captain.”

“I  used  to  be  proud;  now  I’m alone.  But  just  tell  me:  has  your  good  Jesus  always  answered
you?”
“Always . . . no, Captain!”
“Well, then?”
The cook burst out with a gay, childlike laugh.
“Well,” he said, “he’s free, isn’t he?”
At the club, where D’Arrast lunched with the leading citizens, the Mayor told him he must sign
[188] the town’s guest - book so that some trace would remain of the great event of his coming to
Iguape. The Judge found two or three new expressions to praise, besides their guest’s virtues and
talents, the simplicity with which he represented among them the great country to which he had
the honor to be-long. D’Arrast simply sa id that it was indeed an honor to him and an advantage
to  his firm to  have  been awarded the  allocation of this long  construc-tion  job. Whereupon the
Judge expressed his ad-miration for such humility. “By the way,” he asked, “have you thought of
what  should be done to the Chief of Police?” D’Arrast  smiled at  him and said: “Yes, I have  a
solution.”  He  would  con-sider  it  a  personal  favor  and  an  exceptional grace  if the  foolish  man
could  be  forgiven  in  his  name  so  that  his  stay  here  in  Iguape,  where  he  so  much en-joyed
knowing  the  beautiful  town  and  generous  inhabitants,  could  begin  in  a  climate  of  peace  and
friendship. The Judge, attentive and smiling, nodded his head. For a moment he meditated on the
wording as an expert, then called on those pres-ent to appla ud the magnanimous traditions of the
great French nation and, turning again toward D’Arrast, declared himself satisfied. “Since that’s
the way it is,” he concluded, “we shall dine this [189] evening with the Chief.” But D’Arrast said
that  he  was  invited  by friends to  the  ceremony of the  dances  in  the  huts.  “Ah,  yes!”  said  the
Judge. “I am glad you are going. You’ll see, one can’t resist loving our people.”
That evening, D’Arrast, the ship’s cook, and his brother were seated around the ashes of a fire in
the  center  of  the  but  the  engineer  had  already  vis-ited  in  the  morning.  The  brother  had  not
seemed surprised to see him return. He spoke Spanish hardly at all and most of the time merely
nodded his head. As for the cook, he had shown interest in cathedr als and then had expatiated at
length on the black bean soup. Now night had almost  fallen and, although D’Arrast could still
see  the  cook  and  his  brother,  he  could  scarcely  make  out  in the  back  of the  but  the  squatting
figures of an old woman and of the sa me girl who had served him. Down below, he could hear
the monotonous river.
The cook rose, saying: “It’s time.” They got up, but the women did not stir. The men went out
alone. D’Arrast hesitated, then joined the others. Night had now fallen and the rain had stopped.
The pale - black sky still seemed liquid. In its trans-parent dark water, stars began to light up, low
on [190] the horizon. Almost at once they flickered out, falling one by one into the river as if the
last  lights were trickling  from the sky. The  heavy air smelled of water and smoke. Nearby the

sound  of  the  huge  forest  could  be  heard  too,  though  it  was  motionless.  Suddenly  drums  and
singing broke out in the distance, at first muffled and then distinct, approaching closer and closer
and finall y stopping. Soon after, one could see a procession of black girls wearing low - waisted
white dresses of coarse silk. In a tight - fitting red jacket adorned with a necklace of varicolored
teeth, a tall Negro fol-lowed them and, behind him, a disorderly crowd of men in white pajamas
and musicians carrying triangles and broad, short drums. The cook said they should follow the
men.
The  hut, which they reached  by following the river a  few hundred yards beyond the last huts,
was large, empty, and relatively comfo rtable, with plastered walls. It had a dirt floor, a roof of
thatch and reeds supported by a central pole, and  bare walls.  On a  little palm - clad altar at  the
end,  covered  with  candles  that  scarcely  lighted  half the  hall,  there  was  a  magnificent  colored
pri nt in which Saint George, with alluring grace, was get-ting the better of a bewhiskered dragon.
Under [191] the altar a sort of niche decorated with rococo pa-per sheltered a little statue of red -
painted clay rep-resenting a horned god, standing between a candle and a bowl of water. With a
fierce look the god was brandishing an oversized knife made of silver paper.
The cook led D’Arrast to a corner, where they stood against the wall near the door. “This way,”
he whispered, “we can leave without disturbing .” Indeed, the hut was packed tight with men and
women. Already the heat was rising. The musi-cians took their places on both sides of the little
al-tar. The men and women dancers separated into two concentric circles with the men inside. In
the very cente r the black leader in the red jacket took his stand. D’Arrast leaned against the wall,
folding his arms.
But  the  leader,  elbowing  his  way  through  the  circle  of dancers,  came  toward  them and,  in  a
sol-emn way, said a few words to the cook. “Unfold your ar ms, Captain,” the cook said. “You
are hugging yourself and keeping the saint’s spirit from descending.” Obediently D’Arrast let his
arms fall to his sides. Still leaning against the wall, with his long, heavy limbs and his big face
already shiny with sweat , D’Arrast himself looked like [192] some bestial and kindly god. The
tall Negro looked at them and, satisfied, went back to his place. At once, in a resounding voice,
he intoned the open-ing notes of a song that all picked up in chorus, ac-companied by th e drums.
Then the circles began to turn in opposite directions in a sort of heavy, insistent dance rather like
stamping, slightly em-phasized by the double line of swaying hips.
The  heat  had  increased.  Yet  the  pauses gradually diminished,  the  stops becam e  less  frequent,
and the dance speeded up. Without any slowing of the others’ rhythm, without ceasing to dance
himself, the tall Negro again elbowed his way through the circles to go toward the altar. He came
back with a glass of water and a lighted candle that he stuck in the ground in the center of the
hut. He poured the water around the candle  in two  concentric cir-cles and, again erect, turned
maddened eyes toward the roof. His whole body taut and still, he was waiting. “Saint George is
coming. Look! Loo k!” whispered the cook, whose eyes were popping.
Indeed, some dancers now showed signs of being in a trance, but a rigid trance with hands on
hips,  step  stiff,  eyes  staring  and  vacant.  Others  quickened  their  rhythm,  bent  convulsively
back-ward, and began to utter inarticulate cries. The [193] cries gradually rose higher, and when
they fused in a collective shriek, the leader, with eyes still raised, uttered a long, barely phrased

outcry at the top of his lungs. In it the same words kept recur-ring. “You s ee,” said the cook, “he
says he  is the god’s field of battle.” Struck by the change  in his voice, D’Arrast  looked at the
cook,  who,  leaning  forward  with  fists  clenched  and  eyes  staring,  was  mimicking  the  others’
measured  stamping  without  moving  from  his  pl ace.  Then  he  noticed  that  he  himself,  though
without moving his feet, had for some little time been dancing with his whole weight.
But all at once the drums began to beat violently and suddenly the big devil in red broke loose.
His eyes flashing, his fou r limbs whirling around him, he hopped with bent knee on one leg after
the  other,  speeding  up  his  rhythm  until  it  seemed  that  he  must  eventually  fly  to  pieces.  But
abruptly  he  stopped  on  the  verge  of  one  leap  to  stare  at  those  around  him  with  a  proud  and
t errible  look  while  the  drums thundered  on.  Immediately  a  dancer  sprang  from a  dark  corner,
knelt down, and held out a short saber to the man possessed of the spirit. The tall Negro took the
saber  without  ceasing  to  look  around  him  and  then  whirled  it  above his  [194]  head.  At  that
moment  D’Arrast  noticed  the  cook  dancing  among  the  others.  The  engineer  had  not  seen him
leave his side.
In the reddish, uncertain light a stifling dust rose from the ground, making the air even thicker
and sticking to one’s skin . D’Arrast  felt gradually overcome by fatigue and breathed with ever
greater difficulty. He did not even see how the dancers had got hold of the huge cigars they were
now  smoking  while  still  dancing;  their  strange  smell  filled  the  hut  and  rather  made  his  h ead
swim. He  merely saw the  cook passing  near  him, still dancing  and puffing  on a  cigar.  “Don’t
smoke,” he said. The cook grunted without losing the beat, staring at the central pole with the
expression of a boxer about to collapse, his spine constantly tw itching in a long shudder. Beside
him  a  heavy  Negress,  rolling  her  animal  face  from side  to  side,  kept  barking.  But  the  young
Negresses especially went  into  the  most  frightful trance, their  feet  glued  to  the  floor and their
bodies shaken from feet to head by convulsive motions that became more violent upon reaching
the  shoulders.  Their   heads  would  wag  backward  and  forward,  literally  separated  from  a
decapitated body. At the same time all began to howl incessantly with a long collective and [195]
toneless ho wl, apparently not  pausing to  breathe or to  introduce modulations — as if the  bodies
were tightly knotted, muscles and nerves, in a single exhausting outburst, at last giving voice in
each  of  them  to  a  creature  that  had  until  then  been  absolutely  silent.  And ,  still  howling,  the
women  began  to  fall  one  by  one.  The  black  leader  knelt  by  each  one  and  quickly  and
convulsively pressed  her temples with his huge, black - muscled hand. Then they would get  up,
staggering, return to the dance, and resume their howls, at first feebly and then louder and faster,
before falling again, and getting up again, and beginning over again, and for a long time more,
until the general howl decreased, changed, and degenerated into a sort of coarse barking which
shook them with gasps. D ’Arrast, exhausted, his muscles taut from his long dance as he stood
still, choked by his own silence, felt himself stagger. The heat, the dust, the smoke of the cigars,
the  smell  of  bodies  now  made  the  air  almost  unbreathable.  He  looked  for  the  cook,  who had
disappeared.  D’Arrast  let  himself  slide  down  along  the  wall  and  squatted,  holding  back  his
nausea.
When he opened his eyes, the air was still as stifling but the noise had stopped. The drums alone
were  beating  out  a  figured  bass,  and  groups  in  [196] every  corner  of  the  hut,  covered  with
whitish cloths, were marking time by stamping. But in the center of the room, from which the
glass and candle  had  now  been removed, a  group of black girls  in  a semi - hypnotic  state were

dancing slowly, al-ways on the po int of letting the beat get ahead of them. Their eyes closed and
yet standing erect, they were swaying lightly on their toes, almost in the same spot. Two of them,
fat ones, had their faces covered with a curtain of raffia. They sur-rounded another girl, t all, thin,
and wearing a fancy costume. D’Arrast suddenly recognized her as the daughter of his host. In a
green dress and a huntress’s hat of blue gauze turned up in front and adorned with plumes, she
held  in  her  hand  a  green- - and - yellow  bow  with  an  arrow on  the  tip  of  which  was  spitted  a
multicolored bird. On her slim body her pretty head swayed slowly, tipped backward a little, and
her sleeping face reflected an innocent melancholy. At the pauses in the music she stag-gered as
if only  half awake.  Yet the intensified  beat  of the  drums provided  her  with a  sort  of invisible
support around which to entwine her languid arabesques until, stopping again together with the
music,  tottering  on  the  edge  of  equilibrium,  she  uttered  a  strange  bird  cry,  shrill  and  yet
melodious.
[197]D’Arrast,  bewitched  by  the  slow  dance,  was  watching  the  black  Diana  when  the  cook
suddenly loomed up before him, his smooth face now dis-torted. The kindness had disappeared
from his eyes, revealing  nothing  but a sort of unsuspected avid- ity. Coldly, as if speaking to a
stranger, he said: “It’s late, Captain. They are going to dance all night long, but they don’t want
you to stay now.” With head heavy, D’Arrast got up and followed the cook, who went along the
wall  toward  the  door.  On  the  t hreshold  the  cook  stood  aside,  hold-ing  the  bamboo  door,  and
D’Arrast  went  out. He turned  back  and  looked at the cook, who  had  not  moved.  “Come. In a
little while you’ll have to carry the stone.”
“I’m staying,” the cook said with a set expres-sion.
“An d your promise?”
Without  replying, the cook gradually pushed against  the door that  D’Arrast  was holding open
with  one  hand.  They  remained  this  way  for  a  sec-ond  until  D’Arrast  gave  in,  shrugging  his
shoul-ders. He went away.
The  night  was full of fresh aromatic  scents. Above the  forest  the  few  stars in the  austral sky,
blurred by an invisible haze, were shining dimly. [198] The humid air was heavy. Yet it seemed
delight-fully cool on coming out of the hut. D’Arrast climbed the slippery slope, staggering like
a  drunken  man  in  the  potholes.  The  forest, nearby ,  rumbled  slightly.  The  sound  of  the  river
increased. The whole continent was emerging from the night, and loathing overcame D’Arrast. It
seemed to him that he would have liked to spew forth this whol e country, the melancholy of its
vast  expanses,  the  glaucous  light  of  its  forests,  and  the  nocturnal  lapping  of  its  big  deserted
rivers. This  land was too  vast, blood and seasons  mingled  here, and time  liq-uefied. Life  here
was flush with the soil, and, to identify with it, one had to lie down and sleep for years on the
muddy or dried - up ground itself. Yonder, in Europe, there was shame and wrath. Here, exile or
solitude, among these listless and convulsive madmen who danced to die. But through the humid
ni ght, heavy with vegetable scents, the wounded bird’s outlandish cry, uttered by the  beautiful
sleeping girl, still reached his ears.

When D’Arrast, his head in the vise of a crush-ing migraine, had awakened after a bad sleep, a
humid  heat  was  weighin g  upon  the  town  and  the  still  forest.  He  was  waiting  now  under  the
hospital [199] portico, looking at his watch, which had stopped, uncertain of the time, surprised
by the broad day-light and the silence of the town. The almost clear blue sky hung low over the
first  dull  roofs. Yel lowish urubus ,  transfixed  by  the  heat,  were  sleep-ing  on  the  house  across
from the hospital. One of them suddenly fluttered, opened his beak, ostensi-bly got ready to fly
away, flapped his dusty wings twice against his body, rose a few inches above the roof, fell back,
and went to sleep almost at once.
The engineer went down toward the town. The main square was empty, like the streets through
which he had just walked. In the distance, and on both sides of the river, a low mist hu ng over
the forest. The heat fell vertically, and D’Arrast looked for a shady spot. At that moment, under
the over-hang on one of the houses, he saw a little man ges-turing to him. As he came closer, he
recognized Socrates.
“Well, Mr. D’Arrast, you like the ceremony?”
D’Arrast said that it was too hot in the hut and that he preferred the sky and the night air.
“Yes,” Socrates said,  “in  your country there’s only the  Mass. No one dances.” He rubbed  his
hands,  jumped  on  one  foot,  whirled  about,  laughed  u proariously.  “Not  possible,  they’re  not
possible.” [200] Then he looked at D’Arrast inquisitively. “And you, are you going to Mass?”
“No.”
“Then, where are you going?”
“Nowhere. I don’t know.”
Socrates laughed again. “Not possible! A noble without a church, without anything!”
D’Arrast laughed likewise. “Yes, you see, I never found my place. So I left.”
“Stay with us, Mr. D’Arrast, I love you.”
“I’d like to, Socrates, but I don’t know how to dance.” Their laughter echoed in the silence of
the e mpty town.
“Ah,” Socrates said,  “I forget. The Mayor wants to  see you. He is lunching at the club.” And
with-out warning he started off in the direction of the hospital.
“Where are you going?” D’Arrast shouted.
Socrates  imitated  a  snore.  “Sleep.  Soon the  pro-cession.”  And,  half  running,  he  resumed  his
snores.

The Mayor simply wanted to give D’Arrast a place of honor to see the procession. He explained
it to the engineer while sharing with him a dish of meat and rice such as would miraculously cure
a paralytic.  First  they would  take their places on a  balcony of the  Judge’s house, opposite the
church, [201] to see the procession come out. Then they would go to the town hall in the main
street leading to the church, which the penitents would take on the ir way back. The Judge and the
Chief  of  Police  would  accompany  D’Arrast,  the  Mayor  being  obliged  to  take  part  in  the
ceremony. The  Chief of Police was in  fact  in the  clubroom and kept  paying court to  D’Arrast
with an indefatigable smile,  lavishing upon him incomprehensible  but  obviously well - meaning
speeches. When D’Arrast left, the Chief of Police hastened to make a way for him, holding all
the doors open before him.
Under the burning sun, in the still empty town, the two men walked toward the Judge’s ho use.
Their steps were the only sound heard in the si-lence. But all of a sudden a firecracker exploded
in  a  neighboring  street  and  flushed  on  every  roof  the  heavy,  awkward  flocks  of  bald - necked
urubus .  Almost  at  once  dozens  of  firecrackers  went  off  in  all  d irections,  doors  opened,  and
people began to emerge from the houses and fill the narrow streets.
The Judge told D’Arrast how proud he was to receive him in his unworthy house and led him up
a  handsome  baroque  staircase  painted  chalky  blue.  On  the  landing ,  as  D’Arrast  passed,  doors
opened  and  children’s  dark  heads  popped  out  and  [202]  disap-peared  at  once  with  smothered
laughter.  The  main  room,  beautiful  in  architecture,  contained  nothing  but  rattan  furniture  and
large cages filled with squawking  birds. Th e  balcony on which the Judge and D’Arrast  settled
overlooked  the  little  square  in  front  of  the  church.  The  crowd  was  now  beginning  to  fill  it,
strangely  silent,  motionless  un-der  the  heat  that  came  down  from  the  sky  in  al-most  visible
waves. Only the child ren ran around the square, stopping abruptly to light firecrackers, and sharp
reports  followed  one  another  in  rapid  succession.  Seen  from  the  balcony,  the  church  with  its
plaster walls, its dozen blue steps, its blue - and- - gold towers, looked smaller.
Sud denly the organ burst  forth within the church. The crowd, turned toward the portico, drew
over  to  the  sides  of the  square.  The  men took  off their  hats and  the  women knelt  down.  The
dis-tant organ played at length something like marches. Then an odd sound o f wings came from
the forest. A tiny airplane with transparent wings and frail fuselage, out of place in this ageless
world, came in sight over the trees, swooped a little above the square, and, with the clacking of a
big rattle, passed over the heads rais ed toward it. Then the [203] plane turned and disappeared in
the direction of the estuary.
But in the shadow of the church a vague bustle again attracted attention. The organ had stopped,
replaced now by brasses and drums, invisible under the portico. Bl ack - surpliced penitents came
out of the church one by one, formed groups outside the doors, and began to descend the steps.
Behind  them  came  white  penitents  bearing  red - and - blue  ban-ners,  then  a  little  group  of  boys
dressed up as an-gels, sodalities of Chi ldren of Mary with little black and serious faces. Finally,
on a multicolored shrine borne by leading citizens sweating in their dark suits, came the effigy of
the  good  Jesus  himself,  a  reed  in  his  hand  and  his  head  crowned  with  thorns,  bleeding  and
totter ing above the crowd that lined the steps.
When the shrine reached the bottom of the steps, there was a pause during which the penitents

tried to line up in a semblance of order. Then it was that D’Arrast saw the ship’s cook. Bare from
the waist up, he ha d just come out under the portico carrying on his bearded head an enormous
rectan-gular block set on a cork mat. With steady tread he came down the church steps, the stone
perfectly [204] balanced  in the arch formed by his short, muscular arms. As soon as he  fell in
behind the shrine, the procession moved. From the portico burst the mu-sicians, wearing bright -
colored coats and blowing into beribboned brasses. To the beat of a quick march, the penitents
hastened their step and reached one of the streets open ing off the square. When the shrine had
disappeared  behind  them,  nothing  could  be  seen  but  the  cook  and  the  last  of  the  musicians.
Behind  them,  the  crowd  got  in  mo-tion amidst  exploding  firecrackers,  while  the  plane,  with a
great  rattle  of  its  engine,  flew back  over  the  groups  trailing  behind.  D’Arrast  was  looking
exclusively  at  the  cook,  who  was  disappearing  into  the  street  now  and  whose  shoulders  he
suddenly thought he saw sag. But at that distance he couldn’t see well.
Through  the  empty  streets,  betwee n  closed  shops  and  bolted  doors,  the  Judge,  the  Chief  of
Police, and D’Arrast reached the town hall. As they got away from the band and the firecrackers,
silence again enveloped the town and already a few urubus returned to the places on the roofs
that  they seemed  to  have  occupied  for  all  time.  The  town  hall  stood  in  a  long,  narrow  street
leading from one of the outlying sections to the church square. [205] For the moment, the street
was  empty.  From  the  balcony  could  be  seen,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  n othing  but  a
pavement full of potholes, in which the recent rain had left puddles. The sun, now slightly lower,
was still nibbling at the windowless façades of the houses across the street.
They waited a long time, so long that D’Arrast, from staring at the reverberation of the sun on
the  opposite  wall,  felt  his  fatigue  and  dizziness  return-ing.  The  empty street  with  its  deserted
houses at-tracted and repelled him at one and the same time. Once again he wanted to get away
from this coun-try; at the same t ime he thought of that huge stone; he would have liked that trial
to  be over. He was about to  suggest  going down to  find out  something when the  church bells
began to peal forth loudly. Simultaneously, from the other end of the street on their left, a clamo r
burst  out  and a  seething crowd appeared. From a  distance the  people could  be seen swarming
around the shrine, pilgrims and penitents mingled, and they were advancing, amidst fire-crackers
and shouts of joy, along the narrow street. In a few seconds they filled it to the edges, advanc-ing
toward the town hall in an indescribable dis-order — ages, races, and costumes fused in a motley
mass full of gaping eyes and yelling mouths. From [206] the crowd emerged an army of tapers
like lances with flames fading int o the burning sunlight. But when they were close and the crowd
was so thick under the balcony that it seemed to rise up along the walls, D’Arrast saw that the
ship’s cook was not there.
Quick as lightning, without excusing himself, he left the balcony an d the room, dashed down the
staircase, and stood in the street under the deafen-ing sound of the bells and firecrackers. There
he  had to  struggle against  the crowd of merrymakers, the taper - bearers, the shocked penitents.
But, buck-ing the human tide with all his weight, he cut a path in such an impetuous way that he
staggered  and  almost  fell  when  he  was  eventually  free,  be-yond  the  crowd,  at  the  end  of the
street. Leaning against the burning - hot wall, he waited until he  had caught his breath. Then he
resum ed his way. At that moment a group of men emerged into the street. The ones in front were
walking backward, and D’Arrast saw that they surrounded the cook.

He was obviously dead tired. He would stop, then, bent under the huge stone, run a little with
the hasty step of stevedores and coolies — the rapid, flat - footed trot of drudgery. Gathered about
him, penitents in surplices soiled with dust and candle- [207] drippings encouraged him when he
stopped. On his  left  his  brother was walking or running  in  silence . It  seemed  to  D’Arrast  that
they took  an  intermina-ble  time  to  cover  the  space  separating  them  from him.  Having  almost
reached  him,  the  cook  stopped  again  and  glanced  around  with  dull  eyes.  When  he  saw
D’Arrast — yet without appearing to recognize him — he st ood still, turned toward him. An oily,
dirty sweat covered his face, which had gone gray; his beard was full of threads of saliva; and a
brown, dry froth glued  his lips together. He tried  to  smile. But, motionless under  his load,  his
whole body was trembli ng except for the shoulders, where the mus-cles were obviously caught
in a sort of cramp. The brother, who had recognized D’Arrast, said to him simply: “He already
fell.”  And  Socrates,  pop-ping  up  from  nowhere,  whispered  in  his  ear:  “Dance  too  much,  Mr.
D’ Arrast, all night long. He’s tired.”
The cook advanced again with his jerky trot, not like a man who wants to progress but as if he
were  fleeing  the  crushing  load,  as  if  he  hoped  to  lighten  it  through  motion.  Without  knowing
how, D’Arrast found himself a t his right. He laid his hand lightly on the cook’s back and walked
beside  him  with  hasty,  heavy  steps.  At  the  other  end  of  [208]  the  street  the  shrine  had
disappeared, and the crowd, which probably now filled the square, did not seem to advance any
more. For several seconds, the cook, between his brother and D’Arrast, made progress. Soon a
mere space of some twenty yards separated him from the group gathered in front of the town hall
to see him pass. Again, however, he stopped. D’Arrast’s hand became heavi er. Come on, cook,
just a little more,” he said. The man trembled; the saliva began to trickle from his mouth again,
while the sweat literally spurted from all over his body. He tried to breathe deeply and stopped
short. He started off again, took three st eps, and tottered. And suddenly the stone slipped onto his
shoulder,  gashing  it,  and  then  forward  onto  the  ground,  while  the  cook,  losing  his  bal-ance,
toppled over on his side. Those who were preceding him and urging him on jumped back with
loud shouts. O ne of them seized the cork mat while the others took hold of the stone to load it on
him again.
Leaning  over  him,  D’Arrast  with  his  bare  hand  wiped  the  blood  and  dust  from his  shoulder,
while the little man, his face against the ground, panted. He heard nothing and did not stir. His
mouth opened avidly as if each breath were his last. [209] D’Arrast grasped him around the waist
and raised him up as easily as if he had been a child. Holding him upright in a tight clasp with his
full height leaning over him , D’Arrast spoke into his face as if to breathe his own strength into
him. After a moment, the cook, bloody and caked with earth, detached himself with a haggard
expression on his face. He staggered toward the stone, which the others were raising a little. But
he stopped, looked at the stone with a vacant stare, and shook his head. Then he let his arms fall
at his sides and turned toward D’Arrast. Huge tears flowed silently down his ravaged face. He
wanted to speak, he was speaking, but his mouth hardly for med the syl-lables. “I promised,” he
was saying. And then: “Oh, Captain! Oh, Captain!” and the tears drowned his voice. His brother
suddenly appeared  behind  him,  threw  his  arms  around  him,  and  the  cook,  weeping,  collapsed
against him, defeated, with his he ad thrown back.
D’Arrast looked at him, not knowing what to say. He turned toward the crowd in the distance,
now shouting again. Suddenly he tore the cork mat from the hands holding it and walked toward

the stone. He gestured to the others to hold it up and then he loaded it almost effortlessly. His
head  [210]  pressed  down under  the  weight  of the  stone,  his shoulders  hunched,  and  breathing
rather  hard,  he  looked  down at  his  feet  as he  listened  to  the  cook’s sobs.  Then with  vigorous
tread  he  started  off on his  own,  without  flagging  covered  the  space  sepa-rating  him  from the
crowd  at  the  end  of the  street,  and  energetically  forced  his way through the  first  rows,  which
stood  aside  as  he  approached.  In  the  hubbub  of  bells  and  firecrackers  he  entered  the  square
between two  solid  masses of onlookers, sud-denly silent  and gaping at  him in amazement. He
advanced  with the  same  impetuous pace,  and  the  crowd opened  a  path  for  him to  the  church.
De-spite the weight which was beginning to crush his head and neck, he saw the church and the
shrine, which seemed to be waiting for him at the door. He had already gone beyond the center
of the square in that direction when brutally, without knowing why, he veered off to the left and
turned away from the church, forcing the pil grims to face him. Behind him, he heard someone
running.  In  front  of  him  mouths  opened  on  all  sides.  He  didn’t  understand  what  they  were
shouting, although he seemed to  recognize the one Portuguese word that  was being constantly
hurled  at  him.  Suddenly  [21 1]  Soc-rates  appeared  before  him,  rolling  startled  eyes,  speaking
incoherently and pointing out the way to the church behind him. “To the church! To the church!”
was what Socrates and the crowd were shouting at him. Yet D’Arrast continued in the di-rection
in which he was launched. And Socrates stood aside, his arms raised in the air comically, while
the  crowd  gradually  fell  silent.  When  D’Ar-rast  entered  the  first  street,  which  he  had  already
taken with the cook and therefore knew it led to the river secti on, the square had become but a
con-fused murmur behind him.
The stone weighed painfully on his head now and he needed all the strength of his long arms to
lighten it. His shoulders were already stiffening when he reached the first streets on the slipper y
slope. He stopped and listened. He was alone. He settled the stone firmly on its cork base and
went  down with a  cautious but  still steady tread  toward the  huts.  When  he  reached  them,  his
breath  was  beginning  to  fail,  his  arms  were  trembling  under  the  sto ne.  He  hastened  his  pace,
finally reached the little square where the cook’s but stood, ran to it, kicked the door open, and
brusquely hurled the stone onto the still glowing fire in the center of [212] the room. And there,
straightening up until he was su ddenly enormous, drinking in with desperate gulps the familiar
smell of poverty and ashes, he felt rising within him a surge of obscure and pant-ing joy that he
was powerless to name.
When the inhabitants of the hut arrived, they found D’Arrast standing with his shoulders against
the back wall and eyes closed. In the center of the room, in the place of the hearth, the stone was
half  buried  in  ashes  and  earth.  They  stood  in  the  doorway  without  advancing  and  looked  at
D’Ar-rast in silence as if questioning him. But he didn’t speak. Whereupon the brother led the
cook up to the stone, where he dropped on the ground. The brother sat down too, beckoning to
the others. The old  woman joined  him, then the  girl of the  night  before,  but  no  one  looked at
D’Arrast. The y were squatting in a silent circle around the stone. No sound but the murmur of
the river reached them through the heavy air. Standing in the darkness, D’Arrast listened without
seeing anything, and the sound of the waters filled him with a tumultuous hap piness. With eyes
closed, he joyfully acclaimed his own strength; he acclaimed, once again, a  fresh beginning in
life. At that moment, a firecracker [213] went off that seemed very close. The brother moved a
little away from the cook and, half turning towa rd D’Arrast but without looking at him, pointed
to the empty place and said: “Sit down with us.”

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
ALBERT CAMUS was born  in  Mondovi,  Algeria,  in1913;  his  death  on  January4,  1960,  cut
short the career of the most important literary figure of the Western world. Camus spent the early
years of his life in North Africa, where he began writing and doing work in the theater before he
was twenty, and then journalism took him to metropolitan France. From1935 to1938 he ran the
theatrical company L’E quipe, and during the war he was one of the leading writers of the French
Resistance  and  editor  of the  under-ground  newspaper  Combat.  In  occupied  France  in1942  he
published the philosophical essay The Myth of Sisyphus and the novel The Stranger. Among his
other major writ-ings are the essay The Rebel, his plays, and three works of fiction: The Plague,
The  Fall ,  and  Exile  and  the  Kingdom.  A  collection  of  his  essays,  Resistance,  Rebellion  and
Death, was published posthumously in1961. (All the above titles ar e available in Modern Library
or Vintage Editions.)
When  Albert  Camus  was  awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  for  Literature  in1957,  the  official  citation
accompanying  this  highest  honor  said  that  he  was  selected  because  of  “his  important  literary
production,   which with  clear - sighted   earnestness   illuminates   the   problems   of  the   human
con-science in our times.”