albert
if camus:
the invincible summer

ALBERT
MAQUET
“In the midst
of winter, I finally learned
that there was in me
an invincible
summer.”
Albert Camus,
Nobel Prize Winner

last

albert camus:
the invincible summer
BY ALBERT MAQUET
TRANSLATED BY HERMA BRIFFAULT

No writer has achieved classical stat¬
ure more quickly than Albert Camus.
It is startling to recall that the first
major book of the latest winner of the
Nobel Prize was published in Paris
only fifteen years ago.
Above all contemporary writers,
Camus has captured the special sense
of what it means to be living in our day
and age. But he has written so many
important works in such a short period
of time that it has been difficult for
critics to keep pace with him. Until
now, there has not been a study of
Camus worthy of him as a subject.
ALBERT CAMUS is the first fulllength appraisal of Camus to appear
in English. This penetrating and au¬
thoritative work contains analyses and
discussions of all of the novels, stories,
plays, and essays of Camus.
Maquet gives a portrait of Camus
the man as well as of Camus the
writer, rounding out what is, in the
fullest sense, a literary biography. He
includes a complete bibliography of
the 'writings in French and Italian
about Camus, and this is supplemented
with a bibliography of the major ar¬
ticles about Camus in English.

JACKET DESIGN BY AL CORCHIA, JR.

ALBERT CAMUS:
The Invincible Summer

ALBERT CAMUS
The Invincible Summer

BY ALBERT MAQUET
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY
HERMA BRIFFAULT

George Braziller, Inc.
NEW YORK

1958

COPYRIGHT ©

1958 BY GEORGE

BRAZILLER, INC.

ALL

RIGHTS

NOT

BE

RESERVED.

REPRODUCED

THIS

IN

BOOK

WHOLE

MAY

OR

IN

PART IN ANY FORM (EXCEPT BY REVIEW¬
ERS

FOR

WRITTEN

THE

PUBLIC

PRESS),

PERMISSION

FROM

WITHOUT
THE

PUB¬

LISHERS.

LIBRARY

OF

CONGRESS

number:

CATALOG

CARD

58-6624

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA

In the midst of winter, 1 finally
learned that there was in me
an invincible summer.
—Camus, in L’Ete

AUTHOR’S NOTE

The work of Albert Camus is of the kind that
requires us to be worthy of it.
At the very least, we are expected to respond
to the honesty of its message by the honesty of
our reading.
Our present essay was conceived with this
scrupulous intention and with the hope of shar¬
ing it.
We have therefore devoted ourselves to
describing as faithfully as possible the double
experiment, lyrical and intellectual, of the author,
and to showing the stages of evolution that be¬
come apparent.
—A.M.

CONTENTS

Author’s Note

vii

Parti. THE MAN AND HIS STRUGGLES

11

1. The North African

13

2. The Journalist and Resistant

18

3. The Militant

20

4. The Rebel

23

Part II. THE WRITER AND THINKER

27

A. The Concept of the Absurd, Point of
Departure for the Thought

30

1. Man’s Presence in the World

30

2. Nihilism and a Provisional Ethics

38

B. Deviation and Development of the Thought

61

1. The Temptation of the Impossible

61

2. The Lesson of History

71

C. Comprehension, Which Goes Beyond the
Absurd

74

1. The True Healer

74
ix

Contents

2. The True Revolt

109

D. Hope

113

1. Against Nihilism

113

2. Beyond Nihilism

119

E. Rediscoveries

149

Part 111. THE AESTHETICIAN AND ARTIST

183

1. Absurd Creation

186

2. Rebellion and Art

188

3. The Mission of the Artist

193

4. The End of Art

196

5. The Nobel Prize for Literature, 1957

198

Appendix

200

Bibliography

207

I. The Works of Albert Camus

207

1. Novels, Essays, Drama

207

2. New Versions and Adaptations

210

3. Prefaces

211

4. Lectures

212

5. Articles

213

6. Interviews

213

7. Recordings

214

II. Books and Articles in French and Italian
Devoted to Albert Camus

214

III. Translations of the Works of Albert Camus

219

IV. Articles in English Devoted to Albert Camus

220

x

Part i.

THE MAN AND
HIS STRUGGLES

.

1

THE MAN AND
HIS STRUGGLES
In Albert Camus one senses a patient and de¬
liberate lucidity, but at the same time something
else: a restrained energy—and a fierce rage to
live, which scorns feverishness but which will
suffer no delay.
Gaetan Picon,

Le Litteraire, Aug. 10,1946.

1. THE NORTH AFRICAN

Albert Camus was bom on November 7, 1913, at
Mondovi, the county seat of the department of Constan¬
tine, beneath the privileged skies of Algeria. He was
bom, he tells us, “in a land of plenty on the shores of a
happy sea.” Not for nothing is a man the elect of sun
13

Albert Camus

and beauty: in the prodigious shimmering of the light,
the soul is gorged with the pride of living. “Sea, plain,
silence, perfumes of that land! I filled myself with a
fragrant fife, and I bit into the already sun-gilded fruit
of the world, overwhelmed as I felt its strong, sweet
juices trickle from my lips. No, it was not I that counted,
nor the world, but only the harmony and the silence
which made love spring up between us.”1
Thus, from the moment he opened his eyes as a child,
a certain quality of fight consummated his “nuptials”
with the land, a land of opulence and of destitution,
where the flesh consumes its treasures in the burning
impatience of existence, where the mind seeks its truth
in its own negation. Implacable and generous land,
land “without lessons,” he tells us, in Noces. “Its pleas¬
ures have no remedy, and its joys remain without hope.
What it demands are clairvoyant souls, that is to say,
souls without consolation. It requires us to make an act
of lucidity as one makes an act of faith. Singular country,
that bestows simultaneously upon the man it nurtures
its splendor along with its misery!”2
Singular situation for the child who was to be de¬
prived of the ordinary things of life while his senses
were daily overwhelmed by the abundance of nature!
Camus, the son of a humble farm laborer who was killed
1 Noces, p. 29, nouvelle edition, Chariot, 1945.
2 Noces, pp. 54-55.

14

The Man and His Struggles
in 1914 at the first Battle of the Marne, was to compre¬
hend quite soon the hard reality of his condition.
On the one hand, there was the divine voluptuousness
of a banquet over which the sun presided, a voluptuous¬
ness pregnant with a terrible truth—“Everything that
exalts life increases, at the same time, its absurdity.”
On the other hand, there was the bondage to which the
destitute are reduced by social injustice. But on every
side, humiliation. Later on, Camus was to revolt against
the absurd, and open his heart to sympathy.
However, to lose sight of the fact that this revolt, far
from germinating in the stony soil of bitterness, matured
on the very slopes of plenty, is to risk betraying the
man and understanding nothing of the writer. “I may
have had my share of hardships,” he confided to G.
d’Abuarede one day,3 “but I did not begin my life as a
rebel, and by the same token I did not begin my literary
life with imprecation or disparagement, as some writers
do, but with admiration.”
His character as a youth was to be forged in the
crucible of study, athletic sports, and poverty. After
primary and secondary schools, he studied philosophy
at the Faculte des Lettres of the University of Algiers,
where he obtained his Master’s degree by presenting a
thesis on Plotinus and St. Augustine.
3 Les Nouvelles Litteraires, May 10, 1951.
15

Albert Camus

But the discipline of the classroom did not banish the
sports stadium from his mind. “The African University,”
Camus remarked in a letter to a friend,4 “differs from its
French counterparts by resembling much more—both
as to the natural setting and the way of life—the colleges
of the Stoics than it does the prison-like colleges of the
metropolis.” And he adds: “Our greatest occupation
was—and for a long time remained so for me—athletics.
It was on the playing fields that I learned my only les¬
sons in moral ethics.”
But still another lesson awaited him: that which life
reserves for the poverty-stricken student. Necessity was
to compel him to divide his time between studies and
paid employment. He was successively automobile ac¬
cessories salesman, ship broker, meteorologist, and clerk
at police headquarters. Thus he learned, in different
fields of activity, the dull routine of the workingman’s
existence. But he also learned the obscure virtues which
this uniformity, though it may submerge the worker,
does not succeed in stifling in him.
Studies, sports, poverty filled his life. To this was to
be added the ordeal of a long illness that laid him low
while he was studying for his final examination in phi4 Extract from a letter quoted by P. Neraud de Boisdeffre, in “Albert
Camus, ou l’experience tragique,” in Etudes, December, 1950, pp.
303-304.

16

The Man and His Struggles

losophy. It is not to be wondered at that a man whose
will was thus tempered felt obliged one day to raise his
voice, and in a message of grandeur.
But, until world events drew him out of himself,
nothing yet concerned him but to serve art. Passionately
fond of the theatre, Camus organized, with a few friends,
an acting group which he directed. Its very name,
VEquipe—The Working Gang—describes it. After hav¬
ing produced an adaptation of Malraux’s Le Temps de
Mepris, the company staged an original four-act play.
Revolte dans les Asturies,5 which was directly inspired
by the uprising of the Oviedo miners. The play had the
honor of being suppressed by the Government of Al¬
geria. Camus next produced Le Paquebot “Tenacity”,
by Vildrac, Ben Jonsons Silent Woman, Dostoyevsky’s
The Brothers Karamazov, in which he played the part
of Ivan, his own adaptation of Aeschylus’ Prometheus,
which still remains unpublished, Pushkin’s Don Juan,
and versions of Gide’s Le Retour de VEnfant prodigue
and Gorki’s Bas-Fonds.
Camus followed up the theatrical venture with the
adventure of travel, visiting Italy, Austria, Prague, the
Balearic Isles, in one of those parentheses of life, a time
5 Although a collective work, this four-act play cannot conceal the
amount it owes to the young Camus. It was published in 1936 by
Edm. Chariot, “Pour les Amis du Theatre du travail,” in Algiers.

17

Albert Camus
when the mind, relaxed, on vacation, makes itself as it
were porous, open to the discovery of verities only af¬
forded by utterly new and foreign surroundings.
To serve art was his sole aim. To be convinced of the
sincerity of this program, one has only to read the two
little essays the then unknown young man published at
the time, L’Envers et VEndroit, and Noces—a privilege
granted to but a few, since the publications were in
small printings. That there were already in these early
works certain evidences of deeper preoccupations is
something that can now be seen only too clearly. At the
time, no one noticed them—or at any rate, very few—
for Camus was so young.6
2. THE JOURNALIST AND RESISTANT
He was twenty-five, and doubtless, like every ephebus
of the Mediterranean beaches, had “an eagerness to live
that was almost prodigious.” Journalism began to engross
him. After some practice skirmishes on the Algiers
Republicain, he went, in 1940, to Paris. He did some
work on the important evening newspaper, Paris-Soir,
but quit in June of the same year. He found himself with
time to begin work on his novel, L’Etranger. By 1941
6 No one noticed it but Henry de Montherlant who was then living
in Tunis; from there he addressed a letter of praise to the author.
(Cf. the article by M. Muller in Carrefour, December 20, 1949.)

18

The Man and His Struggles

he was back again in Algiers. But he fell ill and was
forced to return, the following year, to a France that was
now engulfed in war.
The hour of the Resistance, the hour of the voyage
to the end of night and of the “battle of shadows” had
come. Camus did his fighting with the team that edited
the clandestine newspaper Combat, and was soon in
the hurly-burly of those working for the Liberation,
ranging from Lyons to Paris at the side of his friend,
Leynaud, who was later to be arrested and shot by the
enemy. “By his very function, the artist is a witness for
liberty, and it is a justification for which he sometimes
has to pay dearly.”7 His “engagement” is therefore but
an act of simple fidelity to his vocation: “. . . it is not
the combat which makes artists out of us, but art which
compels us to be combatants.”8
Immediately after the war, Camus took over the di¬
rection of the newspaper Combat, and the movement
for which it stood. The brilliant editorials that he pub¬
lished—unsigned—contributed a great deal to the pop¬
ularity of Combat with intellectuals. Nevertheless he
soon withdrew from the melee, even if he carried
away from that harrowing commitment less of rancor
than a fierce hope. Returning to the newspaper in 1946,
7 and 8 Actuelles, Chroniques (1944-1948), p. 264. Paris, Gallimard,
1950.

19

Albert Camus

he abandoned it definitely in 1947, handing over the
editorship to Claude Bourdet. He withdrew from public
affairs, but not at all in bitterness: his convictions had
gained in strength what they had lost in illusions. As
he stated much later,9 “For two years we ran an abso¬
lutely independent newspaper which nothing ever com¬
promised. I ask no more. Everything, at one time or
another, bears fruit.”
The journalist, at the age of thirty-two, was restored
to himself, with his burning passion for justice, his vio¬
lent hunger for fraternity, and with his artist’s vocation.
Behind him, he had left many markers along the path
that led from the Maquis to the political arena: in 1942
the novel VEtranger and the essays Le Mythe de Sisyphe, in 1944 the plays Le Malentendu and Caligula, and
the collection of letters Lettres a un Ami allemand,
which were published as a book in 1945.
3. THE MILITANT
From then on, the defense of human values towered
so hugely in Camus’ attention that biographical anecdote
vanishes, as if absorbed in the pure fire of a crusade in
which, silhouetted against the “deepest gloom,” the face
of the thinker and the thought he thinks become indis¬
tinguishable.
9 In the magazine Caliban, no. 54, August 1951, p. 16.

20

The Man and His Struggles

After a lecture tour in America (1946), Camus re¬
turned to the world of myth and, in defense of man
and human happiness, testified once more against the
epoch and against history. In June 1947 he published
La Peste. One reviewer hailed the book as “a manifesto,
in the second post-war period, of antiterrorism, a mani¬
festo with social significance that may be considerable
twenty years from now.”10
Now, however reluctantly, the tone of the writer grew
harsher. Faced with a political world that seemed to
have forgotten the past, and was again in deadlock,
Camus denounced, with every energy he commanded,
the monstrous aberration of this historical logic. In the
name of ideologies, he tells us, man divides against man,
damning all of us to a lonely hell if we will not choose
the one thing that can save us. We must face what is
happening, we must not destroy ourselves. He pleads
for the free exchange of words and ideas among all men
(“le dialogue et la communication universelle des hommes entre eux”) as the antidote to the atom bomb. This
is the burden of Ni victimes ni bourreaux, the virile
articles of November 1948: “Since the experiment that
controls the fate of the whole world goes on, and since it
is inevitable that it will go still further, it is not a bad
thing for men to think of preserving, through the apoca10 Bernard d’Astorg, in Esprit, October 1947, p. 621.

21

Albert Camus

lyptic history that awaits us, the humble right to think,
which, without any pretense of solving everything, will
nonetheless be ready at every moment to give some
meaning to everyday life.”11
The essayist pursues and maintains this thought, but
it remained for the playwright to make it flash out in
all its tragic clarity. L’Etat de Siege is the dramatic
ceremony of Camus’ irrevocable break with the “con¬
temporary political society” that he had found wallow¬
ing in compromise, corrupted with lies, and, finally,
despicable. Such an attitude, we must note, is neither
facile resignation nor withdrawal. Rather, it enlists the
individual in a struggle that is all the more intense be¬
cause it is on the side of life, that is all the more noble
and irresistible because it is armed against death only
with intelligence and human sympathy, that seeks what
is still worth seeking: to save lives. In disengaging one¬
self from public action to preserve one’s integrity, the
conscience cannot but have a feeling of disgust; but
immediately love of humanity intervenes, fecundating
the revolt, orienting it towards private action: “The
world in which I five is repugnant, but I feel myself
one with the human beings who suffer in it. There are
some ambitions which are not mine and I would feel
ill at ease if I were to make my way by depending upon
11 Actuelles, p. 178.
22

The Man and His Struggles

the poor privileges that are reserved for those who ac¬
commodate themselves to this society. But it seems to
me there is another ambition which should be that of
all writers: to bear witness and shout, each time it is
possible, and according to our ability, for those who,
like us, are enslaved.”12
4. THE REBEL
Again it was in the theatre, this time with the play
Les Justes (1949) that this cry echoed. Tom from obliv¬
ion for a moment and for our edification, that handful
of Russian terrorists of the beginning of the century
come, in this play, to reaffirm, while being tom by inner
contradictions, the moral demands of all rebellion and
the price they consented to pay so that theirs might
conserve its original purity. A veritable cry of alarm
before the excesses of our time:

. . If the only solution

is death, then we are not on the right track. The right
track is the one that leads to life, to the sunlight. One
cannot unceasingly suffer from cold.”
Nor can one unceasingly shout. There comes a time
when, while proceeding along the path from the his¬
torical experience which begot it towards the attitude
it seeks to inspire in order to dominate history, the mind
is aroused to renew contact with itself, to collect its
12 Actuelles, pp. 249-250.
23

Albert Camus

thoughts, and to confront itself. After bearing witness,
there comes a time for a new kind of thinking, a broad¬
ening and shading of thoughts. This will be found in
L’Homme Revolte, a collection of essays published in
1951, the fruit of a four year period of such thinking on
Camus’ part, in which his thought, shot through with an
intense hope, attains its plenitude. From the depths of
the inhuman night where his revolt first manifested it¬
self, Camus has achieved, in this book of essays, the
serene realm of moderation; the revolt has become
“pure tension,” halfway between those who surrender
themselves to God and those who deify man. Camus’
revolt “gives without delay its force of love and re¬
fuses injustice without delay.” This revolt, self-con¬
quered, enables Camus to perceive at the end of the
other night, whither the blind world turns, a light that
is “inevitable . . . and for which we have but to struggle
in order to make it shine.”
Hope. L’Espoir. That is also the name of a series
of books which Camus edits today in the publishing
house of Gallimard.
Taking a stand against the contemporary nihilisms,
both bourgeois and Marxist, L’Homme Revolte could
not but arouse some disturbances in the press and
public opinion.
In truth, although the book was much talked about,
24

The Man and His Struggles

people often talked about it after having read it care¬
lessly. Which explains why the author felt obliged to
intervene several times to rehabilitate his falsified
theses.13
But also to be reckoned with were those who had
not waited for this copious essay to form an opinion
on the revolt: Andre Breton headed this rank, having
opened fire upon the author after having read a chapter
devoted to Lautreamont which appeared in the Cahiers
du Sud, and having read it before it had been published.
Camus replied. Thus, the controversy preceded the
simple restatements of the argument, instead of rightly
crowning them.
An important and insinuating article by Francis
Jeanson set the argument in motion.14 Invited to avail
himself of his right to reply, Camus felt called upon to
emerge from his habitual reserve, and addressed a letter
of the same length and scope, in a stingingly indignant
tone, to the editor of the magazine, who happened to be
Jean-Paul Sartre. Called to account, Sartre contrived,
with ferocious verve, to maltreat his colleague, though
13 All the texts concerning this “combat” of Camus with his critics
have been collected, along with others, in Actuelles II, Chroniques
1948-1953. Paris, Gallimard, 1953.
14 Jeanson’s article, entitled, “Albert Camus ou I’ame revoltee”, ap¬
peared in Temps Modemes, May, 1952. The August number of the
magazine groups together Camus’ reply, Sartre’s retort, and a final
word from Jeanson himself, entitled, “Pour tout vous dire . . .”

25

Albert Camus

he swore at the start of his diatribe that he would regret
ever to lose Camus’ friendship. This passage of arms
caused an uproar, and pleased only the personal enemies
of the debaters. Yet a clear understanding was needed
where these two great minds were concerned. If some
have come to regret that, in its bitterness, the argument
ended in a breach of friendship, no one, Camus least of
all, can be sorry that the truth was thus sifted and
refined.

26

Part ii.

THE WRITER
AND THINKER

• •

ll.
THE WRITER
AND THINKER
As with all great artists, he is at the same time
creator of works on the plane of art and custo¬
dian of a doctrine of life on the plane of ethics.
Robert Kanters,

La Gazette des Lettres, No. 28, June 1947.

Camus’ work established itself among us suddenly, with
the weight and authority of a revelation. It forceably
set us in a moment of lucidity which glaringly showed
up our contradictions and the urgent need to remove
them. “As for me, confronting this society,” the young
essayist exclaimed very early in his career, “I do not
want to lie, nor have people lie to me.” This avowed
intention of intellectual asceticism, so jealously main29

Albert Camus

tained in one book after another and, be it noted, unani¬
mously hailed by the critics, had as its first effect the
placing of his thought beyond reach of any system.
Thus, from VEtranger to La Peste, from Le Mythe de
Sisyphe to L’Homme Revolte, we can follow the traces
of a tension which has attained that point of intimate
vibration in which his demands for justice and brotherly
love reach a point of equilibrium.
In the period of activity represented by these works,
several phases can, then, be recognized. To single them
out is to discover at the same time their harmonic pro¬
gression, the suddenly decisive echoes to old, secret
calls. This thought-on-the-move was in fact foretokened
by the author himself in Le Mythe de Sisyphe:

. . the

unique creation of a man is fortified in the successive
and multiple aspects that are his works, which com¬
plete, correct, overtake, or even contradict each other.”15

A. THE CONCEPT OF THE ABSURD,
POINT OF DEPARTURE FOR THE THOUGHT
1. man’s presence in the world
The first two essays written by Camus are a kind of
lyrical prelude to his thought. He situates man at the
very centre of the world spectacle and registers the
15 Le Mythe de Sisyphe, pp. 154-155, new edition, Paris, 1945.

30

The Writer and Thinker

strange music which penetrates him progressively as his
presence there endures. It is a music of discordant tonal¬
ities, since it simultaneously expresses happiness and
bitterness.
The writer had by that time experienced life, had
travelled sufficiently for his consciousness to be up¬
rooted. L’Envers et VEndroit16 discloses traces of that
first “shedding” of the past. (The denuement, as the
author calls it.) In this album of souvenirs, Prague and
Palma de Majorca, Vienna and Venice, and Florence,
symbolically mark the stages of a more profound jour¬
ney, that of the soul.
As the humdrum daily routine, with its habits and
techniques, weaves about us a soft cocoon, we sink into
a lethargy blindly leading us to death, and the objective
responsiveness to our own existence becomes abolished.
Travel drags us out of this ambush, inconsiderately
snatches us away from the comfort and torpor in which
we are entombed. “Far from home and friends, sepa¬
rated from our language, snatched from our props and
stays, deprived of our masks (we don’t know what the
bus fare is, and everything is like that),” we come un¬
expectedly and with a certain perspective upon life
which but a short while ago had caught us in its toils.
Our “inner decor” collapses, and we rise “to the surface
16 Essay, “Collection Mediterraneennes,” Algiers, 1937. The author
has opposed a reissue of the five narratives which constitute this work,
because he is not entirely satisfied with their form.

31

Albert Camus

of ourselves,” we have become detached. Thus we con¬
front our veritable selves, are at the same time very
close to and very far away from “the man that we were
at home and who, at a distance, seems like a stranger.”
It is then that anguish looms.
After that self-confrontation, the traveller is not long
in encountering the “density” of the world. The illusions
of which he has just been stripped had given him sup¬
port, surrounding him with a universe of familiar per¬
ceptions, gestures, words, and ideas; confronted, now,
with an unmasked, mute, and impenetrable universe,
the traveller feels lost in the confusion of an intensified
consciousness, bared to the quick. The “discord which
comes about between himself and things” gives an
artlessness to his vision of the world, endowing the
most ephemeral and humble of realities with the unique
fact of existence, thus restoring to each living thing,
each object, its miraculous worth. Now, the miracle,
because it is in itself its own end and definition, re¬
pudiates the conscious mind that seeks to comprehend
it. Excluded by the images he affronts, man henceforth
embraces nothing but his solitude and exile.
“The divorce between man and his life,” wrote Camus
in Le Mythe de Sisyphe (p. 18), “between the actor
and his setting, this is, strictly speaking, the sentiment
of absurdity.”
32

The Writer and Thinker

And yet . . . “Yet, in the train that was taking me
from Vienna to Venice, I was expecting something . . .
A light was dawning. I know it now, I was ready for
happiness.”
We see that happiness resolving itself into the com¬
plicity of pure Mediterannean landscapes, experiencing
its true form, recognizing its realm, defining its rhythm.
The four essays that comprise Noces are presented a
little like that “gospel of divestiture” which Camus, after
his illness, was to discover in Gide’s Les Nourritures
Terrestres.11 To judge by the first pages, filled with a
calm and passive euphoria that is simultaneously bar¬
baric and refined, one is tempted to see in this work a
new “Song of Songs of Immoralism,” brimming over
with sensual joy, a book which almost procures for the
reader a physical contact with the gardens it cele¬
brates.18 But upon looking closer, the lyricism of the
North African manifests a more vigorous effusion of
animality, whereas the immoderate outpourings of his
17 Bommage a Andre Gide, pp. 223-228, N.R.F., Paris, 1951. An
interesting point is that Gide wrote Les Nourritures upon recovering
from an illness and Camus the essays in Noces shortly before his
illness. True, this does not explain the opposition of their “amoralisms”
—one should rather find that explanation in the fact that a generation
separates them—but it is certain that in the beginning this difference
of experience could only strengthen the differences of dispositions.
18 Goran Schildt, Gide et Vhomme, p. 56, Le Mercure de France,
1949.

33

Albert Camus

predecessor postulate but a cerebral backfiring. Not
surprisingly, Camus himself detected this flaw: “Some¬
thing ... in this admirable exaltation smacks of con¬
version,”19 which he found disconcerting. Moreover,
a note at the bottom of page 59 unambiguously states
what he thinks of “the sensual asceticism” of his elder:
“May I be so foolish as to say I do not like the way
Gide exalts the body? He wants to hold his desire in
check to make it keener—which puts him in the
company of those men who, in the argot of brothels
are called “the involved ones,” or “the cerebrals.”
Noces a Tipasa: what a riot of color and perfume
and tactile sensation! Here, at this rendezvous of stone,
sea, and sun, the body achieves Dionysiac supremacy.
“How many hours spent trampling underfoot the frag¬
rant herbs, caressing the ruins, trying to accord my
breathing with the tumultuous sighing of the world.
Submerged among the wild odors and somnolent con¬
certs of insects, I open my eyes and heart to the
intolerable grandeur of that sky gorged with heat.”
(p. 16) On the level of absolute brute sensation, from
which the conscious mind is alienated, he recovers his
profound harmony with nature. And, entrenched in the
cool shadows, having abandoned himself to “the happy
19 Le Figaro Litter air e, February 24, 1951.

34

The Writer and Thinker

lassitude of my nuptials with the world,” he listens to
the silent harmonies within himself and feels the pride
of living in all its plenitude. “I had performed my func¬
tions as a man, and to know joy throughout a long
day did not seem to me an exceptional feat, but the
awed accomplishment of a condition which, in some
circumstances, makes happiness a duty.” (p. 28) Pagan
song of deliverance, this is a kind of virile paean to the
glory of sensual joys.
But now we have Djemila, with its vestiges of the
past, Djemila, a town of the dead. One of those places
“where the mind perishes so that a verity may be bom
which is negation itself.” In the eye of the wind that
impetuously harries it, the self is burnished, “worn
down to the soul,” and progressively assimilated to the
arid landscape of mins, as if at last summed up in “the
solitude of an antique column or of an olive tree out¬
lined against the summer sky.” Through his identifi¬
cation with the landscape, the wanderer experiences
that detachment from himself which the traveller of
L’Envers et I’Endroit had known in the depths of an
exiled consciousness. “Soon, scattered to the four comers
of the earth, forgetful and forgotten by myself, I am
in and of this wind, these columns and this arch, these
flagstones that feel hot and those pale mountains around
35

Albert Camus

the deserted town.” (p. 38) He is what he lives, he is
“as if imprisoned for eternity—and everything is present
to him.” The past dissolves, the future is unthinkable,
and the present is so intense that the flesh is borne to
the farthest frontiers of its possessions, fiercely setting
the individual against everything that would oblige him
to renounce this newly recognized weight of life. “I do
not like to believe that death opens upon another life.
To me it is a door that shuts.” (p. 41) The great lesson
of Djemila, is “the conscious certitude of a death with¬
out hope.” Exaltation and bitterness: between these two
poles oscillates the tragic happiness of the man.
L’Ete a Alger takes up again this teaching (“Every¬
thing here breathes the horror of dying in a country that
invites us to five”), and offers us a collective illustration.
“This entire people, flung into its present existence, lives
without myths, without consolation; it has invested all
its wealth in this earth, and thereafter is left without
defense against death.” (p. 77)
Le Desert pictures the intolerable beauty of Tuscany
—the unchanging aspects of its art, the changing aspects
of its countryside—which dissimulates beneath a pro¬
fusion of enchantments the same illuminating truth:
that of the flesh overwhelmed with sensual delight, that
of the consciousness emptied of hope. Here too the mind
36

The Writer and Thinker

leams that it is nothing and that its sole reason for
being is the perishable body, precisely because perish¬
able. In “this desert magnificent to the heart” it is im¬
possible to allow oneself to be beguiled by myths. De¬
nied, excluded, or admitted, brought down to the
measure of his destiny, man has a presentiment that
“a certain continuity in despair can engender joy.”
(p. 110) That “divestiture” rejoins a greater wealth, and
that certitude of death a higher passion for living.
One day, from a hilltop terrace, we witness with him
“the great breathing of the world,” and glimpse, with
him, the possibility of “a higher happiness, where hap¬
piness seems futile” (p. 114), the happiness that un¬
folds in contemplation. “The world is beautiful, and be¬
yond it there is no salvation.” (p. 117) The traveller
succumbs to the sweetness of that privileged moment:
“I admire, I admire that bond which, in the world,
unites mankind, that double reflection in which my heart
can intervene and dictate its happiness to the precise
bounds where the world can then complete or destroy
it.” (p. 122)
In this poetic luxuriance of ideas which, matured by
age and selected and organized by reflection, will take
form in his later works with well defined outlines, may
already be seen the constants of the thought of Albert
37

Albert Camus

Camus. First of all, there is his atheism,20 which is not
the negation of the divine but the impossibility of open¬
ing his heart to the revelation of any kind of absolute
truth, a rejection which, on the one hand, determines
his lucid adhesion to the only relative truths of earthly
existence, and on the other hand, a kind of dynamic
imperative which keeps him from sinking into despair
and secretly hands him over to reasons of the heart
which his mind does not know.
2. NIHILISM AND A PROVISIONAL ETHICS
When, in 1942, L’Etranger appeared, the book
created a sensation and provoked the greatest variety
of reactions. As a matter of fact, it was almost im¬
penetrable or was badly understood, and it was neces¬
sary to become acquainted with Le Mythe de Sisyphe
which appeared a few months later, in order to measure
its real scope. In effect, this book of essays describes and
comments upon the awareness of the absurd which
comprises the climate of VEtranger. Since the narrative
aimed at inspiring the sentiment of the absurd, and the
essay the notion of the absurd, it goes without saying
20 Adopting a distinction that Gabriel Marcel had explained, Charles
Moeller (“Albert Camus ou l’honnetete desesperee,” pp. 42 et seq.)
concludes that Camus’ atheism is more a refusal of God than the
impossibility of God. Certainly his atheism makes him refuse any
effort to find a transcendent truth.

38

The Myth of Sisyphus

that to explain the former we must benefit by the en¬
lightenment furnished by the latter.
Le Mythe de Sisyphe (The Myth of Sisyphus)

The absurd, and suicide. “There is but one truly
serious philosophical problem: it is suicide.” Thus the
book of essays begins. It is but a means for the author
to give impetus to his thought. Suicide would not pre¬
occupy him if it did not respond to the most pressing of
questions: the meaning of life. And that response is re¬
sumed in the avowal that “It is not worth the trouble.”
The traditional explanations of suicide, sentimental or
other, all imply the same profound cause, which is, that
the individual, sustained until then by habit, suddenly
discovers “even instinctively, the ridiculous character
of habit, the absence of any profound reason for living,
the senseless character of that daily agitation and the
futility of suffering.” (p. 18) This desperate illumina¬
tion is what Camus calls “the sentiment of the absurd.”
It remains to judge if this sentiment or feeling finds its
necessary conclusion in suicide. But before deciding
this, the author gives himself over to an examination
of the “absurd walls” within which is played out the
drama of our human condition.
The absurd walls. The sentiment of the absurd, un¬
expected, unforeseeable, “in its light without radiance,”
39

Albert Camus

can strike anyone anywhere at any moment. The very
banality of daily life constitutes a medium particularly
favorable to its emergence. “Get up, take tram, four
hours at the office or factory, lunch, take tram, four
hours of work, supper, sleep, and Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, at the same
rhythm this course is easily followed most of the time.”
(p. 27) Until the day when weariness causes a sudden
awakening of the conscience. Why, of what use this
mechanical existence, what rhyme or reason is there
in it?
Another vision of the absurd. We enjoy making plans
for the future, although “after all, it’s a question of dy¬
ing.” But the time comes when the scales fall from our
eyes and we see that beneath its mask Time is a sly
enemy and not a faithful ally. We count on time’s giving
us its support, and implacably and ceaselessly it situates
us on our course—“Thirty years old, already!”—weigh¬
ing upon us, exhausting us.
Then, too, what can be said of the staggering shock
we receive when we suddenly perceive “to what extent
a stone is foreign and irreducible to us, with what in¬
tensity nature or a landscape can repudiate us”? (p.
28) And when we ourselves are astonished at seeing
“the stranger who, at certain moments, comes to meet
us in the looking-glass, the familiar and yet disquieting
40

The Myth of Sisyphus

brother that we find in our own photographs”? (p. 29)
And when, in the face of a beloved one, it happens that
we do not recognize anything in those eyes, that mouth,
that forehead that we have so loved? All these priv¬
ileged moments brutally confront us with the absurd
and then leave us, self-denounced, in its pitiless light.
How may all this be explained? Simply by the un¬
expected contact with the reality of creatures and things.
For that reality usually eludes us. Our habits conceal
it, our affective life camouflages it. Stripped of these
disguises which our conscious mind endlessly compels
reality to assume, it looms up in its strict objectivity,
“foreign,” inhuman, and repellent. It is here that we
find the absurd lying in wait for us.
But where, without denial, the absurd assails us, is
when we confront death. This, naturally, has nothing
to do with the experience of the thing. Nor, still more,
with the death of others. “The horror comes in reality
from the mathematical side of the event. . . . That ele¬
mentary and definitive side of the adventure is the
entire content of the sentiment of the absurd. Beneath
the mortal illumination of this destiny, the futility of
it appears. No moral code, and no least effort are a
priori justifiable, considering the ruthless mathematics
controlling our condition.” (p. 30)
To the inventory of the sentiments “which can com41

Albert Camus

port something of the absurd” succeeds that of the
efforts of the mind condemned to the same impediment:
to the confusion of the sensibility is added the im¬
potence of the intelligence.
In line with Montaigne, Pascal, Poincare, the author
demonstrates the infirmity of our understanding: the
incapacity of distinguishing the true from the false, the
impossibility of knowing oneself and the world, the
vanity of scientific enterprise, in a word, the resistance
of multiple and elusive reality to our unity and clarity.
The fact remains nonetheless that the clairvoyance
acquired in the humiliation of our powers allows a more
exact definition of the absurd. The absurd, we have
let it to be understood, is everything that has no
meaning. But the world appears thus to us only because
it eludes our reasoning, and our own life shows up the
same character only in the same divorcement. We are
thus justified in concluding that the absurd depends
upon neither the one nor the other of the elements
present, but upon their confrontation. “The irrational,
the human nostalgia, and the absurd that emerges from
their confrontation, these are the three characters of
the drama.” (p. 45)
Absurd, the contradiction between our aspiration
for the eternal and our subordination to duration; ab¬
surd, the opposition between our desire for unity and
42

The Myth of Sisyphus

the irreducible duality of our nature; absurd, the discord
between our passion for understanding, for exercising
our reason, and the unintelligibility, the “unreasonable
silence” of the world, between our feverish quest for
happiness and the vanity of our action.
In his enumeration of absurd experiences, Camus has
never ceased making it clear that only their conse¬
quences interested him. The moment has come to apply
the findings.
Phibsophical suicide. We cannot honestly consider
it possible to solve a problem if we do not respect the
admitted facts. We are therefore not authorized to elude
one sole term of the question posed by the absurd. And
this, be it recalled, is inscribed in a perpetual confronta¬
tion, “a struggle without respite.” On the one hand, the
irrational and incomprehensible; on the other hand, our
impotence, from which naturally follows “the total ab¬
sence of hope—which has nothing to do with despair—a
continual refusal—which must not be confused with
renouncement—and a conscious insatisfaction—which
should not be assimilated to youthful unrest.” (p. 50)
And yet a response has been given which destroys
the equation to be solved. Camus has called it “philo¬
sophical suicide” because it repudiates lucid reason and,
without that lucid reason, the absurd ceases to exist.
Camus alludes here to some metaphysical themes of
43

Albert Camus

Jaspers, Chestov, and Kierkegaard, whose experiments
had been analyzed, along with others, in a preceding
paragraph, (p. 39 et seq.) Now, that experiment was to
conclude with a clever juggling of the problem. The
religious faith which serves as axis to these philosophies
introduces the notion of hope into the debate, thus sup¬
pressing one of the terms of the imposed confrontation.
If our exile here on earth must be resolved and justified
one day in the contemplation of the celestial realm, the
irrational (in its essence) becomes rational (by its ex¬
istence). The obstacle is circumvented; the experiment
aborted.
The conscious mind upon awakening, began by recog¬
nizing its prison, then at once invoked hope to drive
away that bad dream; after thus having dispelled the
walls” which enclosed it, the mind found an escape—
but into the night of routine living, where it soon fell
asleep again.
Now that we hold that to be conscious of the absurd
and to remain so is to persist in recognizing our im¬
prisonment and the impossibility of appealing the sen¬
tence of death to the supernatural or to some kind of
hope, nothing prevents us any longer from returning to
the problem of suicide which we have left pending.
Life has no meaning, therefore I kill myself. Logic is
satisfied. Perhaps one can say as much of the demands
44

The Myth of Sisyphus

of truth brought to light in a movement of clairvoyance?
I kill myself, and I annihilate with me this conscience in
which the vision of the absurd finds its support. I de¬
stroy the confrontation, I “skip” the problem, I vault
over it. Hope denies the opacity of the world by substi¬
tuting for it the transparency of divine reason; suicide
denies our need for impossible transparency, comes to
grief on that same opacity, and admits the absurd, that
is to say, avoids it. We must live, if we wish to main¬
tain what we believe to be true.
“To live is to make the absurd five. To make it live
is, above all, to face it squarely. Unlike Eurydice, when
we avert our gaze, the absurd dies. Thus, revolt is one
of the few coherent philosophical positions.” (pp. 76-77)
For revolt, setting human reason and the inhumanity
of the absurd face to face, inaugurates a perpetual strug¬
gle in which the mind, “eternally renewed, eternally on
the alert,” remains wide awake. That is what gives life
all its value. “For a man without blinkers, there is no
finer spectacle than that of the intelligence at grips
with a reality that transcends him.” (p. 78)
The revolt cannot expect any compensation for its
lucid, lonely, and continued effort. It is a revolt without
hope; it defends its truth, that perishable flame which
leaped forth one day from the burning centre of the
consciousness, and maintains it. And the heroic zeal of
45

Albert Camus

this revolt seeks for nothing except to prove human
grandeur.
However, one must live. A man must consciously re¬
sume “the chain of daily gestures” but with a new dispo¬
sition, a new virtue. This consciousness which, before
the absurd experience, allowed itself to be sunk in a
comfortable lethargy, will henceforth sustain its vigil¬
ance and exercise the freedom recognized in its defini¬
tive awakening. Since nothing of what can be thought or
done has any meaning, my life is no longer inclined
towards one thought rather than another or to ac¬
complish this thing rather than that. Without aim,
without plan for the future, shut against all those
hopes which would have compelled a constant choice,
that is to say, a renouncement, a discipline of action,
that is to say, self-restraint, the absurd man sees open¬
ing to him a total liberty, which the perspective of death
increases and exalts still more. The “absurd” man, being
solicited by nothing, is disposed to and available to
everything. And death, upon which he stubbornly fixes
his gaze, frees him without appeal, discharging him from
all responsibility. The old freedom, that freedom which
he believed he experienced when it was a matter of
“thinking of the future, deciding upon an aim, having
a preference,” was only an illusion, threatened at every
turn by death. “Absurd” freedom, placing existence in
46

The Myth of Sisyphus

the perspective of death, diverts the attention of the
individual from his aims, that have suddenly become
paltry, and concentrates it upon the will to live.
Since God does not exist and since one must die,
everything is allowed. But if everything is allowed,
everything is indifferent. There can be no question of
establishing a scale of values among the experiences that
life proposes. “The important thing is not to live better
but to live more.” (p. 84) An ethic of quantity which
rejoins and even supposes an ethic of quality. For it is
not by accumulating the most varied aspects of the senti¬
ent world that we live most, but simply by being
lucid, by “being aware of one’s life, one’s revolt, one’s
freedom as much as possible ...” To taste fully the
passing moment, to pause at each and to lose none, “To
keep each successive moment before the mind unceas¬
ingly conscious, is the ideal of the absurd man.” (p. 88)
Three types of man make of this ideal the ferment of
their existence: the lover, the comedian, the adventurer.
Their portrait is sketched in the second chapter,
“L’Homme Absurde,” with the understanding that these
extreme cases of the absurd man are not put forward
as examples but as illustrations of a consistent attitude.
As for the “most absurd of absurd men,” the creative
man, it was considered that he deserved to have a spe¬
cial study devoted to him, “La creation absurde” (“Ab47

Albert Camus

surd Creation”), which we will deal with in a separate
chapter.21
But the man in the first rank, the one who summarizes
all and whose destiny gave birth to one of the most poig¬
nant myths of antiquity, is Sisyphus. The gods had con¬
demned him to roll to the top of a mountain an
enormous mass of stone which, when it had barely
reached its destination, rolled back towards the depths
from which he tirelessly raised it up again. “If this myth
is tragic, it is because its hero is conscious. Where, in
effect, would be his suffering if at each step he were
sustained by the hope of succeeding? . . . Sisyphus, pro¬
letarian of the gods, impotent and rebellious, knows the
whole extent of his miserable condition: that is what
he thinks about as he makes his descent. The clair¬
voyance which constitutes his torment consummates
at the same time his victory. There is no destiny but
what can be surmounted by disdain.” (pp. 165-166)
As may be seen, it was inevitable that Camus’ essay
on the absurd should be entitled Le Mythe de Sisyphe.
L’Etranger (The Stranger)
An authoritative critic, Marcel Girard, has stated that
with this work Albert Camus has provided “the best
21 See our Chapter III.
48

The Stranger

novel of his generation.”22 Upon rereading it, we cannot,
in any case, refrain from applying to it the reflection
made by Jean-Paul Sartre in regard to a novel of
Faulkner: “With the recoil of time, good novels be¬
come as like as possible to natural phenomena; we for¬
get that they have an author, we accept them as we
accept stones or trees, because they are there, because
they exist.”23
L’Etranger belongs in reality to the category of nar¬
rative rather than to that of novel. The plot is simple.
(Before all else, let us especially note that the action
takes place in Algiers and its vicinity. We could even
say, as will soon clearly appear, that it is inconceivable
elsewhere.)
The hero-narrator is a humble employee, one of those
creatures whose humdrum existence contains nothing
worth noting. He is Mr. Anybody. Meursault, as he is
called, has just learned that his mother has died in the
Home for the Aged where he had finally been obliged
to place her three years previously. The very day after
the funeral, he strikes up an intimate friendship with a
girl, Marie Cardona, a stenographer formerly employed
in the office where he works, meeting her by chance
22 Marcel Girard, Guide lllustre de la Litterature jrangaise moderne,
1918-1949. Paris, 1949.
23 Jean-Paul Sartre, Situations I, p. 8. Paris, 1947.

49

Albert Camus

at the bathing beach in the harbor. But this changes
nothing in his way of life, no more than does his be¬
reavement. On Sundays, Meursault is bored, and during
the week he tries to put in some honest work and not to
displease his employer. Of course, there’s Marie, from
time to time, Marie who has asked him if he loves her
and to whom he has replied that the phrase meant noth¬
ing but that he felt he did not. Marie, who has asked
him to marry her, and to whom he has replied that he
would do it “whenever she liked.” Marie, in short. There
was also the offer his employer had made to create
a job for him in Paris. But for Meursault it’s all the same:
to marry or have a simple affair, to live in Paris or to
live in Algiers.
Then, one Sunday, a fellow lodger by the name of
Raymond, to whom he had had occasion to render a
service, invites him to spend the day, with Marie, at
the home of a couple of friends in the suburbs. Every¬
thing would have been for the best if our men had not
had a scuffle on the beach with some Arabs who had
followed them that far, having a grudge to settle with
Raymond. It is at Raymond that their blows are aimed,
and he is the one who receives the blows and after
having been somewhat repaired, it is he who decides to
turn upon his aggressors. Meursault, who accompanies
50

The Stranger

him, and to whom he has entrusted his revolver, finds
himself alone at a given moment, “Come there without
having thought about it,” standing in front of the last
Arab. What matter! In his mind, “the affair was finished.”
But the Arab pulled out his knife, “the sunlight glanced
off the steel.” Blinded by the sweat that had accumu¬
lated in his eyebrows and now suddenly runs down over
his eyelids, Meursault controls himself no longer but
pulls the trigger. . .. Then, he fires again, “four times on
an inert body where the bullets sank in without leaving
a visible trace.”
Imprisonment, investigation, trial: the judicial ma¬
chinery swings into action. The witnesses testify that
the accused had not wanted to look at his dead mother,
that he had smoked, slept, and drunk coffee during the
funeral vigil, and that next day he had even gone to see
a Femandel movie! The indictment emphasizes that
“when he buried his mother he was already a criminal
at heart.” Meursault is condemned to be guillotined.
The hope of a still possible appeal torments him for
quite awhile. And then it is that the prison chaplain,
whom he has refused to see many times, enters the
death cell: after the temptation of hope, the temptation
of salvation. Irritated by proposals that do not interest
him, anxious not to lose what little time remains in
51

Albert Camus

hearing about God, who represents nothing to him,
Meursault can no longer contain himself. He revolts,
unleashes a storm of abuse; his consciousness pierces the
darkness, revealing to him the sentiment of the absurd
and the knowledge of his innocence; his past revives,
disclosing to him that he has been happy—and still is,
so close to annihilation ...
Here we have the essential themes of The Myth of
Sisyphus illustrated: the moral blindness of daily autom¬
atisms, the temptation of hope confronting death, and
revolt. There remains one other theme: the rage to live.
This theme is carried out poetically, in a style that is
ample and colorful, on the last page of the narrative.
“The Stranger,” henceforth lucid, tastes with rapture the
immediate moment; the man condemned to death, at
last drawn from his lethargy, awakens to life and comes
to terms with “the benign indifference of the world,”
that exterior world “which can always deliver us from
everything,” as the author of La Teste would later
write.
What could quite possibly one day designate this
little book of 150 pages as one of the classics of our
century is not, we may be sure, the simple fable it re¬
lates, but rather, on the one hand, the sentiment of the
absurd which emanates from it and, on the other hand,
the art with which it proceeds, an art in which con52

The Stranger

struction and technique of style perfectly adapted to
its needs both play their part.
The sentiment of the absurd. The demonstration of
The Myth of Sisyphus gives us the key to The Stranger,
it is true. However, we must renounce seeing in the
novel a romantic prefiguration of the essay. The novel
explains nothing, proves nothing; it is not a novel with
a thesis to expound. It does not show us a man, struck
one day by the notion of the absurd and desperately
seeking to escape from his “nausea,” then, on the verge
of suicide, operating that sudden recovery which mobi¬
lizes him in a conscious revolt, making him measure his
freedom and arousing his passion for earthly experience.
No. Meursault does not know the awakening of con¬
sciousness until the end of his adventure, on the last
page; but it is remarkable that up to then his life has
obeyed, according to all appearance, the absurd ortho¬
doxy. He therefore presents this singular case of a
conscious mind lulled to sleep but linked with a be¬
havior that supposes a wide-awake state.
With Meursault, the absurd is like a congenital in¬
firmity, and this is what gives such weight of reality
to his character. One might say that the absurd is in his
blood. And he makes that absurd live, not by the
vigilance of the mind, but in the abandonment of the
flesh. By his intense physical presence, Meursault is
53

Albert Camus

indeed the brother of those young “barbarians” of the
Mediterranean shores that were evoked by Camus
in Noces.
Entirely given over to sensation, he lives only in the
successive moments, and with the sensation that dis¬
appears, the moment vanishes before a memory of it
can be organized and registered. Thus we have this
man’s incapacity of experiencing a feeling, for to ex¬
perience a feeling presupposes continuity; he is without
a past, but also without a future. The “It’s all the same
to me” that constantly returns to his bps is understand¬
able. In order to express a judgment of value, it is neces¬
sary to base oneself on memory or have an imagination
as to the future. In the flow of the present, all hierarchy
is void of meaning.
Insensibility, indifference, absence of feelings, “in¬
humanity,” this comprises more than is needed to elicit
our avowal that Meursault has appeared to us as a
“stranger.” He is also a stranger to himself, since he
cannot manage to give a meaning to his life, since
“time ... is for him nothing but a succession of distinct
moments which no Cartesian God joins together and
since he is traversed by no elan vital, and is transfigured
by no memory.”24 And finally, he is a stranger to those
24 Rachel Bespaloff, “Le Monde du Condamne a mort” in Esprit,
January 1950, p. 2.

54

The Stranger

who approach him. Some, like Marie, will love him
“because he’s odd”; others will hate him, and to such
a point that they will make him pay with his life for the
horror he inspires in them.
It is not the man who has killed another man “on
account of the sun” that society condemns, but indeed
this kind of monster who refuses with unequaled firm¬
ness to enter into the game of their illusions, lies, and
hypocrisies. Society wants a reassuring attitude from
him and he does nothing but denounce, by his tranquil
stubbornness in speaking the truth, the real and miser¬
able aspect of man’s fate.
In short, the murder he has committed is taken as
being a pretext to destroy the truth that he embodies.
That is what has made some people see in him “as it
were, the negative proof of that Christ who came down
to earth to be a man among men two thousand years
ago.”25 For he is innocent, he does not assume the least
guilt. In making a victim of him, society has merely
recognized and proclaimed the scandal of human ex¬
istence, to which he has witnessed forcefully through¬
out the trial, in his imperturbable identification of
human existence with himself.
It is also hard not to discover the tragic background
of this adventure. The theme of the sun, which blazes
25 P. Neraud de Boisdeffre, loc. cit., p. 306.

55

Albert Camus

out in the essential pages of Noces, is here developed
mysteriously, with the obsessive urgency of a leitmotif.
Meursault will be only “the stranger,” as a fictional
character; he will not arrest our attention more than
Voltaire’s Ingenu or Candide. But his physical presence
is affirmed, and physically it is subjected to an implac¬
able sun. His blood is aroused, it would seem, only to
take stock of this fatality which he feels he must endure.
Through it, ineluctably, is accomplished his destiny
as an individual, and this, in three phases: the funeral,
the crime, the trial, each with its particular sun presid¬
ing. Roland Barthes, to whom we owe this very perti¬
nent insight,26 thus analyzes the tragic progression:
“The funereal sun of the beginning is nothing more
visibly than the condition of the sliminess of matter: the
sweat of the faces, the softening of the asphalt along
the torrid route of the funeral procession, here every¬
thing is an image of stickiness in the environment.
Meursault is as glued to the sun as he is to the rites
themselves, and the solar fire has as function to ensnare
and shed light on the absurdity of the scene. On the
beach, another figure of the sun: this one does not
liquefy, it hardens, transforms matter into metal, the
sea into a sword, the sand into steel, the gesture into
26 Club, Bulletin du “Club du meilleur livre”, April 1954, No. 12,
p. 7.

56

The Stranger

murder; the sun is a weapon, a blade, a wedge, likely
to wound, to mutilate, whereas the flesh of man is dull
and flabby. And in the courtroom where Meursault is
judged, we have finally a dry sun, a dusty sunlight, the
rusty sunbeam of the hypogeum.” And he concludes:
“As in the Oedipus at Colonna or in Shakespeare’s
Richard 11, the conduct of the hero is doubled by a
carnal itinerary which attaches us to his magnificent
and fragile existence. The novel is thus founded not only
in philosophy but also in literature: ten years after
its publication, something in this book continues to
sing, continues to rend us; which is, indeed, the double
power of all beauty.”
The construction. The work is composed of two
parts of equal importance. The first part makes us live
beside Meursault a few of his days, and ends with the
murder; the second makes us relive these same days,
but obliquely, through the proceedings of the law court
—depositions of witnesses, indictment by the Prosecut¬
ing Attorney—and outside Meursault. On the one hand,
the insignificant life as it has been lived by the hero, a
life without continuity, comprised of juxtaposed instants,
“inorganic,” one might almost say; on the other hand,
the reconstitution of this life, gathered together and
organized by the working of reason and the power of
words. We see to what account the author expects to
57

Albert Camus

turn this confrontation: to bring to light the absurd in a
display of the betrayals to which the mind yields in try¬
ing to apprehend the facts with the aid of concepts and
language. This discord between the objective reality and
the subjective image which pretends to reproduce it is
calculated to penetrate us with the futility of human
justice. How honestly support a verdict when its very
object escapes all exact definition?
Meursault, in the prisoner’s box, listens to what is
being said about him, as though it concerned someone
else; his absurdity emphasizes the absurdity of the
miserable comedy in which his destiny is at stake and
arouses a certain humor, which is perhaps the surest
argument of the book.
But by what ingenuity does the novelist, using words
like his Public Prosecutor, manage in the first part
of his work to give us the illusion of being the direct
witnesses of the reality which he evokes? This was a
veritable challenge, which required the use of a special
technique.
The technique of the style. Meursault, as we have
said, fives only in detached moments, a succession of
present instants independent of each other and cast back
into oblivion once they have been consumed. This dis¬
continuity of time is marked in the narrative by the
discontinuity of the style.
58

The Stranger

Each sentence, like each instant, forms a whole, a
small, homogeneous and enclosed universe, attached
by nothing to what precedes, and drawing nothing in its
wake. A thing is no sooner stated than swallowed up in
silence; from one thing to the other, there is no logical
articulation, no relation; in their juxtaposition, there is
no trace whatsoever of some kind of spiritual ascendancy
over reality. No consciousness interposes to organize
this sensitive material, “translating” it and submitting
it to the psychological selection which stocks the mem¬
ory, unifies and orients it, projecting it into the future
according to an affective dynamism. No. The narrator
remains passive, his presence becomes transparent.
Moreover, one might almost say that, above everything,
he is preoccupied with remaining silent. Jean-Paul
Sartre subtly noted this when he wrote “... his phrasing
does not appertain to the world of speech, it has neither
ramifications nor prolongations nor interior structure
. . . it is measured out in the rhythms of a silent intui¬
tion.”27
By imposing upon us an analytical vision of things,
that is to say, by keeping them on a level lower than
their significance, by preserving this same vision from
the short-sightedness of habits and the deformations
27 “Explication de L’Etranger," in Situations I, pp. 110-120. Gallimard, 1947.

59

Albert Camus

of subjectivity, the discontinuity and the transparency
of The Stranger puts us in contact with “pure” reality
in the crude state, where lurks the absurd, to contami¬
nate us. The awakening of the consciousness will in¬
evitably follow, and thus the objective of the author
will be achieved.
The conscientious conformity of technique with sub¬
ject matter, so effective in application, is very like the
prior achievement in certain of Hemingway’s works,
and leads to the supposition that Camus is responsible
only for choosing to use it: he borrowed deliberately.
The chapter on “absurd creation” in The Myth of Sisy¬
phus strengthens this opinion.
It still happens that at certain moments, on certain
pages, the warm and tender style of the poetic author
of Noces furtively reappears, as if the dull and spas¬
modic flood of the absurdist aesthetic opened at times to
allow the tide to rise from its depths, full and luminous.
But not only is there the style. In its composition also
VEtranger asserts its quality of a work minutely
planned. Beneath its rambling, disconnected, dislocated
appearance, this narrative shows a robust structural
organization. Not one detail is left pending, but is
utilized again at some point to weigh upon the hero’s
destiny. Such and such precise detail or incident, at first
view futile and derisory, suddenly assumes, in the
60

The Stranger

illumination of a new situation, a definitive and un¬
challengeable value.
On this score, this little book on the absurd can lay
claim to the purest classicism.

B. DEVIATION AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE THOUGHT
1. THE TEMPTATION OF THE IMPOSSIBLE

Well within the solution brought to the problem of
the absurd, we have the dark flame of a tragedy and the
sinister parade of a drama. If it is kept in mind that the
anecdote which is the basis of the play Le Malentendu
(“Cross Purposes,” in the English translation) is nar¬
rated in VEtranger (pages 105-106),28 and that a first
version of Caligula was written in 1938,29 it is not sur28 “The author thus informs us that he stubbornly intends not only
to create characters but human relations.”—Emmanuel Mounier, in
Esprit, January 1950, p. 28. Likewise, two lines in La Peste, page 68,
recall the murder committed by Meursault.
29 Charles Moeller is the only one, to our knowledge, who has felt
in duty bound to accord a certain interest to this chronology. Accord¬
ing to him, Caligula, written between 1937 and 1942, as Sartre has
pointed out, would be seen to echo a crisis traversed by the author,
rudely stricken by illness at that time. He who was born to sing the
joy of life, and who did sing it, had had the revelation of the absurd
in the humiliation of his flesh; and he transposed his personal drama
into the impossible adventure of Caligula. According to this theory,
the political romanticism of this dramatic work would be but window-

61

Albert Camus

prising to find in these two plays the illustration of the
conflicts which the thought of Le Mythe de Sisyphe, in
a certain way, surpassed.30 Let us rather admire how
they were predestined in their time to embody in their
symbolical significance the significance of contemporary
events. Then, again, it appears that the author chose the
themes of the absurd according to the category of ex¬
pression which attracted him. Thus, the revolt of the
humiliated, the vengeful, the bloody, finds its natural
place in the theatre; the revolt of the oppressed, indi¬
vidual or collective, incapable of violence, finds its
place in the form of the narrative. As Camus himself
has said, in Le Mythe de Sisyphe (p. 155), it suffices
that all his works be viewed together for them “to find
their natural grouping.”

dressing. Nevertheless, the fact remains that, by allowing a play written
two or three years previously to be produced in 1944, Camus implicitly
recognized that nothing in this work need be disavowed as not being
in line with his thinking at that time. And all the same, we cannot do
him the injury of thinking that he was unconscious of the political
significance of the play at that period when the events of the day gave
it a kind of double life. Moreover, the Lettres d un Ami allemand
(the first two were known in 1944) are there to witness that Caligula
well responded to the writer’s preoccupations of the hour.
30 The two plays, Le Malentendu and Caligula were published to¬
gether by Gallimard in 1944. They were produced respectively in
1944 and 1945, the former at the Theatre des Mathurins, starring
Maria Casares and Marcel Herrand, the latter at the Theatre Hebertot,
starring Margo Lion and Gerard Philipe.

62

Cross Purposes

Le Malentendu

(Cross Purposes)

In complicity with her mother, the sombre Martha,
as a way of realizing her dream of sunshine and happi¬
ness, kills and robs and disposes of the bodies of travel¬
lers who stop off at their inn, situated somewhere in
the rainy countryside of Bohemia. One day Martha’s
brother Jan comes back after twenty years of absence,
happy to be able at last to bring the means of a richer
life to those for whom he feels “responsible.” Having
maintained his incognito, considering that “it isn’t
enough, in such cases, to make oneself known,” but
that he must again “make himself be loved,” he suffers
the same fate as the transient guests that have pre¬
ceded him.
When the “misunderstanding” is discovered, the
mother drowns herself in the river into which they have
cast the body of her son. Martha will also kill herself,
but not before trying to destroy in Maria, Jan’s wife
who has come to ask for news of him, the illusion of any
sentiment, the mirage of any possible significance in
the human earthly adventure. In Act III, Scene 3, we
have the following significant dialogue:
Martha:

But I cannot die, leaving you with the idea that
you are right, that love is not vain and this is an
63

Albert Camus

Maria:
Martha:

accident. For it’s now that we are in the order
of things. You must convince yourself of it.
What order?
That in which no one is ever recognized.

Thus reechoes the theme of VEtranger: in the uni¬
verse without solace where we must live and breathe,
we pass by each other without our own exile being
able to enter into communication with the exile of
others. That is what gives pathos to this play, in which
the horrifying perspective of the crime seems to confirm
itself from one moment to another in the contradictory
rigidity of each of the characters who are now clearseeing, now blind, according to whether the action con¬
cerns the individual or his relations to others.
Since sentiment cannot have any true basis, there
remains nothing for the human being but to stifle the
impulses of his heart and enter into the “blind peace”
of the stone, or into the sleep of death. Martha gives
no other advice to her sister-in-law. “You must choose
between the stupid felicity of stones or the slimy bed
where we will await you.”
The voluntary achievement of indifference, or suicide
—this is the alternative with which Le Malentendu con¬
fronts us. Maria, in an agonizing collapse will exclaim,
“Oh, my God! I cannot live in this desert!” and will
call upon the pity of heaven from the depths of her
64

Cross Purposes

grief. A response will come from the lips of the old
serving man, whose voice has not yet been heard, the
old man towards whom she turns, imploringly. But his
answer is “No.” And that reply, which sets a final period
to the tragedy, reveals to us, beyond the physical plane
where we have seen the force of passion precipitate the
action towards death, and beyond the moral plane
where liberty in all things is allowed, and which ends
in an impasse, a metaphysical plane where divine in¬
difference has taken scenically the forms of absence, of
silence, and of refusal.
The demonstration is made, all too well made, all too
apparent.
Whereas Meursault weighed upon us with all his
weight of flesh, obsessed us with the disquieting opacity
of his character, and resembled us “like a brother,” the
protagonists of Le Malentendu do not always succeed
in attaining this human dimension in which the abstract
ideas of the tragedy could really come alive. For the
greater part of the time they fall short of being them¬
selves, cramped by the symbolical destiny the author
has assigned to them, incorporated in it, instead of its
being incarnated in them. The result is that, despite all
the art of the playwright, who, in the strong and sober
manner of the dialogue, provides us with scenes of rare
plastic beauty, the work as a whole does not ring true.
65

Albert Camus

Nevertheless, what is surprising is that this “dark play,”
fashioned on the pattern of the absurd, also shimmers
secretly with that light which Camus has always carried
within him and which he keeps alive, like a muted
nostalgia of his past, and the most tenacious promise of
the future. Of what does Martha dream? What desire
impels her to accumulate her crimes? She yearns to
escape this overwhelming landscape without horizons,
this gray and enclosed universe in which she feels im¬
prisoned, and to find the seashores spread out beneath
the sun. In other words, to escape from the suffocation
human beings know within “the absurd walls,” and
to taste happiness. It is clear that the young North
African, when he calls up the vision of happiness, sees it
always in sunlight. This theme, which the first essay of
Noces and also the essay VEnvers et VEndroit before it,
expressed in the opposition between the “historical
cities” and the walled cities, shut in upon themselves,
privileged places, the seaside towns, open to the purest
light, this theme which the adventure of VEtranger
weaves so powerfully, here attests its permanence at
the centre of the artist’s thought.
Caligula

Even if you are young and Caesar, you weep when
you discover that “things are not as they should be.” It
66

Caligula

needs but a sudden unsettling of the soul, for instance,
the loss of the woman you love. Thus, one day, Caligula
felt penetrated by “a quite simple, quite clear, and
rather stupid truth . . . heavy to bear”: human beings
die, and they are not happy.
But because one is young, and especially because one
retains absolute power, one may nourish the wild am¬
bition to change the order of things, one may wish to
“mingle the heavens and the sea, ugliness and beauty,
make laughter spring from suffering.”
Scipio:

Caligula:

But it’s a game without limits. It’s the amuse¬
ment of a madman.
No, Scipio. It is the virtue of an emperor . . .
Oh, my dear friends! I have at last compre¬
hended the uses of power. It gives the im¬
possible some chance. Today and for all time
to come my liberty has no more frontiers.

The world has no meaning and no one seems to guess
this truth? Well! We shall see to it that everyone has
access to the truth of the world, “which is not to have
any.” “Rejoice! An emperor has at last been given you
to teach you liberty.” It is enough to push the absurd to
its final consequences, that is to say, enough to be logical
and remain unflinchingly so. Therefore, let us suppress
all the traditional values which give existence an il¬
lusory significance.
67

Albert Camus

Caligula begins by despoiling rich and poor alike, by
turning the patricians to ridicule, then he kills the sons
and the fathers of his friends, inflicts tortures, starves
the people, degrades virtue, flouts conjugal love, raises
lechery to the rank of civic duty, blasphemes, and ends
up by strangling with his own hands a bothersome mis¬
tress. All this with the exhibitionism of a mountebank
who seems to be applauding his own spirited perform¬
ance. Caligula acts, and watches himself act, his “curious
tragedy.” How far will he go in his experiment with the
impossible? His freedom has demanded everything of
violence, to dress his revolt. But now he is crushed by a
nameless solitude, a solitude “poisoned by presences”
—the presences of his victims. Hate and conspiracy sur¬
round him, hemming him in ever closer, squeezing him
as if in a vise. The impossible has not been attained. At
the moment of paying, fear seizes him. But since nothing
endures, and he is guilty! Stabbed by one of the conspir¬
ators, he shouts, as he expires, “I’m still living!” It is
like a challenge to eternity.
Meursault, condemned to death, remained a victim.
Caligula expiates his crimes as executioner. Certainly,
for the one as for the other, all acts are of equal value
and “to live is the opposite of to love.” But Meursault
kills by mischance, and is not enlightened by his revolt
until the dawn of his punishment, whereas Caligula
68

Caligula

assassinates through reasoning, his point of departure
being his freedom to revolt, through his absolute power.
What more

closely relates

Le

Malentendu and

Caligula is that we see in both the same temptation of
the impossible, the same “superhumanistic” temptation.
In both we have the “painful sentiment of impotence,
the proud revolt against the injustice of such a humilia¬
tion, nostalgia for what man has been, might have been,
could be, anguish caused by the idea of death; all this
complex of passions constituting an intolerable psychosis
for which must be found, if not a remedy, at least an
alleviation.”31 Both Martha and Caligula have sought
this remedy in the Nietzschean “will to power.” Con¬
tempt for their condition has made them respond
to life with arguments of force. What we cannot exceed,
we destroy. But we are not long in becoming the prisoner
of our crimes and of our sterility; defeat, then, authorizes
but one attitude: the destruction of ourselves. And so
we have the suicide of Martha, the “superior” suicide
of Caligula. Between these two epilogues, as between
the two experiments they conclude, there is but a differ¬
ence of weight.
Let us not confine ourselves to the fictional aspects
through whose intense romanticism may be discerned
the political tragedy of our time. Today, still, “the
31 Gabriel-Rey, Humanisme et Surhumanisme, p. 15. Paris, 1951.

69

Albert Camus

misunderstanding” on the scale of peoples, nations,
humanity entire (as Vercors bitterly has noted), de¬
mands that “men of good will cannot recognize each
other.”32 As for the monstrous logic of Caligula-Hitler,
we know only too well what it cost Europe and the
world.
Nonetheless, this should not make us lose sight of the
personal position of the author: a position that is both
negative and expectant. In Caligula, he abandons the
tyrant in obliging him to avow his error: “I did not
follow the course I should have followed, and I ended
up with nothing. My freedom is not the right one.” In
Le Malentendu he abandons the criminal mother by
bringing her to foresee that “in a world where every¬
thing negates itself there are undeniable forces, and
upon this earth where nothing is assured, we have our
certitudes,” which, in the event, is “the love of a mother
for her son.” And this double repudiation, without
letting us presage the orientation of his future work, in¬
dicates a turning point, even so. Are we not assured that
often “we recognize the path to follow by discovering
the paths that lead away from it”?
If the temptation of the impossible is an enticement,
if we must keep in mind “undeniable forces,” then
the liberty of the absurd man suffers a limitation; then
S2 Vercors, Plus ou moins homme, p. 329. Paris, 1950.

70

Caligula

that revolt, the minute it recognizes and respects this
limit, seeks to preserve something ...
2. THE LESSON OF HISTORY
To our sorrow, Caligula made his reentrance upon the
political scene, with the same destructive rage and with
a nationalist mystique in addition. His ghost has been
blamed; there is an effort to prevent his reincarnation.
Let us explain.
The four Lettres a un Ami allemand simultaneously
proclaim a breach with the past and a new examination
of revolt and of the relations that should be established
between absurd thought and action.33
A breach—which lets us suppose that the two friends
were once in accord on certain points—is implied in the
statement, “For a long time we were in agreement that
this world has no superior reason for being, and that
we felt frustrated . . .” (p. 75) A breach, since from
identical concepts different and even opposing ethics
have been inferred: “The thing is that you lightly agreed
to despair and that I never agreed to it. You admitted
33 These letters, which were to an imaginary friend, were “open
letters,” being published clandestinely during the German Occupation
of France. The first was published in 1943 in the second issue of
Revue Libre; the second at the beginning of 1944 in Les Cahiers de
la Liberation; the two others remained unpublished until all were
collected in a volume issued by Gallimard in 1948.

71

Albert Camus

enough injustice in our condition to bring yourself to
add to it, while to me it appeared, on the contrary, that
men should affirm justice in order to struggle against
the eternal injustice, create happiness in order to pro¬
test against the universe of unhappiness. Because you
pushed your despair to the point of rapture, because
you unburdened yourself of it by setting it up as a
principle, you agreed to destroy the works of man by
struggling against him, in order to complete his essential
misery. And I, refusing to admit this despair and this
tortured world, all I wanted was for men to recover
their solidarity, for the purpose of struggling against
their outrageous destiny.” (pp. 76-77)
Precisely, that destiny assumed for five years the
aspect of the Nazi oppressor, and for five years the
multiple front of the Resistance rose against him. How
avoid drawing a parallel and remarking that the revolt
against the absurd likewise springs from a suffering
shared by all? How avoid having the feeling from then
on that such revolt can justify itself only in the same
human solidarity? Thus, the trials of the soul and body
have revealed love.
The vision of death has, for its part, illumined another
movement of the absurd thought. Caligula, slave of his
reasoning, covers himself with blood in his effort to
surpass the gods. Camus chooses justice, to remain
72

Caligula

“faithful to the earth.” And he writes, “I continue to
believe that this world has no superior meaning. But
I know that something in it has meaning: it is man, be¬
cause man is the sole being to insist upon having a
meaning.” (pp. 78-79)
It is no longer a question of pretending that every¬
thing is of equal value, that everything is allowed. The
solution of The Myth of Sisyphus avers itself insufficient,
confined as it is abstractly within the limits of individual
conduct. From the moment revolt overflows this nar¬
row framework, a new problem looms up, which is
no longer that of suicide, but of murder. Reckoning
from the fundamental absurdity, “Can or should one
kill others?” Camus, as a French Resistant, replied in
his own way. There remains to be seen whether his
“taste for justice ... as little reasoned as the most sud¬
den of passions,” can find in thought a reasonable
foundation.
Solidarity and justice, love and respect for mankind,
such are, on the frontiers of the absurd, the new points
of view which will be stressed in the later works.

73

Albert Camus

C. COMPREHENSION, WHICH GOES
BEYOND THE ABSURD
1. THE TRUE HEALER

In 1945, Albert Camus takes his bearings. A little
essay, Remarque sur la revolted marks the stage
reached by his reflection and surveys the new aspect
of his line of thought. “In the absurd experience, suffer¬
ing is individual. From the first movement of revolt, it
is the adventure of all. . . The malady which until then
was suffered by one sole individual becomes collective
Note, particularly, that word “plague” (peste). Al¬
ready, Caligula, having examined himself, had pro¬
claimed the coming of the pestilence: “. . . in short, it
is I who take the place of the plague.” (p. 109) The
word will be the title of the next narrative, and it is to
be presumed that we should regard it as an extension
of the essay.
La Peste (The Plague)35

La Peste was immediately hailed as an event. Only a
few days passed after its publication in June, 1947,
84 Published in the symposium, Existence, Gallimard, 1945.
85 Published by Gallimard, 1947. Its publication in America as The
Plague, had to wait until 1957.

74

The Plague

before the jury of the Prix des Critiques asked the honor
of awarding it their annual prize. The stir it created
was tremendous. Translated into several foreign lan¬
guages, it accomplished in six months the race towards
world recognition which it had taken Malraux’s La Con¬
dition Humaine fifteen years to accomplish (as the
critic, Pierre Neraud de Boisdeffre put it).
And yet, in this wilfully drab narrative, ashen-hued,
in this fresco as uncluttered as a diagram, nothing is
conceded to imagination or sentiment, and everything
is offered to the intellect. The assets usual to success
are completely lacking; the indications of its worth are
without adornment. To what may this paradoxical suc¬
cess be attributed? In fact, we believe that this work
of simple realism presents, on different levels, a sym¬
bolical transparency, where each reader has been able
to find something to satisfy his preoccupation of the
moment, whether metaphysical, ethical, or historical.
The book is presented as being the diary of a witness
who, in the final pages, is revealed to be one of the
heroes of the adventure, Dr. Rieux.
It is a diary without circumlocutions, at the same time
sober and detailed, measured and objective.
a) The Story.
The town of Oran, in no way more predestined than
75

Albert Camus

any other to experience extraordinary events, and like¬
wise no better prepared than any other to endure them,
is overwhelmed, in the year 194..., by the plague. The
narrator sets out, in a simple narration, virile in tone, to
describe simultaneously the progress of the epidemic,
the behavior of the inhabitants, and the struggle against
the pestilence undertaken by some of them.
The epidemic. This shows itself at first in curious
symptoms: rats in ever growing number come to die
in the streets of the town. Then, cases of fever, very
troublesome, break out. After a slight retreat, the epi¬
demic suddenly makes a new spurt. Confronted with
the number of casualties, the Government stops shilly¬
shallying, proclaims the presence of the plague, and puts
the town in quarantine: the gates of the city are shut
and guarded by sentinels.
The plague insinuates itself, working methodically,
without haste. Towards the end of the month of June,
with the first wind that rises, its virulence is intensified.
The statistics show seven hundred deaths a week. A
second lot of serum received from Paris proves to be
even less efficacious than the first lot. The statistics in¬
dicate a continuous rise in the death rate, while the
disease takes a new form, becoming pulmonary. In the
middle of August, at the time of greatest heat and wind,
the disease reaches its culminating point. At the same
76

The Plague

time, it is seen to be moving from the outskirts of the
town, where it seemed to be confined, towards the
centre. Then come the rains of September and October:
people wait expectantly for a change. But there is no
change. The serum “manufactured with cultures of the
very microbe infesting the town” is tried without im¬
mediate result. November comes: the daily hecatomb
still reaches the same figure. Nonetheless, it seems that
the epidemic has reached its peak. Succeeding its light¬
ning-swift rise, there is a levelling off which, by some,
is considered to be a reassuring sign. Nevertheless, with
the cold days of December, upon which everyone had
counted to stop the progress of the epidemic, it con¬
tinues imperturbably to accumulate its assassinations
with the same rhythm, the same regularity. “Yes, efforts
must be renewed . . .”
One day, a case of pulmonary fever is checked just
when all seemed lost. That first victory is to be shortly
followed by others, Almost at the same time, the rats
reappear, but alive, this time. The statistics finally in¬
dicate the recession of the epidemic. During the month
of January, the serum, time after time, proves efficient
beyond expectation. The plague is put to rout. After a
few fits and starts, as of a wounded animal, it returns to
“the unknown lair from which it had emerged, in si¬
lence.”
77

Albert Camus

The town of Oran reopens its gates and once more
yields itself to carefree sleep.
The inhabitants. Their feelings could be inscribed on
the same graph in two lines, one of which would in¬
terpret the progress of fear, the other the evolution of
the emotive life separated from loved objects and dis¬
possessed of affections. The former line would maintain
itself for a certain time stationary, then would rise im¬
perceptibly to the level of fright, then almost vertically
to the acme of panic; it would then slowly zigzag down,
stabilizing itself in a zone of dejection, and prudently
would return, despite some oscillations of impatience,
towards the zero of indifference and of blind tranquil¬
lity. The latter line—of the emotive life—would shoot
up almost in a vertical line to a sharp peak of heart¬
break—separation, exile—would pass to the highest
point of suffering, of the disembodiment of memory,
then, sentiment having become emptied of all personal
content, would adjust itself to the long waiting for the
plague to withdraw; a contained, circumspect hope
coinciding with the first victories over the disease, would
then be led to an intermediary stage, from which it
would plunge, after a few contradictory movements of
excitation and depression, into the euphoria of reunions
with loved ones, and of a resumed routine.
As for the reactions of the inhabitants, they are those
78

The Plague

of any human community disturbed in its habits. These
people who formerly gave themselves up to an existence
devoid of suspicion, to the servile slumber of the absurd,
will endure the absurdity of the plague with the same
passivity. Most of them will elude it by stupefying them¬
selves in cafes and cinemas. Some will seek a surer
refuge in religion, with all the more application for
having neglected it so long. Others, finally, the “sharp
ones,” will take advantage of the general disorder to go
in for shady deals, and they will establish a kind of
black market.
The fighters. Against this background of collective
misery and egoistic preoccupations, some individuals
in revolt against the plague are sharply silhouetted.
These are the Rieux, the Tarrous, Ramberts, Grands,
and Paneloux, who will organize the medical resistance
against the epidemic and who, every day, will expose
themselves to the contagion of each other’s determina¬
tion to make the cause of man triumph. Thanks to them,
hospital units are set up, isolation camps are created,
the burial of the dead is organized. The fighters are
present on all fronts.
Although they have plunged unreservedly into this
active work, they are not swamped by it. The harassing
task which insensibly exhausts them, will never abolish
in them the prerogatives of the mind. . . . On the con79

Albert Camus

trary, in this daily contest with suffering and death,
they commune with themselves, their thought takes
precise form, with every nuance and illumination. Dur¬
ing certain moments they steal from the tragic reality,
the better to dominate it by reflection, discussion, the
give and take of friendships; we are given a glimpse of
the depth of their motives, and this obliges us to read
beyond the fictional narrative.
b) Beyond the story.
The epigraph, which quotes Daniel Defoe, invites
us to surpass the realism of the work—a symbolical
realism—and to penetrate its veritable reality: “It is as
reasonable to represent one kind of imprisonment by an¬
other, as it is to represent anything that really exists
by that which exists not.”
At the moment when the book appeared, minds
barely delivered from the nightmare of the dark years
of the war quite naturally were inclined to recognize
the plague as being the German Occupation and the
struggle against the epidemic as the very action of the
Resistance. We must say that these transpositions of¬
fered no difficulty at all and that, in addition, enough
was recalled of the author’s militant attitude to make
one feel authorized to make such transpositions.
But it would be narrowing the significance of the
80

The Plague

work not to receive it except under color of an allegory
inspired by circumstances. It would be to forget the
reasoning of Camus, ever advancing since Le Mythe
de Sisyphe and constantly being shaped by experience.
The Lettres a un Ami allemand have already given
glimpses of the sense in which history had engaged the
forward movement of Camus’ thought. To discover
that one is implicated in an adventure shared by others
and that the same heartbreak establishes a complicity
which it is impossible to evade—when one is called
Sisyphus and carries within oneself the experience of
all the Sisyphuses on earth—is to discover by analogy
that one no more acts for oneself alone in the lucid re¬
volt against the irrationality of the world than in the
armed resistance to the oppression of the invader. In
the individual, as in the general and organized revolt,
the solidarity of human beings is revealed, and in return
that solidarity brings its veritable justification to revolt.
Thus, the plague symbolizes at times this existence
immured by the absurd, where we flounder about, and
at other times, the evil witnessed by the suffering of
the world and the sufferings of the innocent; at still
other times, those baneful powers which work in us
and which threaten, if we do not take care, to add still
more to the misery of our condition. La Peste, rather
than being an exalting of the Resistance, thus appears,
81

Albert Camus

in a roundabout manner, the manner of fiction, as a
definition of a humanism faithful to human dignity
and, in its widest bounds, despite its lack of the tran¬
scendental, a humanism open to a sacred interpretation.
It remains to be asked to what extent this work is,
from the aesthetic point of view, a fable, and to what
extent a realistic novel.
Certainly, its multivalent symbolism and the com¬
plexity of the decoding to which it lends itself, situates
La Peste beyond the realm peculiar to allegory, the in¬
tentions of which are always clear and precise, allowing
a simple tracing off, line by line. Furthermore, the con¬
tent of each symbol does not coincide in all respects with
the reality which informs it and the expression of the
reality does not always attain the level of symbolism.
Admitting for a moment that the plague represents the
German Occupation, let us indulge in the game of equiv¬
alences: we will manage to establish a certain number of
them, but we have to concede that historical reality is
not exhausted by the narrative and that the narrative de¬
velops more than one theme without reference to his¬
torical reality. Thus, we search vainly, in this “anti¬
terrorism manifesto,” for the symbol corresponding to
the worst undertaking of terror and humiliation that
men of our time have invented against their fellow men:
the concentration camp. In other respects we may easily
82

The Plague

find in this narrative thousands of details, even episodes,
which echo no historical event but which the logic of
realism renders indispensable.
For this is the relation of an event—no doubt imagi¬
nary, but not unreal—that is to say, it is an objective
relation of events situated in time (“in 194...”) and
space (“the town of Oran”). These events and the
individuals involved in them, are presented to us by
the narrator according to all the laws of probability.
He may never have experienced any plague, but he
has informed himself on the subject. Historically, to
begin with: as witness this or that meditation of Dr.
Rieux, this or that bookish recollection referred to in
passing. Then, medically.
But never are the epidemic and its ravages evoked for
their own sake. They constitute a framework of facts
which subtend the expression of human suffering, the
expression of revolt inspired by such suffering. And the
writer assumes the existence of that revolt, not only
through the attitude of his heroes but equally in the
transfiguration he imposes upon reality. As was to be
later specified in L’Homme Revolte, “Real literary crea¬
tion . . . employs reality and only reality with all its
warmth and its blood, its passion and outcries. It merely
adds something that transfigures reality.” (p. 333) That
“something” here, is a summing up of the artist’s protest
83

Albert Camus

against unjust conditions. That something, added to
reality in Camus’ work, causes the great wind of pity
and sympathy which blows through it, prolonging and
multiplying it beyond the anecdote in a cross-fire of
symbols. We have only to imagine for a moment what
Jean-Paul Sartre, for example, might have drawn from
such a subject, what scenes of horror and violence, what
trifling details his clinical eye would have brought to
our notice, to form an exact opinion of the rebellious,
slightly unfocused, stylized view that Camus gives of
the world in La Peste, always ready to “satisfy the need
for freedom and dignity in the heart of every man.” “A
cryptic realism,” Rachel Bespaloff calls this realism
which, while recreating reality, maintains the preroga¬
tives of a rebellious consciousness and dispels the opac¬
ity of things, allowing the underlying thought to appear.
The protagonists. More than anything, the characters
themselves represent a reply to the problem of evil. It is
through them that the author pursues his search for an
order of values in humanity’s blind-alley existence. The
characters have often been criticized for their lack of
real solidity. One critic has even claimed not to see
anything in them but a makeshift in the Camus order
of aesthetics, and has asserted that obviously, had
Camus been able to do so, he would have contented
himself with a bare stage from which only voices would
84

The Plague

be heard, thus conveying his thought to us in all its
conceptual purity. No doubt the prestige of this thought
has hypnotized most critics, and the rather colorless
sobriety of the tangible exhibits has been unable to
counter what was, by and large, a biased reading. None¬
theless, it must be admitted that the physical descrip¬
tions of the characters often smack of the passport or
the identity card, rather than of authentic fictional crea¬
tions. Are we otherwise instructed as to their personality,
their type, the characteristics that make each individual
a unique and irreplaceable human being? Not very
much.36 Hence, when they confront each other in dia¬
logue, we are always witnessing a confrontation, never
a conflict of personalities.
If their creator withheld from them the keen breath
of a passionately imaginative life, it is because he did
not propose to launch them into the free exercise of
their lives, allowing them to accomplish their destinies
in their own way by the simple operation of their feel¬
ings. The role he assigned them is better defined and
consequently more restricted, more linear. In effect,
the life in which they are all equally caught up has
plunged them suddenly into a night of misfortune, in86 Grand, the most effaced of all the characters, must be excepted.
Paradoxically he is the only one to possess real solidity; we shaff ex¬
plain this later on.

85

Albert Camus

justice, and suffering, and in this crisis the demand that
is made is not upon the entire individual but upon
that part of him which concerns his dignity. Each one
is expected to reply to the question that is put to all,
at the same instant and in the same terms. And each
one is a man confronting the condition of mankind, not
an individual contending with his personal problems.
That is why, though their faces and souls remain in
shadow, they compensate by demonstrating so strong
a moral personality. The plague, far from infecting them,
strengthens them; it is the test which reveals instead
of dissolving, which concentrates instead of disconcert¬
ing; it is the fortuitous tragedy between the limits of
which is expressed a drama much more vast, and which
calls upon a man to specify the relations between his
thought and his behavior.
Without being any one of his characters, even in op¬
position, Camus is no less found to be represented by
all of them.37 But each one of Camus’ characters, diverse
as they are, illustrates an aspect of his thought, and with
all the more truth since that thought seeks to outdo it¬
self in contradictory hesitations. But finally, given the
right perspective, the thought appears, like a design
in mosaics, revealing and reassembling its outlines.
37 A confirmation of this may be found in Camus’ remark on Sade:
“A character is never the author who created him; but an author may
quite likely be all his characters at once.”

86

The Plague

The thought. It is not without reason that the book
opens with a description of the town and of the life that
the inhabitants lead there, or that the author hastens to
emphasize the banality of the setting—“to sum up, a
neutral kind of place”—and the habits contracted there,
which are like a natural secretion. The theme of autom¬
atism which daily weaves lives together was sugges¬
tively illustrated in the pages of L’Etranger; here it
forms a backdrop sufficiently featureless for us to lose
sight of the fact that these are citizens of Oran, suffi¬
ciently impersonal for us to discover here the very rep¬
lica of our slumbering consciousness.
A stranger in town, “the stranger” being a certain
Tarrou, about whom “no one could say where he came
from or why he was there,” records in his notebooks,
with a visible penchant for the insignificant detail, his
observations, reflections, and considerations as to people
and things. In certain ways he rather resembles Meursault. He has the same taste for sensation, the same
liking for the display of naked flesh on beaches and at
watering resorts, the same mania for collecting trifles—
Meursault keeps a scrapbook in which he pastes amus¬
ing pictures cut out of his newspaper, while Tarrou
takes pleasure in collecting grotesque scenes, conversa¬
tions devoid of interest, comic situations which he has
caught in the net of his absurdist perception while
87

Albert Camus

strolling about the town. Identical behavior of the two
characters, linked with different personalities. In con¬
trast with his predecessor, Tarrou maintains himself in
a condition of absolute lucidity. His voluntary exile and
his unwonted diligence as chronicler appear in some
kind of way as auxiliaries of this viligance. No doubt,
Tarrou has read and pondered Le Mythe de Sisyphe.
Nevertheless he does not seem to be at all set in his
conclusions. We are intrigued when he says, “The only
thing that interests me is to find inner peace.” (p. 39)
And when we hear him calmly affirm that he has no
more to learn from life, we try to imagine the tormented
past to which he could be referring. Yes, Tarrou has a
story to tell, and one night, in an hour of friendship, he
will tell it to Dr. Rieux.
It had all started that day when he was barely seven¬
teen and had heard his father, a Prosecuting Attorney,
demand in the name of society the execution of a con¬
victed criminal. He was overwhelmed with an actual
nausea, but held out against it for almost a year. Then,
not able to stand it longer, he left home, resolved to de¬
feat that society which was based on capital punishment.
He joined a political party whose actions seemed to
promise the establishing of a new order based on honor
and respect for mankind, and threw himself body and
soul into the struggle. Alas, in the new order as well as
88

The Plague

in the old, death sentences could not be avoided; he dis¬
covered that one is fatally led to assassination. One day
he witnessed an execution and experienced the same
vertiginous feeling that had overwhelmed him as a
boy. This made him vacillate. The horror of the spectacle
still haunted him. “Do you know that at such a short
range the shooting squad aim at the region of the heart,
and that with their big bullets they make a hole you
could put your fist into?” (p. 275) Terrible but necessary
sacrifices on the altar of an ideal! Thus Tarrou discovers
that he has become an accomplice of evil in his effort
to reduce it to impotence, and that no reason is ad¬
missible which, in any way, seeks to legalize murder.
He withdraws from the combat. “From now on,” he re¬
flects, “I leave it to others to make history.” (p. 278) He
does not blame the others, he does not consider himself
in a position to judge them, and he even continues to
like them. Simply, he notes that it has become intoler¬
able to be with them and to continue to be a plaguestricken person; that is to say, intolerable to have a heart
contaminated by evil, a heart that finds nothing better
than to consent to it or to become its agent. Henceforth,
the only way to “comfort mankind and, if not to save
them, at least to do them the least possible harm and
even sometimes a little good,” is to force oneself to at¬
tain to an inner purity by a constant and exhausting
59

Albert Camus

struggle against the microbe that one carries within
oneself;38 at the very least, “to watch oneself unceasingly
so as not to be brought, in a moment of distraction, to
breathe in someone’s face and clap the infection onto
him.” (p. 277) But the fact remains that one always
risks, despite the most scrupulous attention, ranging
oneself on the side of the pestilence rather than on the
side of the victims. Tarrou is not unaware of this. If it
is permitted him to refrain from ever being a “reasonable
murderer,” he dares not depart from the modesty which
allows him only to try to be “an innocent murderer.”
Executioners or victims; victims—executioners. “Natu¬
rally, there has to be a third category,” and Tarrou can¬
not refrain from evoking this category, while measuring
the distance which separates him from it: the category
of the “true healers,” of those who are content not only
to attend the sick because such is their profession, but
who, having vanquished the plague in the sick bodies,
have let themselves be penetrated by love and uplifted
38 Charles Moeller has in this connection noted the new preoccupa¬
tion that Tarrou introduces into the universe of Camus: “With him,
the theme of moral evil, the evil that men inflict upon each other,
reaches its greatest depth.” (Op. cit., pp. 58-59.) And he recalls to
mind (notes 8 and 12) the words of Scipio as to Caligula’s scruples
before his conversion to the absurd: “He often repeated that to cause
suffering was the only way of fooling oneself.” This comparison of
ideas reveals the superior unity in which the thought of the writer
shapes up from one work to another, as we have noted elsewhere.

90

The Plague

by revolt, at contact with human misery. Their love of
creation is such that their personal happiness is sought
outside themselves, in a possible happiness for all the
humiliated; their sentiment of revolt in face of creation
is such that their professional action is sublimated in a
hopeless struggle against death. Tarrou hastens to add
that “one doesn’t run across many of them,” and that
“it must be difficult.” In concluding his story, he makes
a final confession, which singularly clarifies the first.
“Can one be a saint without God? That’s the only con¬
crete problem I know of today.” (p. 279) Upon the ex¬
perimental solution of this problem depends, in effect,
the “inner peace” to which he aspires.
It is on the road which, beyond murderous innocence,
leads to saintliness without God that the plague has
caught Tarrou. We realize that it has taught him noth¬
ing, not even—especially not even—his solidarity with
those who have chosen to combat it. For him, the epi¬
demic represents a particular instance of the diffused
and immanent pestilence, whose ethical and metaphy¬
sical modes of infection he has for a long time recog¬
nized.39 Up to a certain point, one might perhaps even
39 A question presents itself: does the author consider this evil as
inherent in the nature of things, like an ineluctable fatality? Or, on the
contrary, does he hold it as the penalty for an accidental weakness,
a disorder characteristic of our time, a “psychosis” of the twentieth
century? R.-M. Alberes makes the remark that “Camus still wavers

91

Albert Camus

say the plague has come to confirm him in his inner
convictions, and has allowed him to draw a little nearer
the ideal which preyed upon his mind. We know that
Tarrou helps Dr. Rieux to the very best of his powers.
The plague lays him low at the very moment when
victory appears to be, if not achieved, at least near.
Rieux, who attended the dying Tarrou, does not know
whether his friend found peace. There only remains
in his heart the painful intuition that “for himself, there
would never more be any possible peace.”
To Dr. Rieux is entrusted not only the role of narrator
but the mission of representing the type of “true healer”.
A narrator he is, because, having collected the most
complete information on the history of this epidemic.

between these two positions,” but that “in some of his writings he
inclines towards the optimistic response, towards the idea that Evil
is not totally congenital and that it can be historically surmounted.”

(Les Hommes Traques, Paris, 1953.) He then cites this sentence in
La Peste (p. 150): The evil that is in the world almost always derives
from ignorance, and good intentions, if unenlightened, can do as much
harm as malevolence.” Let us in our turn quote from the same page,
a few lines farther down: “. . . the most incorrigible vice being that
of ignorance which presumes to know everything and which therefore
claims the right to kill. Without possible doubt, Camus is aiming
here at the evil born of History, that evil of ideologies against which

L’Homme Revolte will take such vehement stand. Already in 1948
Camus declared, in the course of an interview: “My personal position,
as much as it can be defended, is to estimate that if men are not
innocent, they are guilty only of ignorance. This idea should be
developed.” (Actuelles, p. 225)

92

The Plague

he has felt it his duty to bear witness for the victims and
to “tell quite simply what we learn in the time of pesti¬
lence, that there are more things to admire in men than
to despise.” (p. 336) A true healer he will be, not after
having, like Tarrou, asked himself how to become one,
but starting out with loving, in all humility, to do his
duty, correctly and honestly. He, too, has his story. It
is brief: “When I first entered this profession, I did it
almost absent-mindedly, because I needed it, because
it was a situation like any other, and one of those situa¬
tions to which young men aspire. Perhaps also because
it was particularly difficult for the son of a workingman
such as I was. And then, I had to see someone die.”
(pp. 146-147) That was when something broke in him:
his revolt, which raged against the very order of a world
ruled by death. Death! That, certainly, was the worst
of scandals! Bernard Rieux can no more believe in God
than can Tarrou. For if man does not live in perfect in¬
nocence (what to say of his crimes, his wars, his in¬
justices?) there are at least the children—and they die!
But you cannot change the order of the world, and God
does not exist. Faced with the seemingly hopeless situa¬
tion, one feels the need to be more self-effacing.
The movement of revolt that springs from the vision
of human suffering, while bringing to fight the com¬
monality of the condition which finks him to his fellow
93

Albert Camus

men, renders the physician vulnerable to sympathy and
shows him the meaning of the action to which he must
dedicate himself: the struggle against evil. To attend the
wound, the fracture, the organ attacked by the malady,
the bubo and the dry cough, with the unique concern
of rescuing sick bodies from suffering as rapidly as pos¬
sible. To defend mankind against death, without los¬
ing sight of the fact that all victory is but temporary,
and that sooner or later death will triumph. To attend,
but not to save. Rieux clearly stipulates it to Father
Paneloux: “Salvation is too big a word for me. I don’t
go that far. It’s man’s health that interests me, his health
comes first.” (p. 241) Thus, without circumlocutions,
he affirms his determination for earthly happiness in
the midst of a universe closed to the idea of any kind
of salvation.40 Having established “such a clear demarca¬
tion between the idea of happiness and the idea of sal¬
vation,” as Andre Rousseaux has emphasized,41 the
novelist maintains his thought quite unequivocally.
40 In January, 1945, Camus expressed himself in an editorial in

Combat in the same terms, regarding an article by Frangois Mauriac:
. . . We refuse to despair of mankind. Without having the un¬
reasonable ambition to save men, we still want to serve them.”
(Actuelles, p. 74).
41 “Albert Camus et la philosophic du bonheur,” in Litterature du

XXe siecle, Paris, 1949.

94

The Plague

Moreover, it is by the logic of the same intellectual
honesty that his mouthpiece declares himself to have no
least taste for heroism and saintliness. This physician
who is daily called upon to perform tasks without
grandeur has remained in the very midst of the plague.
True, he has had to extend his activity, has sometimes
increased it to the verge of exhaustion; but within him
nothing has changed, he has extended himself faithfully
with an abstention that secures him against all false
self-glorification and keeps him within the bounds of
his ideal: to be a man.
The narrator does not fail to proclaim this priority
of happiness in the very heart of his chronicle. “Let us
give the truth its due,” he specifies, “and heroism the
secondary place it should have, immediately after, never
before, the noble claim of happiness.” (p. 157) It is
therefore not astonishing to hear him approve the con¬
duct of Rambert, the journalist, who, far from throwing
in his lot with those struggling against the epidemic,
does all he can to escape, spurred by his love for his
mistress who has remained in Paris. Then we remember
that Rieux has allowed his own wife, who has been ill
for a year, to go away to a mountain resort, where she
dies shortly afterwards. He loved her dearly. Why did
he not go away, rejoin her? He could have surrounded
95

Albert Camus

her with care, could have retarded her death or per¬
haps, who knows, could have cured her. Why, precisely,
should he have turned his back upon that happiness for
which the appetite of others seems to him so warranted?
We would not dare to reply since he has abstained from
doing so. “Nothing in the world is worth turning one’s
back on what we love. And yet, I turn away, I, too,
without being able to figure out why.” (p. 230) All the
same, in this blind and as if necessary choice of the
finest and most difficult action, something is revealed
to us of the force of an imperative transcending every
kind of moral reflection. A creative force. His conscience
torn, Rambert in his turn will not be long in feeling sub¬
jugated by it and irresistibly constrained to renounce
his egoistic resolve: “I’ve always felt I was a stranger
in this town and that I’d no concern with you. But now
that I’ve seen what I’ve seen, I know that I belong here,
whether I want to or not. This affair concerns all of us.”
(p. 230) In vain was he told that “there’s no shame in
preferring happiness,” that if he wanted to share the
misfortunes of mankind, “there would never be time
for happiness.” Nothing could shake his resolve. He had
chosen, he would stay, he would fight. And the convic¬
tion which dominates him in all its grandeur of shining
truth, though not supported by any value, founds and
inaugurates a new one: There can be cause for shame
96

The Plague

in being happy all alone.*2 No sensitive heart can keep
from responding to human suffering with sympathy. A

fortiori, a heart in revolt against the absurdity of man’s
fate.

Sympathy. A noble yet restrained sympathy blows
like a fresh breeze through the entire body of Camus’
work. You expect at any moment to have it break forth
in an effusion of warmth, but the author’s sense of the
proprieties permits him only to use accents of sober
virility, as if he sought to avoid all prodigality.
To be moved to pity for a plague victim does not ever
signify, with Camus, a weakening, but rather the ex¬
change of one’s own exile with that of one’s companion
in misery. How far we are, in La Peste, from the in¬
communicable solitudes of VEtranger! Here the barriers
are thrown down, the roads converge towards some high
destination. Faced with its condition, the human com¬
munity tends to recreate itself from one individual to
another, within the bounds of a secret fraternity. Even
these “awakened sleepers” who constitute the majority
of the Oran inhabitants have in the long run come to
understand that “the plague concerns everybody.”
42 The youthful sensitivity which vibrates in the first essay of Noces
is content with a justification otherwise cramped: “There is no shame
in being happy.” (p. 23) Which allows us once more to remark upon
how the theme of happiness, fundamental with Camus, is enlarged in
La Peste.

97

Albert Camus

The human material of L’Etranger, buried beneath
the greyish lava of insignificance, formed around the
central character, rigid and colorless, a blur from which
he emerged only to emphasize its disgusting platitude.
In La Peste, the grey tints of the painting of absurdity
are relieved by the pathetic highlights of flesh and
blood; the outlines become clearer, the forms more vul¬
nerable; the “pantomime devoid of meaning” of the hu¬
man marionettes writhes occasionally in cruel and
ridiculous convulsions but at times attains a deeply mov¬
ing dignity. Pity spontaneously responds to suffering,
and in some circumstances with such impulsive totality
that the individual ceases to have a life of his own. For
example, that page which Robert de Luppe has called
“one of the culminating pages of the narrative, the
blood-red rose-window of a cathedral,” shows us Dr.
Rieux physically sharing, rather than witnessing, the
death agony of Judge Otho’s child, anxious, as if by some
occult transmission of vital force, to “sustain by his still
intact strength” the suffering infant, seeking in a tension
of his whole being to assume the burden of the inno¬
cent’s torment.
Usually less exalted, the sympathy of the “true healer”
reveals itself no less actively. The painful situations
created by the event do not monopolize it. All suffering
finds it responsive, even moral suffering, even senti98

The Plague

mental, even obscure. The suffering of a Joseph Grand,
for example.
This character resembles Meursault on more than one
point. Like Meursault, he is a humble employee, in his
existence as in his person; he presents “all the earmarks
of insignificance.” Even to the mysterious literary work
that occupies his leisure time, he is identifiable with
the “absurd” hero. His particular phrase, that phrase
rewritten again and again, that first phrase of a novel
that will never advance further, defines his limitations.
The difficulty he has in finding the mot juste has always
kept him from writing the letter of complaint which
should set forth his legitimate rights to a promotion and
explains why at his age he is still kept in a subordinate
position, poorly paid. Although ambition has never
spurred him on, nonetheless he had caressed the hope of
a future that would amply assure him his material life
while giving him the possibility of “indulging without
remorse in his favorite occupations.” Joseph Grand has,
you see, an ideal.
But what finally differentiates him from “the stranger”
and renders him so close to us is the quality of his sensi¬
tive and virtuous heart. “He did not blush to admit that
he loved his nephews and his sister, his only surviving
relatives whom he visited in France every other year. He
admitted that the memory of his parents, who had died
99

Albert Camus

when he was still young, caused him grief. He did not
hesitate to admit that he loved above everything a cer¬
tain church bell in his neighborhood which softly pealed
towards five o’clock in the afternoon.” (p. 59)
One day this normally shy person, encouraged by the
understanding friendship of Rieux, discloses his secret
wound. Grand recounts his story, with a reserve that
renders it very poignant. While still quite young, he had
married a poor girl of his neighborhood. Monopolized by
his office work, which held out hopes at the time, he had
insensibly allowed the fire of his love to die down. “A
man who has a job, poverty, the future gradually closing
in, the silence of the evenings around the supper table,
there’s no place for passion in such a universe.” (p. 97)
However, his situation did not improve. Jeanne, his wife,
must have suffered in silence. After several years, utterly
wearied, she had resigned herself to leave him. “Joseph
Grand in his turn had suffered. He could have made a
fresh start, as Rieux reminded him. But there you are, he
did not have the necessary faith. Only, he still thought
of her. What he would have liked, was to write to her,
justifying himself.” (p. 98) The emotion that grips the
poor man would invade us if the author had not fixed
it in an unexpectedly grotesque image: “Grand blew his
nose in a kind of checked napkin. Then he wiped his
100

The Plague

moustache.” Rieux, it is laconically added, “gazed at
him.” (p. 98)
This confidential scene was to have, a few months
later, a singularly pathetic heightening. Here are the
facts. Grand, feeling the first symptoms of the disease,
had gone to wander in the streets, “his features queerly
contorted.” Warned of this, Rieux had gone everywhere
in search of him and had finally found him in tears,
“almost glued to a window display of crudely carved
wooden toys”—very like that Christmas shop in front of
which had been decided his marriage with Jeanne. And
he opens his heart again, but, the anguish of death pro¬
jecting his old grief into an abyss of distress, he is
hounded by the old desire to explain himself in a letter
to Jeanne so that she could “be happy without remorse.”
Here, nothing any longer effaces the emotion. And if
Rieux does not pronounce a word, his silence is a suf¬
ficiently explicit response: “ . . . his tears overwhelmed
Rieux because he could understand them and felt his
own tears welling up.... This distress was his, and what
wrung his heart at that moment was the passionate in¬
dignation a man feels when confronting the grief that
all men share.” (pp. 286-287)
We have said that Grand is the only character in the
book possessing the consistency of a real hero of a novel.
101

Albert Camus

First of all, this is true of him physically. “He was a
man of about fifty years of age, tall and bent-shouldered,
with thin arms and legs, and a yellowish moustache.”
(p. 29) Thus sketched from his entrance on the stage,
when he seems to have only a walk-on part, this portrait
will later be dwelt upon as to the main features, height¬
ened as to colors by psychological and moral analysis.
“At first sight, in effect, Joseph Grand was nothing more
than what he looked like, a humble municipal office
worker. Tall and thin, his clothes hung loosely upon him,
being always too big, for he was under the illusion that,
cut large, they would wear longer. Though he still had
most of his lower teeth, he had lost those of the upper
jaw, with the result that when his upper lip was raised in
a smile, his mouth was a dark hole in his face. If we add
to this portrait some additional characteristics—that he
had the walk of a young seminarist, sidling along the
walls and slipping into doorways, that he exuded the
faint odor of smoke-filled basement rooms, that he had
all the attributes of insignificance—it will be seen that
one could not imagine him anywhere except at an office
desk, studiously revising the tariff of the public baths or
gathering together for a junior editor the materials for a
report on the new garbage-collection tax. Even if not
forewarned, you had the feeling that he had been put
into the world for the sole purpose of performing the
102

The Plague

discreet but indispensable duties of a temporary assist¬
ant municipal clerk at sixty-two francs thirty centimes a
day. ... In a certain sense, one might well say that his
life was exemplary. He was one of those men, rare in
our town as elsewhere, who always have the courage of
their good feelings. The little that he confided of himself
testified, in effect, to acts of kindness and a capacity for
affection that no one dares own to in our times.” (pp. 5657, 59) We have purposely underlined three portions of
this passage: the author, it is evident, forestalls us in
judging of the unity of this individual: the perfect ade¬
quacy of his physical aspect, social function and charac¬
ter confers upon him a real intensity of presence.
Psychologically, his “manias” finally render him un¬
forgettable. “Rieux had already noted Grand’s mania for
quoting the turns of speech common in his birthplace,
Montelimar, and following up with hackneyed ex¬
pressions that came from nowhere, as for instance,
“divine weather,” or “a magical effect.” (p. 55) And
then, there is the mysterious literary work, that phrase
constantly rewritten: “One fine morning in May, a slim
horsewoman, mounted on a handsome chestnut mare,
was riding along the flowering bridle paths of the Bois
de Boulogne.” Here again the profound unity of the
character is confirmed. There is not one situation in
which we are not made to remark that Grand “seemed to
103

Albert Camus

search for words,” that he “showed finickiness in the
choice of expressions,” that he “stammered,” that “the
words came stumbling out of his ill-furnished mouth,”
etc. It might be said that this infirmity finds, in the
derisory ideal to which he is dedicated, a tragic prefer¬
ment. It has weighed upon his life like a fatality, bring¬
ing about a heartbreak of which he has not been cured.
Because of this infirmity he has been unable to write the
letter which would have set forth his rights to an ad¬
vancement; because of this infirmity, when his wife was
growing weary of him, he was unable to “find the words
which would have held her”; and again it is this infirmity
which still keeps him from writing the letter which
would justify him in the eyes of his beloved. Between
these two impossible letters have been drawn on the
chart of his life the curve of his destiny, the curve of his
suffering. As we say of an actor, that he “fits his part,”
the fictional character, Joseph Grand, “fits” reality. Con¬
sidering the extent to which he seems to have impressed
his very creator, it would not surprise us to learn that he
was drawn from life.
Although revealed in a more subtle and insistent light,
Joseph Grand plays only a small part, a little in the back¬
ground. He emerges from the shadows only to return,
but we are given, in the moments when his face passes
under the full fight, a staggering glimpse of what the
104

The Plague

human vocation is, we experience it through him: it is a
vocation of suffering and of humble grandeur. Although
he fights the plague in his own way, by trying to estab¬
lish correctly the statistics for the sanitary squads,
Grand still remains absorbed in his own drama: the
“slender horsewoman” of his literary efforts, and the
memory of Jeanne, the two phantoms alternating in his
nostalgic reveries. Between Rieux, who has unhesitat¬
ingly turned his back on personal happiness to throw
himself wholeheartedly into the fight, and Rambert, who
has joined it after a struggle with his conscience, Grand
will represent that category of individuals who are im¬
pelled by a kind of sure and noble instinct to do what is
necessary in time of misfortune, without any choice or
renouncement on his part, and without any least dis¬
placement of the axis round which revolves their absurd,
myopic world. “. . .The plague is here, we’ve got to
defend ourselves, evidently. Oh, if everything was that
simple!” And Grand, the narrator adds, “went back to
his sentence.” The reader cannot help smiling. The
caricatural nature of the little man, whose pitiable ridic¬
ulousness is always underscored, goes beyond the merely
picturesque and becomes charged with an important
symbolical meaning. The “true healers,” the “saints with¬
out God,” emerge from the human flood and their noble
faces, a little fixed in their expressions, risk giving to
105

Albert Camus

heroism an exceptional profile and a preeminence above
happiness which the author, as we know, discounte¬
nances. But Grand’s moustache, his “mouth like a dark
hole,” his round hat, his jumping-jack gesticulations, his
sentimental moments, his manias prevent any hyper¬
bolic interpretation. “Yes, if it’s true that men like to
hold up examples and types that they can call heroes,
and if there must absolutely be some heroes in this
story, the narrator commends to his readers this insignifi¬
cant and obscure hero, who had to his credit only a little
kind-heartedness and a seemingly ridiculous ideal.”
(p. 156)
Mediocre like that anonymous throng of people
scourged by the Angel of the Plague “on the bloody
threshing floor of pain,” his heart crushed, Joseph Grand,
beloved child of Camus, steps out of the rank and file to
bear witness in his suffering and in his obscure courage
to a dignity that the superior characters maintain in
a clear-sighted revolt. It is to him, much more than to
Rieux or Tarrou, that the narrative owes the best part
of its optimism: there are more things in men to admire

than to despise.
In short, the thought that emerges from La Peste,
without disavowing the rather limited conclusions of

Le Mythe de Sisyphe, marks the culmination of a theo¬
rizing on the absurd, extended to the certitude that
106

The Plague

“man, without the help of the Eternal or of rationalistic
thought, can create, all by himself, his own values.”
(Actuelles, p. Ill) Yes, the individual is the captive of
an incomprehensible universe, against which his desire
for coherence and his passion for justice miserably col¬
lide. Yes, his abandonment is irremediable, definitive,
and the evil of which he is the prey is a pure absurdity.
His sense of dignity commands him to reject this mis¬
fortune, which he shares with his fellow men; hence his
revolt, but a revolt that postulates the greatest solidarity
with his fellow men. Henceforth Sisyphus will no
longer be alone; the stone he rolls will no longer be only
his stone, and in the painful effort that he furnishes to
push it up and immobilize it for a moment at the top
of the hill (since the stone will fall down again, since
the dead rats will reappear in the happy city), Sisyphus
will perhaps approach that supreme gladness of soul
in which his love will have gathered together all the
joys of the world.
Paradoxically, this work, so magnificently optimistic,
in which it is demonstrated that “a spontaneous appeal
of his nature, an innate feeling of sympathy suffice to
impel man towards grandeur,”43 this work completely
impregnated with charity and with a meaning under¬
standable to Christians, is assuredly the most anti43 Pierre-Henri Simon, Temoins de VHomme, p. 192. Paris, 1951.

107

Albert Camus

Christian of all the books of Camus. For it signally con¬
stitutes the work which aims to prove most clearly that
man is in a position to edify, without God, a humanism
of high nobility. Of such nobility that, at its highest,
it approaches the realm of holiness. Moreover, human¬
ism of this sort regards the Christian as an untrustworthy
ally. Camus will always reproach the Father Paneloux
who was capable of preaching that first sermon justifying the scourge and holding it up as divine punishment,
thus subjecting man to sterile submission. The Father
Paneloux of the second sermon, the one who, confronted
with the death agony of a child, felt the collapse of his
abstract concept of suffering, will always be reproached
by Rieux for having abdicated his reason to preach
a faith blindly consenting to evil, thus plunging into the
hell of a completely Jansenist pessimism. “When an in¬
nocent boy can have his eyes put out,” says Tarrou, “a
Christian should lose his faith or consent to have his
own eyes put out.” (pp. 251-252)
By relying on the strength of the soul in adversity and
exalting the purest values in man, Camus, in La Peste,
invites us to put our bets on hope. We are made to see
that the same ascetic grandeur is not within the reach of
any and all; to those who prefer their personal happiness
to it we are asked to give our understanding. But no
matter how demanding this ethics may be, it cannot fail
108

The Plague

to attract those who, according to Alberes, “comprise
the salt of the earth.”
2. THE TRUE REVOLT
It is unlikely that the play L’Etat de Siege44 would
ever have been written or produced had not chance
intervened. To quote from the program notes, it was
first necessary for Jean-Louis Barrault to have

the

idea of staging a play around the myth of the plague —
an idea dating from 1941—then, a few years later, for
Albert Camus to “use the same myth in the writing of
his novel,” for him to be designated “quite naturally
to Barrault as the desired collaborator.” After that, the
two had to come to an agreement as to the formula of
such a play, “the avowed ambition of which is to mingle
all the dramatic forms, from the lyrical monologue to
the elements of the popular theatre, including mime,
simple dialogue, farce, and chorus.” The exceptional
origin of this work explains why it represents, in the
body of Camus’ dramatic works, an exceptional aes¬
thetic.
This play has been spoken of as a failure. True, the
characters are pure abstractions endowed with mimicry
and language; the dialogue is but a succession of a COn44 First performed on 27 October 1948 by the Company Madeleine
Renaud-Jean-Louis Barrault at the Theatre Marigny.

109

Albert Camus

frontation of ideas; and the style is of a fabrication which
does not always conceal its formulas. The sets, too,
despite some touches of local color, are indeterminate
and unreal, preeminently depicting a place where the
imagination can conceive the unfolding of this imagi¬
nary story.45 We are also willing to believe that no
spectator was really moved by it. But such was not the
author’s ambition. “In short, it is a question of imagining
a myth that might be intelligible to all spectators.”
(Program notes) In other words, the object was to set
minds to thinking, not to set the tear-ducts working.
And is it not also apparent to what point the allegorical
type of the medieval morality play or the Spanish “auto

sacramental” have served as inspiration for this inten¬
tionally

dry

stylization,

this

animated

ideography

wherein the beauty lies in the homogeneity of its
movements, this multiform spectacle upon which are
centered bright beams of thought?
That thought, fragmented in La Peste, comes to¬
gether here, its elements fused and unified. In passing

45 Which renders quite inopportune the accusations brought against
the author by Gabriel Marcel in Les Nouvelles Litteraires, accusations
founded essentially upon the fact that a play criticizing the totalitarian
world should have its scene laid in Spain. Camus, in his reply,
“Pourquoi I’Espagne?” (“Why Spain?”) which was reprinted in

Actuelles (pp. 241-250), shows that his work, although of general
bearing, does not lack some historical justifications, even when it
would seem to be directed against the Franco regime.

110

The Plague

from the realm of the novel to the perspective of the
stage, the themes of revolt are organized in a coherent
pattern.
The plot may be summarized as follows. Above
Cadiz, a comet has traced its baleful portent. The
Plague, which has taken human form—and “the look
of a noncommissioned officer”—is not long in putting
in an appearance and setting up a dictatorship. This
new master “does not rule; he judges.” “His palace is
a barracks, his hunting lodge is a law court. A state
of siege is proclaimed.” Immediately the stigmata of
the disease appear on the flesh of the inhabitants; at
the first faint indication, the victim is suspect; two indi¬
cations, he is condemned; three, he is suppressed. Terror
reigns, or rather functions, for everything is regulated,
even death. Denouncements are encouraged, executions
are massive, there are concentration camps, and none
of this is left to chance. The all powerful machine of
bureaucracy pitilessly crushes the palpitating flesh of
life and liberty.
Diego alone succeeds in dominating his fear. He who
at the first onsets of the scourge has assumed the mask
of a physician of the plague, now snatches away the
gags that had silenced the humiliated populace and
does not rest until he has aroused them to revolt, in a
great wave of pride and wrath. This, despite the efforts
111

Albert Camus

of his betrothed, Victoria, to hold him back for the
sake of their love from this revolt which he had felt
growing in him. But how keep alive personal happiness
and at the same time do what must be done? Diego
dedicates himself to the cause of humanity and from
that derives his strength. He knows, however, that “it
is a force that consumes all, leaving no room for happi¬
ness.” Having looked the Plague in the face, he checks
the murderous machine; but having dared to continue
to face it, he will be struck down by the evil.
In the liberated town, thanks to his sacrifice, those
who fled make their reentry, “The stodgy and optimistic
and comfortable citizenry in the vanguard, as usual.”
Everything will begin again. Nada, the nihilist, the dark
henchman of destruction, commits suicide, thus con¬
summating the breakdown of a revolt against the absurd
which has renounced taking root in love.
Rieux, in La Peste, neglected his personal happiness
to defend the happiness of others; at the end, his wife
and his friend Tarrou were dead. In L’Etat de Siege
the sacrifice of the hero is supreme: Diego pays with
his life. We may wonder if, in making the “honesty” of
Diego conclusive by his martyrdom, Camus did not
want to bring an additional thought to the message
of La Peste. After having demonstrated what some
men should and could accomplish for the happiness of
112

The Plague

all, he would specify that they cannot be permitted to
have any least illusion as to their personal fate.

D. HOPE
1. AGAINST NIHILISM

Returning once more to the problem of murderous
revolt, the author of La Peste had published in January
1948 a little essay entitled Les Meurtriers delicats.46 In
it there was a question of the organized attempt, in
1905, against the life of the Grand Duke Serge, by a
group of terrorists belonging to the Socialist Revolution¬
ary Party. In it could be seen how men of integrity, in
revolt against a criminal society and necessarily brought
to consent to crime, also made it their constant care
“to leave contradictions behind and to create values
which they lacked.” To begin with, by gladly and
willingly offering their own lives in payment for the
lives of their victims, considering that the violence they
disproved in the depths of their hearts—but to which
it was impossible not to resort—could be justified by
their personal sacrifice. Secondly, by the qualms of
conscience they felt in connection with the lives of
others, staying the execution of their plan from the

46 In La Table Ronde, no. 1, Jan. 1948. This essay is taken up again
in L’Homme Revolte, pp. 206-216.

113

Albert Camus

moment that they risked compromising an innocent
person, a “stranger.” Thus the student Kaliayev re¬
nounced throwing the bomb at the carriage of the
Grand Duke, because the intended victim was ac¬
companied by his nephews.
Les Justes47

The story of this attempted assassination furnishes
the main part of the action in the play Les Justes (“The
Just”), as the author himself has made a point of say¬
ing in the Theatre Hebertot’s program: “In effect, ex¬
traordinary as some of the situations in this play may be,
they are nonetheless historical. However, this does not
mean, as will be shown, that Les Justes is a historical
play. But all the characters really existed and con¬
ducted themselves as I relate it.”48
Two protagonists confront each other: Stepan and
Kaliayev. United in one action, they remain divided on
the question of the principles that should inspire the
action.
As for Stepan, only the revolution counts; he believes
that dedicating himself to the liberation of the Russian
people means recognizing all rights and being hin¬
dered neither by honor nor justice nor sentiment nor

47 A play in five acts. Gallimard, 1950.
48 Quoted by Robert de Luppe, in Albert Camus, 1952.
114

Les Justes

the murder of a child. Humiliated, bearing the marks of
the prison and the whip, Stepan in reality seeks in
revolutionary terrorism nothing but the assuagement
of his hatred. “Where would I find the strength to
love? But there remains to me at least the strength to
hate.” At the very instant when his comrades are secretly
preparing to inflict death, his veritable and nihilistic
thought bursts out, and escapes in a cry of relief:
“There is too much to do; the world must be destroyed
from top to bottom!” Love cannot come until after¬
wards.
Quite the opposite, Kaliayev tries to maintain in the
midst of the claims of revolution the contradictory
claims of the heart. No, the revolution does not confer
upon revolutionaries every right! “Even in destruction,”
as Dora will remark, “there is an order, there are limits.”
For instance, the life of innocents, the lives of the Grand
Duke’s nephews. That day, we must remember, Kaliayev
will abstain. This will earn him a torrent of abuse from
Stepan, will cause him to be suspected of cowardice
and to be treated as a “poet” and a “softie.” What mat¬
ter! His feeling is that love cannot and should not have
to wait until afterwards! For it is in the name of his
love for his oppressed compatriots that Kaliayev fights
and accepts the risks of the gallows. It is in order that
this love may triumph today—and not tomorrow—over
115

Albert Camus

the murder that he has agreed to administer justice,
and not to assassinate. Hear him: “But as for me, I love
those who live today on the same earth as I do, and
they are the ones I salute. It is for them that I fight
and that I agree to die. And for that city of the future,
about which I am not sure, I would not engage to strike
my brothers in the face. I will not add to living injustice
for the sake of a dead justice.” The second time, the
Grand Duke being alone, Kaliayev throws the bomb.
From that time onward, Kaliayev expects nothing
but the appeasement granted by death. His death will
render all its retributive purity to his act; by dying, he
will pay for the life he took; by dying, he will recover
his innocence. So it is that when the Grand Duchess
herself comes to the prison to assure him that she will
intercede for him, he implores her to take no such step.
He will be hanged.
This conflict, at the centre of which the rebel tries
to size up the just act, and which is composed simul¬
taneously of love and violence, in no way eclipses the
conflict of the man torn between his egoistic desire
for happiness and the heart-rending appeal for fra¬
ternity. After Rieux, after Rambert, after Diego, Dora
and Kaliayev have turned their backs on love, for they,
too, have had to recognize the inhuman vocation of “the
just.” “Yes, love is impossible, that is our lot.” Impossi116

Les Justes

ble even, at the height of the conflict, to enjoy that
moment of respite when they can forget, even for an
hour, the atrocious misery of this world. In a word, im¬
possible ever to relax. “. . . In summer, Yanek, do you
remember? But no, it’s always winter. We are not of
this world, we are among the just. There is a warmth
which is not for us. Oh, pity for the just!”
While Kaliayev, in a final thought as to the things
that had warmed his life, could only conclude: “Those
who love today must die together if they want to be
reunited.” Dora, for her part, has reached an identical
conclusion. “It’s so much easier to die of our own contra¬
dictions than to live them.” Thus precisely the contradic¬
tion is resolved. Perhaps, in the fires of suffering, on the
funeral pyre of the death sentence, love will survive, like
the phoenix, at last reconciled to the passion for justice,
for which it has immolated itself. From the depths of
his cell, Kaliayev cannot keep himself from imagining
that “rendezvous of grief.” Dora, uplifted by a similar
intuition, implores them to let her throw the bomb next
time. The punishment to which they offer themselves
not only sublimates their devotion to the cause of
justice, but also redeems the evil to which they have
consented in the name of that justice.
Thus are rejoined in them the feeling of guilt which
consumed Tarrou in a purifying fire and that of soli117

Albert Camus

darity which drew Rieux away from his personal hap¬
piness to make him assume the burden of others’
suffering. In them are mingled the two types of rebels,
the “true healers” and “the saints without God.”
“The theme of happiness here receives an ultimate
promotion. Kaliayev . . . recovers, beyond earthly
pleasure, a kind of terrible happiness, a kind of ‘wintry’
love which unites him to his fellow men. In Les Justes
we are far from the joys of sun and summer that are
chanted in Les Noces. Here, Camus attempts a secular
tranfiguration of the religion of happiness.”49
Inspired by history as to the facts, Les Justes over¬
flows the historical bounds in its significance. Here the
past is not resuscitated for itself, but for the lesson of
exigency it can give to the contemporary world issued
from it and so tragically unfaithful to its example. In a
brief letter of rectification addressed to the magazine

Caliban,50 the author emphasizes the topicality of the
play: “The ‘modern’ reasoning, as they say, consists in
settling the problem: If you do not want to be exe¬
cutioners, you are choirboys, and vice versa. Kaliayev,
Dora Brillant, and their comrades, fifty years ago, re¬
futed this base notion. Their message to us across the

49 Charles Moeller, op. cit., p. 70.
80 Caliban, No. 39, May 1950, pp. 22-24. This reply, entitled “La
Justice, elle aussi a ses pharisiens,” is reprinted in Actuelles II, pp.
21-24.

118

Les Justes

years is that, on the contrary, there is a dead justice and
a living justice; and justice dies from the moment it
becomes a comfort, when it ceases to be a burning
reality, a demand upon oneself.” The revolutionary
apostles of 1905, in their revolt which created new
values, call upon us to confront the nihilism and the
conformism of our time, which they proved to be mon¬
strous forgeries of justice. We know Camus’ undying
mistrust of all systems of ideas; he is too well aware
of the excesses to which those who insist upon any
kind of absolute can be carried. With Les Justes and the
exemplary intransigence of the protagonists’ scruples,
he clears the ground for the unmasking of the political
ideologies of the century.
2. BEYOND NIHILISM
In order to appreciate L’Homme Revolte,51 a compact
and recondite work, taut and concentrated in its
reasoning, we can do no better than quote an extract
from one of Camus’ replies to the criticisms it aroused,
wherein the author explains himself. “All those people
for whom the problems aired in this book are not
merely theoretical have comprehended that I was
analyzing a contradiction which had at first been mine.
The thoughts of which I speak have nurtured me and I

51 Paris, 1951. Published as The Rebel in New York, 1956.
119

Albert Camus

wanted to carry them further by ridding them of what
I believe prevented them from advancing. I am not,
in effect, a philosopher, and I can speak only of what
I have experienced. I have experienced nihilism, con¬
tradiction, violence, and the vertigo of destruction. But
at the same time I have hailed creative powers and the
privilege of living. Nothing authorizes me to judge in
a detached way an epoch of which I am completely
a part. I judge it from within, merging myself with it.
But henceforth I reserve the right to tell what I know
about myself and others, on the sole condition that
what I say shall add nothing to the intolerable wretched¬
ness of the world, but merely with the object of point¬
ing out, within the dim imprisoning walls where we
are groping, the still visible points where doors may
open ... I am interested only in a new renaissance.”52
This work, then, represents, like the preceding ones,
and for the same reasons, a testimony to that line of
thought which we have followed step by step from its
awakening. It comprises a testimony that is decisive, the
testimony, rather, for Camus’ system of thought here
culminates, achieves fulfillment and maturity.
It would therefore be a gross distortion of facts to

52 Letter to Libertaire, reprinted in Actuelles II, pp. 77-84, under
the title, “Revolte et Romantisme.”
120

Les Justes

regard L’Homme Revolte as a theoretical essay or a
historical study of revolt. Though it is true that the
history of revolt here occupies an important place, the
ethical preoccupations of the author nonetheless con¬
serve their preeminence. He warns us of it, moreover,
on the threshold of the work: “Again, the important
thing is not, as yet, to go to the root of things, but, the
world being what it is, to know how to live in it.” (p. 14)
We have seen how, throughout La Peste, the theme
of revolt took precedence over the theme of the absurd,
so original in L’Etranger; in the same way, the problem
of suicide studied in Le Mythe de Sisyphe is here sup¬
planted by the problem of murder. “This essay proposes,
in the face of murder and revolt, to pursue a train of
thought which began with suicide and the concept of
the absurd.” (p. 15) Such changes of illumination are
natural and at the same time logical. It is natural that
the experience of the man, informed by events, should
in its turn mould the thought of the writer. “In the
age of negation, it was of some avail to examine one’s
position relative to suicide. In the age of ideologies, we
must examine our position relative to murder.” (p. 14)
It is logical that the two trains of thought should be
systematized, the first being augmented and extended
in the second.
121

Albert Camus

L’Homme Revolte (The Rebel)
The introduction signalizes the harmony between
these two trains of thought by a new analysis of the
concept of the absurd, this time in its relation to murder.
The Absurd and Murder. The absurd attitude, de¬
fined in Le Mythe de Sisyphe, in no way bears upon
murder. This indifference is tantamount to a consent or
approbation, as though one were to say, “Nothing has
meaning and the crimes committed around me have
no more importance than all the rest: I allow them.
Nothing has meaning and I want to act, to impose
my will, to conquer; murder is useful to me, is oppor¬
tune; I approve it.”
Such an attitude, which endeavors to be, and indeed
believes itself to be faithful to logic, cannot but betray
a serious contradiction. We recall the reasoning by
which suicide was rejected. “But it is obvious that the
concept of the absurd admits that human life is the
only necessary good since . . . without life, the absurdist
wager would rest upon nothing.” (p. 19) Then who¬
ever endeavors to derive his rule of life from the
absurdist doctrine ends up inevitably in nihilism while
wearing himself out in contradictions. Camus denounces
here the tragic error of our time. In effect, “the privil¬
eged emotion” which has bared the irrationality of
122

The Rebel

the world and of our own lives cannot serve as a basis
of action; it constitutes “nothing but a point of de¬
parture, a vivid criticism of life—the equivalent, on
the plane of existence, of systematic doubt.” (p. 21)
Consequently, we must go beyond the absurd, more
exactly, we must be “caught up in the irresistible move¬
ment by which the absurd excels itself.” This movement
is revolt. The absurd has led us into an impasse; will
revolt succeed in finding the reasons which should
justify it? A preliminary examination of the content
of revolt must be made. The first chapter, which gives
the title to the essay, is devoted to this.
The rebel. A slave who suddenly rebels is affirming
the existence of a limit beyond which he will not tolerate
humiliation. He deems that a part of himself deserves
to be respected and, by that very fact, “he proceeds to
place it above everything else and proclaims it pref¬
erable to everything, even to life itself.” In other words,
he recognizes the transcendence of a value which not
only surpasses himself but humanity entire.53 “It is for
53 At this point of the demonstration the occasion presents itself
quite naturally to Camus to emphasize that he is not an existentialist,
that for him the essence precedes existence: “Analysis of revolt leads
at least to the supicion that, as the Greeks believed, but contrary to
the postulates of contemporary thought, a human nature does exist.”
It is well to recall that already, in 1945, Camus, interviewed by
Jeanine Delpech, spoke out clearly on this point: “Sartre and I both
published all our books, without exception, before making each other’s

123

Albert Camus

the sake of everyone in the world that the slave asserts
himself when he decides that a command has infringed
on something within him which does not belong to him
alone, but which is common ground where all men—
the man who insults and oppresses him, even—have a
natural community.” (p. 28)
Thus, in rebelling, “man surpasses himself and identi¬
fies with others,” since revolt implies the widest com¬
plicity. Conversely, human solidarity, at least in a
universe closed to absolute values, does not assert itself
except on the level of rebellion. From the moment that
rebellion neglects or rejects or destroys this solidarity,
it “loses simultaneously its right to be called rebellion.”
Therefore, a limit exists, which should always be kept
in mind, constantly remembered. We must say No to
the plague which engenders suffering, but Yes to life
with its body being consumed by the plague; Yes to
respect for humanity and at the same time No to the
injustice of humanity. Without this “perpetual tension”
between a Yes and a No, revolt degenerates, becomes
acquiescence or murder. As absolute negation, revolt
hands life over to the folly of anarchy, in which “every-

acquaintance. When we did meet it was to note at once our differences.
Sartre is existentialist, and the only book of ideas that I have published,

Le My the de Sisyphe, was directed against the philosophers called
existentialists.” (Nouvelles Litteraires, November 15, 1945.)

124

The Rebel

thing is permitted”; as absolute affirmation, revolt con¬
secrates the apotheosis of evil and recognizes suffering
only to add to it. In the one case as in the other, it
assumes but one of the terms of its vocation and is faith¬
less to itself.
There now remains for the author to confront the
conclusions of this analytical study with the works and
acts in which the spirit of revolt has been expressed. At
this point the author turns towards History, asking it to
bear witness. Principally he examines the history of our
time, because our secularized [desacralise] age has made
rebellion “one of the essential dimensions of man.” The
excesses of one rebellion can be explained, in part at
least, by the excesses of another. Hence, in passing in
review the various historical manifestations of rebellion,
“we shall have to say, each time, whether it remains
faithful to its first noble promise or if, through negli¬
gence or folly, it forgets its original purpose and be¬
comes swamped in tyranny or servitude.” (pp. 35-36)
The investigation will take up first the rebellious
attitude as it is displayed in literature, on the plane
of thought, then the attitude which, turned into actions,
becomes embodied in revolutions. From metaphysical
rebellion (Chapter II) to historical rebellion (Chapter
III) we will follow the route which leads from the idea
to action.
125

Albert Camus

Metaphysical rebellion. This “movement by which
man protests against his condition and against all crea¬
tion,” is seen by Camus to have had its first expression
with Epicurus, who figures as a forerunner whose in¬
fluence can be felt in the “absolute negation” of Sade,
the “dandies,” Dostoyevsky, and in the “absolute affirma¬
tion” of Stirner and Nietzsche, ending in the “mid¬
night exaltations” of the surrealists. With all these
rebels, despite their particular attitudes, Camus finds
the same “intemperance of the Absolute.” And in either
of the two types of rebellion, whether of total refusal
or total acceptance of things-as-they-are, the revolt
culminates in murder.
Historical rebellion. When rebellion, that “nostalgia
for innocence,” consents to be guilty and take up arms,
it runs directly to murder and leads to revolution. The
passage from the one to the other is subtly noted: “Re¬
bellion, by its very nature, is limited in scope. It is no
more than an incoherent statement. Revolution, on the
other hand, originates in the realm of ideas. It is pre¬
cisely the injection of ideas into historical experience,
while rebellion is only the movement that leads from
individual experience into the realm of ideas.” (p. 136)
Metaphysical rebellion accepts

or precognizes

the

killing of others; revolution kills not only men but also
principles. Thus, the regicides of 1793, with whom the
126

The Rebel

history of modem revolutions begins, attacked in the
person of the king the representative of God on earth,
“yet even so, without daring to kill the Eternal Princi¬
ple.” The Reason which they substituted, and which
inspired a religion of total virtue in Saint-Just, plunged
them into the bloody night of the Terror.
After them came the “deicides” (“God-killers”), en¬
thusiastic disciples of Hegel, whose dialectic, after hav¬
ing tried to destroy all transcendence utterly, had
stirred in them the nostalgia for a divinity, but a ter¬
restrial divinity. Whereas the reasonable absolute of
Saint-Just and Rousseau soared above history, Hegel’s
identified itself with history. The values of truth and
justice no longer vitalized action but had to be con¬
quered by action; thus, they “ceased to be guides in
order to become goals.” It is easy to guess what the
opportunistic or passionate proselytes of this dynamic
philosophy were able to derive from it. “If nothing can
be clearly understood before truth has finally been
brought to light, then every action is arbitrary and force
will finally reign.” (p. 184) And murder will be in¬
stalled as a provisional ethics. The time of individual
terror and terrorism is inaugurated.
The action of the young Russian terrorists who, from
1820 to 1905, were to fling themselves, in the midst of
the people’s indifference, into an assault on tyranny, is
127

Albert Camus

to be written down to a prolongation of the German
ideology of the nineteenth century, and composes in
letters of blood the martyrology of the socialist revo¬
lution. Their outrages cannot make their sacrifices be
forgotten. “Almost all of them paid for this liberation
by suicide, execution, prison, or insanity.” With these
“squeamish assassins” (Camus’ phrase is “meurtriers
delicats”), rebellion triumphed for a moment over nihil¬
ism. But since its victory coincided with the death of
its heroes, it was not long in betraying itself and re¬
turning to the infidelity that had so painfully been
surmounted for a short while. And even, it “now con¬
templates the subjection of the entire universe.” The
despairing philanthropy of a Chigalev, possessed by the
idea of equality, resignedly foretokened “the totalitarian
theocrats of the twentieth century and State terrorism.”
With the initial concept “that everything is meaning¬
less and that history is only written in terms of the
hazards of force,” Hitler and Mussolini tried in vain
to construct a universal empire based on State terrorism
and irrational terror. Humiliated and full of hatred,
they expected passion to give them what reason could
not give. Hitler proclaimed the superiority of the
future over the individual, thus plunging his people
into a policy of endless conquest; as was required by
the presence of perpetual enemies both within and
128

The Rebel

without the State, creating perpetual terror, since the
enemies would exist as long as the conquest was pur¬
sued. The State thus conceived could only be identified
with an immense barracks inhabited by millions of silent
slaves, and resounding with the imperious howls of a
deified Fuehrer. “The commandments of the leader,
posturing in the burning bush of spotlights, on a Sinai
of planks and flags, therefore comprise both law and
virtue. Suppose the superhuman microphones issue a
single order for a crime to be committed: the criminal
order is handed down from chief to subchief until it
ultimately reaches the slave who receives orders with¬
out passing them on.” (pp. 227-228) Propaganda or re¬
pressions within the walls, war outside the walls; the
Empire of Efficiency was based on ruins and hecatombs.
As for the Italian dictator, he announced “the exaltation
of the dark powers of blood and instinct, the biological
justification of the worst that the instinct for power
produces” and founded his State on the absolute: “Noth¬
ing beyond the State, above the State, against the
State. Everything to the State, for the State, in the
State.” (p. 227)
The dream of world-unification which was barely
caressed by the Fascist mystics remained for Russian
Communism to propose as a definite and incontestable
aim, sustained by a metaphysical ambition and a doc129

Albert Camus

trine with universal pretensions. The total revolution
thus envisaged has, to date, been expressed “under the
auspices of the rational State as it is to be found in
Russia.” Camus devotes no less than seventy pages
to criticizing this State terrorism, so much more ef¬
ficacious and solid than the State terrorism of the
Fascists, because founded upon a rationale of terror.
To take over from that God killed by Hegel, then to
set up the Religion of Humanity “unified in one im¬
mense army, one immense factory, no longer aware
of anything but heroisms and inventions”

(Julien

Renda), to establish, in an absolute subjection to the
material world and an exaltation of its powers, the im¬
perialism of the human species, at last in command of
creation—such was the ambition. As for the doctrine,
it allowed itself to be defined by Karl Marx in a double
prophecy, bourgeois and revolutionary, bourgeois, be¬
cause it prolonged the philosophy of progress current in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, crediting the
scientific Utopia of Auguste Comte and borrowing from
the economists of the industrial revolution certain es¬
sential features; revolutionary, through its theory of
economic determinism and its prediction of a golden
age in the future. All of which demands a word or two
of explanation.
According to Marx, man and his thought are con130

The Rebel

stantly and necessarily dependent upon the means of
subsistence, therefore of production. That is to say,
man, the founder of society, is thereby also created by
society. In this double economic and social determinism,
there is no room for any transcendence, even that of
reason. History covers all, reigns over all, receives its
movement from the class struggle. We know that with
the advent of the nineteenth century, with the progress
of the machine and the opening of international markets,
the workers became more and more aware of being
dispossessed of their means of production which were
“concentrated in the hands of those able to buy.” Bour¬
geois capitalism was making ready to devour everything.
At this point the fatalistic prophecy of Marx intervened.
According to him, capital would not stop growing,
would not stop absorbing all small enterprises, concen¬
trating in the hands of a few the wealth produced by
the workers and stolen from their work. Ruined, the
middle classes would swell the ranks of the proletariat.
Thus, little by little, “an immense army of oppressed
slaves find themselves confronting a handful of de¬
spicable masters.” Then, what should happen would
happen. Neither crises nor misery could be avoided.
The proletariat, dragged to the very lowest, degraded
and despoiled to the last degree, would “bring forth
the supreme dignity from the supreme humiliation.”
131

Albert Camus

The universal revolution would break out, abolishing
the shameful exploitation of man by man. Then, said
Marx, “history, in a supreme act of violence, will cease
to be violent.”
Unfortunately it so happens that the facts have in¬
validated these economic predictions and “the prole¬
tariat has rejected the historical mission with which
Marx had rightly charged it.” The Bolshevik revolution,
faced with other powers, found it necessary to be
powerful itself. Like the capitalism which it aimed
to abolish, the collectivity is forced “to arm and rearm,
because others are arming and rearming. It does not
stop accumulating and will never stop until the day
when perhaps it will reign alone on earth. For that to
happen, moreover, it must undergo a war.” (p. 271)
Is the radiant city of justice and reconciliation nothing,
then, but a mirage? It would seem that even in the
time of Lenin it could not be otherwise regarded. Lenin,
laying the foundations of a military empire, had to
juggle liberty progressively in the name of “the King¬
dom of Ends,” when “in a world finally subjected and
purged of adversaries, the final iniquity will have been
drowned in the blood of the just and the unjust.” And
Camus, after having exposed the plan from the affirma¬
tions of Lenin himself, proceeds to synthesize the
opportunist movement which shapes its course to such
132

The Rebel

a mystification: “From the rule of the masses and the
concept of the proletarian revolution we move on to the
idea of a revolution made and directed by professional
agents. The ruthless criticism of the State is then recon¬
ciled with the necessary but provisional dictatorship
of the proletariat, in the person of its leaders. Finally,
it is announced that the end of this provisional con¬
dition cannot be foreseen and that, moreover, no one
has ever dared to promise that there will be an end.”
(pp. 285-286) From this moment onward, the dream
of universal liberty, requiring a total submission to
history (which is to say, to Empire), reduces man to
total slavery. His human nature denied, the individual
summed up in the “social unit” and degraded to the
rank of an object, dialogue and personal relations elimi¬
nated and replaced by propaganda or polemic, “the
ration coupon substituted for bread; love and friendship
submitted to the doctrine, and destiny to the plan;
punishment considered the norm, and production sub¬
stituted for living creation, quite accurately describe
this disembodied Europe, peopled with phantoms,
victorious or subjugated, of power.” (p. 295)
But that is not all. In this totalitarian universe where,
under cover of justice, are committed the worst in¬
justices, we find the worst injustice of the trial super¬
imposed. Every citizen is suspect and presumed guilty.
133

Albert Camus

It is not enough for him to approve the regime, still
less to be neutral (indifference is equivalent to hos¬
tility!), he must still be able constantly to prove that
he has faith and lives according to that faith. “Consum¬
mating its history in its own way, the revolution is
not content with killing all rebellion. It insists on holding
every man, down to the most servile, responsible for the
fact that rebellion ever existed and still exists under the
sun.” (p. 300)
"Here ends the surprising itinerary of Prometheus,”
writes Camus, fixing the transformations of historic
revolution in the colorful imagery of myth. “Proclaiming
his hatred of the gods and his love of mankind, he scorn¬
fully turns away from Zeus and approaches mortal
men in order to lead them in an assault against the
heavens. But men are weak or cowardly; they must be
organized. They love pleasure and immediate happiness;
they must be taught to refuse, in order to grow up, must
be given immediate rewards. Thus Prometheus, in his
turn, becomes a master who first teaches, then com¬
mands. The fight is prolonged and becomes exhausting.
Men doubt that they can safely approach the city of
light and doubt even if the city exists. They must be
saved from themselves. The hero then tells them that
he, and he alone, knows the city. Those who doubt of its
existence will be cast out into the desert, chained to a
134

The Rebel

rock, offered as food to the vultures. The others will
henceforth march in darkness, behind the pensive and
solitary master. Prometheus alone has become god and
reigns over the solitude of men. But he has won from
Zeus only solitude and cruelty; he is no longer Pro¬
metheus, he is Caesar. The real, the eternal Prometheus
has now assumed the aspect of one of his victims. The
same cry, springing from the depths of time, resounds
forever through the Scythian desert.” (p. 301)
But now the author finds it is time to reach some
positive conclusions. The fifth chapter, “Thought at the
Meridian,” with its thirty-five pages, perhaps weighs
very lightly, as someone has remarked, in comparison
with the negative section which constitutes more than
two thirds of the work. But this is to forget that the
description of error, treason, and darkness carries
within it the force of truth, fidelity and light, and that
once the roads to inferno are denounced, the road to
Damascus lies open without need for comment.
Rebellion and murder. By the time we have investi¬
gated history, it appears that rebellion, in having re¬
course to murder, condemns itself to illogicality, exactly
as does the doctrine of the absurd. “From the moment
he strikes, the rebel cuts the world in two. He rebelled
in the name of the identity of man with man and he
sacrifices the identity by consecrating the difference in
135

Albert Camus

blood. His very being, in the midst of suffering and
oppression, was contained in this identity. The same
movement which aimed at affirming him thus brings
an end to his existence.” (p. 348)
In “the nihilistic murder,” the rebel recognizes no
limit to his action; whenever he rebels to vindicate the
liberty of all, he proves, with weapon in hand, that he
refuses liberty to his victim, which is to say that, in the
long run, he refuses it to all. “Nihilistic passion, adding
to injustice and lies, destroys in its fury its original ex¬
istence and thus abolishes the most cogent reasons for
revolt.” (p. 352)
On the plane of history and in the absence of all
values of a superior order, rebellion is caught between
irreconcilable principles:

violence and nonviolence,

justice and liberty. The efficacity of the act “presup¬
poses the cynicism of violence”; renouncement of vio¬
lence reduces us to acquiescence in slavery. These two
opposed attitudes unite in the same treason of revolt,
in the same nihilism. Similarly, rebellion for the sake
of justice, tolerating no contradiction, suppresses all
liberty, while absolute liberty, establishing “the right
of the strongest to dominate,” maintains and confirms
the reign of injustice. In reality, the paradoxes in which
revolutionary action becomes involved do not exist
except in the mind fascinated by the absolute and
136

The Rebel

abstracted from reality. As the author reminds us, in
having recourse to the allegorical expression “the repre¬
sentatives on earth” of such people are “effectively, the
yogi and the commissar.” The yogi, lost in the mirage
of a supernatural justice, turns away from rebellion and
rejects reality. The commissar, on the contrary, admits
only the facts of history, taken in its universality as a
value susceptible of founding an ethic, a pure Utopia.
Because history is not completed and its veritable mean¬
ing cannot be clarified except in its totality at the end of
its career. Because, especially, we are powerless to have
a global grasp of a reality in which we are integrated,
powerless to survey at a glance a whole of which we are
a part. “Historical murder,” in its chimerical appetite for
the absolute—absolute rationalism or absolute nihilism
—distorts the rebellion it seeks to make triumphant. A
revolutionary act which wishes to be coherent in terms
of its origins should actively consent to the relative
and thus express fidelity to human conditions. A relative
justice. The revolutionary must know that man is in¬
capable of absolute virtue, but also that evil can be
combatted, that it is possible at least to attempt not to
be its accomplice. He understands that justice does not
exist without freedom or freedom without justice; that
at all costs the two ideas “must find their limits in
each other” if he would “preserve the common existence
137

Albert Camus

that justifies the insurrection.” Such limitation would
forever prevent violence from “negatively founding
servitude and a regime of violence.” If, nevertheless, re¬
course to violence cannot be avoided, when facing an
excess of injustice, for example, the revolt must maintain
its ties with “a personal responsibility and an immediate
risk.” The rebel engaged in an “authentic revolt will only
consent to take up arms for institutions that limit
violence, not for those which codify it.” (p. 360)
Before defining this attitude in politics, Camus pon¬
ders the question, “Is rebellion efficacious?” and re¬
plies, “It is the only attitude that is efficacious today.”
In a classic use of language, he opposes the word
“efficacity” (of a creative revolt) to the “efficiency” that
historical absolutism derives from the terror and silence
of its “desert.” We are to understand that the results ex¬
pected of an “efficacious” revolt should mark a victory
over injustice and tyranny, rendering it intransigent as
to the choice of “the means,” while the second, essentially
aiming only at its own triumph, cares little for moral
ethics, provided it succeeds, and will authorize itself
to have recourse to any and every means. On the one
hand, action is self-disciplined because of the grandeur
of the objects it pursues. On the other hand, these same
objects serve as pretexts for permitting any act that
will impose them with certainty. No doubt, the action
138

The Rebel

contained within the bounds imposed by respect for
freedom and a sense of justice runs the risk of failing
and of being destroyed. But if revolutionary action
renounces this risk, the guarantees with which it sought
to surround itself can only be forged in lies, dissimula¬
tion, cynicism, in short, its own negation.
Moderation and excess. The recognition of a limit,
of “a mediating value,” balances and maintains the
contradictions of revolt, transfiguring it and enabling
it to accomplish its true human dimensions. “In effect,
there is a natural moderation in matter as well as in
man,” a moderation confirmed by science and material
forces themselves. It is the excess of our epoch that
has upset the movement of history. “Moderation, con¬
fronting this irregularity, teaches us that one part of
realism is necessary to every ethic; that unadulterated
virtue is homicidal; and that one part of ethics is neces¬
sary to all realism; cynicism is homicidal.” (p. 366)
There remains to be ascertained how this free and
moderate attitude can become a part of history, and in
what form of activity it can find its expression. Camus
sees it realized in what is usually called revolutionary
trade-unionism, which sprang from the very midst of
reality—professional employment. Its efficacity has been
proved. “It is this movement which, within a century,
has enormously improved conditions of the working
139

Albert Camus

classes, taking them from the sixteen-hour day to the
forty-hour week.” (p. 367) But when the absolutist
revolution seized upon this living reality to raise its pro¬
test, the very impetus of the revolt was broken, modera¬
tion was left behind, the counterpoise of argument
was lost, resulting in an inevitable plunge into terror
and murder.
Beyond nihilism. Let us pause a moment. It is
important to realize that the essayist’s train of thought,
which we have now summarized, has neither this dryas-dust aspect nor this stiff and labored manner. On the
contrary, Camus employs, with sure and confident ease,
a rich but close-knit phraseology which improves con¬
stantly upon itself. We cannot give an exact idea of this
entire fifth chapter of the book without making it clear
that the author leads up to his unique thought in a con¬
tinual movement of confrontation. Gradually, the defi¬
nition of true rebellion emerges, pictured clearly,
pointed up by the corresponding critique of rebellion
unfaithful to its origins. Near the conclusion, on the
tenth page from the end of the book, the author gives
free rein to his dialectics, releasing the lucid passion
which had held it in check until then. For by this time he
has touched the fundamentals of the problem and
recognized that the triumphs of his reasoning partake
of the antique wisdom, a heritage neglected by the
140

The Rebel

Occident to its loss. In the course of the essay he has also
convinced himself that the real conflict of the century
is the conflict “between German dreams and Mediter¬
ranean tradition, between the violence of eternal ado¬
lescence and virile strength, between nostalgia, rendered
more poignant by knowledge and by books, and courage
hardened and enlightened in the experiences of life.” It
is, moreover, a conflict to which the Christian Church
has not remained foreign, since it “forsook its sunny
Mediterranean heritage,” neglecting nature

to lay

claims to temporal power and historical dynamism.
Thus the author, approaching his fortieth year, and
as he rounds out his intellectual adventure, finds again
that two-sided truth which, as a boy on the shores
of North Africa, had been like the surge of his blood, but
now elucidated, confirmed, founded in reason. And
the poet who wrote Les Noces, strengthened by thought,
takes up his song again in an assured voice to recount
his triumph over midnight shadows and his hope of a
renaissance; to tell of “the strange form of love” which
animates his revolt, preoccupied with present happiness
rather than with a far-distant and problematic Eden; to
assert the extent of his refusal, while conscious of the
permanence of evil, but also of the power of man “to
diminish it arithmetically,” and of his duty to “rectify
in creation everything that can be rectified.”
141

Albert Camus
L’Ete54

“The work of Albert Camus,” notes Pierre Neraud
de Boisdeffre,55 “would have been a hymn to happiness
if it could have developed along the lines it followed
originally; it would have celebrated man’s nuptials
with the unsullied earth, would have celebrated a
world in which friendship is natural, where man’s work
is a vocation, where culture is a privilege, a world of
which history has not yet taken possession.” As a matter
of fact, Camus has never stopped composing this hymn
throughout the long Odyssey which, after a period of
exile in the dark swamps of nihilism, was to bring him
back to the smooth shores of Ithaca, “the faithful earth,
the audacious and frugal thought.”
Camus, heir of Greece, child of sea and sun, was tom
by the war from his contemplation, and took his place
“in the shuffling line of men standing before the open
door of Hell.” But even while fighting in those lurid
shadows against the horror of a monstrous epos, and
while denouncing “the capitals of crime” where the
crushed silence of the enslaved was punctuated from
time to time by the crepitation of the twelve blind
64 L’Ete, collected essays. Published by Gallimard, 1954.
65 “Debats: L’Homme Revoke de Camus,” in Psychologie moderne
et reflexion chretienne, p. 217. Artheme Fayard, cahier No. 3, January,
1953.

142

L’Ete

bullets, he could not keep from singing, in his heart,
a muted accompaniment to the millennial voices of
trees and sky, a song celebrating happiness and beauty.
The eight essays gathered together in the volume
entitled

L’Ete—“Summer”—were

composed over

a

period of almost fifteen years, between 1939 and 1953,
and they leave no doubt as to this hidden but intense
fidelity of the author to the tradition of his native
land; a tradition of sunlight and moderation, a land
where the sensation of living is so keen, so palpable, that
it overwhelms us and reduces us to silence.
The thought of Albert Camus is not carried further
by these essays; indeed, most of them appeared through¬
out the years in various magazines or anthologies.
Certainly his logic of revolt is not extended. What these
essays express is the inherent accord between this
Mediterranean man and the land that gave him birth.
We suddenly perceive that this North African who came
among us in quest of a solution to the tragedy of the
century has never really left his native shores; rather,
they have never let him go. He eluded, for a time, the
enchantment of the natural world in which he had
grown to manhood, but never freed himself wholly from
it. We may well admire and wonder when we note
how, without failing in its severity, his rhetoric has been
able at times to develop according to the throbbing of
143

Albert Camus

that nostalgia; as though a Descartes, without being
false to himself, had allowed or even summoned a
Chateaubriand to take the pen.
Among so many superbly written pages, we will select
a few in which the poet has concentrated upon a se¬
ductive image. For example, this page in Les Amandiers:
“When I lived in Algiers, I always waited patiently
throughout the winter, because I knew that on one
night, one single, pure, cold night in February, the
almond trees of the Consuls Valley would cover them¬
selves with white flowers. I marvelled, then, at seeing
how that fragile snow resisted all the rains and the
winds from the sea. Yet every year they endured, exactly
the time required to prepare the fruit.” (p. 73) What a
marvellous act of faith, and what exorcism! At a time
when the sword was again making an attack upon the
Spring, when History was again threatening to subdue
the spirit, that was how the memory of the land elected
by the gods continued to glow against the darkness of
despair. Camus was aware of it: “. . . sometimes, when
the burden of life becomes too heavy in this Europe
still full of misery, I turn my mind back towards those
shining lands where so much force of eternal youth is
still intact.” (pp. 73-74) This secret force of eternal
youth and innocence, this force of character which
upholds the beautiful, hard, blue sky, is what “in the
144

L’Ete

winter of the world, will prepare the fruit.” The essay
dates from 1940. The “meridian thought” already shines
here and the man who declares that he does not suf¬
ficiently believe “in reason to subscribe to progress or
to any philosophy of history” is already, here, a clearseeing rebel, determined and mature. Les Amandiers
contains “the certitude of the ever-returning sap.”
These pages add nothing to the thought of Albert
Camus, but when we discover in them that his mind
has never ceased “to cultivate, within the bounds of in¬
eluctable dangers the field of life, loved for itself, for
all the rich treasures in which life abounds”56 his thought
is made secretly more tangible, is brought closer to us.
However, these essays risk disappointing those people
who have made an effort to see in Camus’ writings the
work of a philosopher—despite his warnings. For they
emphasize, by prolonging them as in a pause of music,
the poetic chords with which L’Homme Revolte ends.
Never has “the meridian thought” more openly revealed
the affective substrata of Camus’ nature, where every¬
thing is founded upon his sentimental adherence to the
glittering land where he had the good fortune to be
born. Let us quote a second time the essayist’s frank
avowal: “In effect, I am not a philosopher, I only know
56 Andre Rousseaux, “L’Ete d’Albert Camus,” Le Figaro Litteraire,
March 20, 1954.

145

Albert Camus

how to talk about the things I have experienced.” It is
in this quite personal (and consequently quite relative)
perspective that we are invited to discover Camus’
line of thought and judge it; indeed, to judge it ac¬
cording to any other criteria would be not only to betray
but to negate it by emptying out its living sap.
An inclusive examination of the author’s work, one
not analytical like this present essay, which is centred
upon the ideological and moral evolution that can be
noted, would disclose the duality of the experience
which has led us from Les Noces to VEte, passing by
way of Le Mythe de Sisyphe and VHomme Revolte. A
lyrical experience to start with, during which his mind
is fecundated in a privileged emotion; then an attempt
to elaborate in thought the emotive seeds thus garnered.
Here is a definite example which allows us to lay
a finger on the transition from one creative attitude to
the other. In La Peste, it is the spectacle of individual
or collective suffering which unleashes sympathy and
the feeling of solidarity; in VHomme Revolte (which,
in sum, only reduces to dialectic terms the symbolism
of the novel), the feeling of solidarity takes shape and
affirms itself in the movement of revolt. Robert de
Luppe, who has noted this difference, asks, “But is
not the profounder reality to be found in the novel?
146

L’Ete
Does not the direct vision of suffering awaken the
conscience more than the actual revolt?”57 No doubt,
but the theoretical essay obeys the impulse which
governs the findings of sensitive experience and re¬
constructs them according to an architecture that does
not disdain a certain geometry. The feeling of duality,
of ambivalence which

characterizes

Mediterranean

thought, as Gabriel Audision has so well shown in his
Ulysse ou I’lntelligence, constantly asserts itself in the
writings of Camus, in strong contrast with his line of
thought. Exaltation of life and humiliation of death,
taste for happiness and appeal of fraternity, revolt and
love, acceptance and refusal. And finally the coexistence
in the very midst of his artist’s vocation, of a tendency
to lyricism and a need to dominate this tendency by
thought; this altemance of song and rhetoric, of pas¬
sionate warmth and cold reasoning is surely not without
its significance.
Let it be said in passing, and with the aim of correct¬
ing an intolerable optical illusion, that nothing in his
quality as a man or his personality as a writer relates
him to Jean-Paul Sartre, Doctor of Philosophy, creator
of a coherent doctrine, esoteric on certain points, and
whose postulates furnish the armor of his entire body
57 Robert de Luppe, op. cit., p. 86.

147

Albert Camus

of literary work, instead of testifying, as with Camus
and Malraux, to adventures that have been lived.
To return to the double experience, lyrical and in¬
tellectual, of Camus, we should note that this internal
disparity does not always flow in two distinct streams,
but entails corresponding differences in the nature of
his books and in their achievements. Thus, some of the
constructions, as for instance Le Malentendu and
L’Etat de Siege, show marks of the effort of adaptation
to a theoretical pattern. Le Mythe de Sisyphe betrays a
straining for stoical inflexibility; and VHomme Revolte,
despite some pages of soaring inspiration, at times shows
painful constraint. On the other hand, the hymn to
the beauty of the world comprised by Noces and VEte,
the muted yet strong and virile recitative that is La
Peste, the cry of purity and love that is Les Justes echo
in us with an intensity of accent that only an authentic
inspiration can sustain.
In sum, we would like to remind those who refuse the
ultimate title of thinker to this rebel, that a tree is not
judged by its roots, and that this tree of “solar truth,”
shimmering though it be and streaming with the warmth
and sea spray that favored its growth, may very well be
the truth of the new Renaissance which the best minds
of our time do not despair of shaping.
148

L’Ete

E. REDISCOVERIES
After L’Homme Revolte, in which the balanced
“Thought at the Meridian” seemed to be a kind of
conclusion, or at least a culmination of the thought
analyzed up to now; after VEte, the lyricism of which
had but improved upon the accents of Noces with
steadfast constancy; after this phase of activity lasting
close to twenty years and which suddenly returns to
its poetical source, as if to measure the distance run,
it is legitimate to look questioningly into the future
career of Albert Camus.
We know that he considers his work as barely begun
and deems it primarily as but a necessary settling of
matters between the century and the role he feels
called upon to play in it. First of all, he wanted to “get
in line” with his epoch (“se mettre en regie avec” are
his words). The proof of his artistry could only come
afterwards.
Thus, the period of criticism having been passed, his
taste for a freer creativity begins to reassert its fragile
and difficult demands.
Does this mean that the works to come—works of
art rather than declarations of faith—will resolutely
149

Albert Camus

turn away from the problems of the hour? Not at all.
But instead of deferring to them in his writings, Camus
will do his utmost to dominate them, and instead of
allowing them to dictate the substance and form of his
works, will shape them to his needs. History, which
provoked the virile retort that was La Peste and the
sound demystification that was VHomme Revolte, will
no longer determine the inspiration of the creator, but
will let itself be absorbed in his great effort to tap the
tree of life. Henceforth the question of myth sinks into
the background, giving way to the author’s search for
eternal truth, without, however, the one being neces¬
sarily immaterial to the other.58
“By one of those departures which are an indication
of the originality and authenticity of his revolt, Camus
evidently means to escape from the Manichaeism in
which some critics would have confined him, and re¬
discover existence in all its living complexity.”59
La Chute (The Fall)60

This short narrative of 170 pages, like L’Etranger,
with which, rightly or wrongly, certain affinities have
68 See: Gazette de Lausanne, March 28, 1954.
59Roger Quilliot, La Mer et les Prisons p. 268, (Essay on Albert
Camus, published by Gullimard, Paris, 1956).
60 Published by Gallimard, Paris, 1956. In its English translation,
The Fall, published by Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1957.

150

The Fall

been discovered, has been variously received and under¬
stood by the critics. There has been unanimity on but
one point: the quality of its composition and style.
Once more Camus has been hailed as an incomparable
artist,61 assuredly one of the most rigorous and gifted
of contemporary writers.
In effect, it is impossible not to be charmed by this
long monologue which from the first page sues for our
attention in a language that is marvellously pure, some¬
times

distant and slightly ceremonious,

sometimes

warmly familiar or stingingly sarcastic, sometimes elo¬
quent, persuasive, and sometimes uplifted by a poetic
imagination of infallibly clear vision. As P.-H. Simon
has put it, we could hardly “resist the charm of this
narration which is dry without baldness, rapid without
excessive tension, illuminated with percussive formulas,
in a tone of humor that is sometimes slightly grating but
more often of a luminous and biting irony: the idea,
scoured and polished, shines like a steel blade.”
The monologist, who has broken with his past, lives
under the false name of Jean-Baptiste Clamence in the
61 “The writer has increased his marvels and multiplied his enchant¬
ments. His prose remains the most luminous and precise that we have
read since the first works of Montherlant (but without Montherlant’s
arrogance or rhetoric), since the first works of Gide, even, (but with¬
out Gide’s damp exudations of seduction), and the moralist has
sharpened some unalterable aphorisms.”—Alain Bosquet, in Combat,
May 31, 1956.

151

Albert Camus

slum quarters of Amsterdam, where he has taken to
frequenting the seamen’s bars along the Zeedijk, par¬
ticularly the bar called Mexico-City; it is there that he
watches out for the occasion to force the person at the
next table, preferably a foreigner and a bourgeois—
on this occasion a Frenchman, like himself—to open up
the conversation so that he may disclose the secret of
his clandestine existence, the reasons for his “fall.”
The confession soon becomes something of a me¬
thodical introspection, and what we are asked to hear
is not the story of a life but the adventures of a con¬
science. Furthermore, a complete background of bitter
allusions to the cynicism of our epoch tends to efface
the too personal elements existing in the case described.
It is, then, a confession, but a “calculated” confession,
in which the anecdote goes beyond its particular refer¬
ence to reach the human species through the individual
and unmask man’s deepest nature. In short, it is hu¬
manity entire that confesses through the mouth of this
curious penitent; “the mirror into which he gazes, he
finally holds up to others.”
A “calculated” confession. A few years previously,
Jean-Baptiste Clamence was a brilliant lawyer in Paris,
a lawyer who championed noble causes, a defender of
“widows and orphans.”
Professionally, he experienced a comforting pleasure
152

The Fall

in realizing that he was “on the right side.” He felt him¬
self above the judges, not having to judge, and above
the accused, not being in the situation of being judged.
He disdained the former and forced recognition from the
latter; in a word, he soared. In his personal life he had
been no less favored: good-looking, excellent dancer,
fine talker, generous and courteous citizen, he enjoyed
everywhere the same success and everywhere excelled.
Such constancy in achievement, the apparent consum¬
mation of happy natural dispositions, inclined him to
consider himself as “designated” for happiness, as “au¬
thorized for this happiness by some kind of superior
decree.” And yet, “always gratified, never sated,” he
was at the same time not satisfied with anything.
One evening, as night descended, very contented
with his day, while lingering on a bridge over the Seine,
the Pont des Arts, “his heart swelling with an enormous
feeling of power . . . and of completeness,” he had
heard the sound of laughter behind him. He turned,
saw no one, and as the sound diminished, “which had
come from nowhere, if not the water,” he was pervaded
with a distress that it took some time to overcome.
In fact, he was never able to rid himself of that
distress. His tranquil sufficiency had been shaken, his
conscience had been awakened. He was about to see
clearly within himself and discover his vanity, the sole
153

Albert Camus

impetus and end of his behavior: “the I-I-I.” Until then,
everything that was not his paltry person or did not
concern it immediately, had “slid off” him and sunk
into oblivion. Searching his memory, he recollected
certain things that his introspection now revealed to
him as being of overwhelming significance. To begin
with, there was that memory of an altercation he had
had, in the course of which he had been struck by an
unknown person, without retaliating; an incident that
had filled him with “sweet dreams of revenge.” Then,
there were the souvenirs of his multiple affairs with
women, his comedian’s skill in the game of seduction,
his tyrannical egotism, memories of the only love he
had ever experienced in all those adventures—and
which was dedicated to himself. Finally, there was the
most painful memory, of that woman who had thrown
herself into the river from the Pont Royal, just after he
had passed her, and whose desperate cry for help he had
heard, without moving a muscle.
Thus, from memory to memory, and through a selfexamination of constantly greater depth, Clamence was
not long in bringing to light “the fundamental duplicity
of human beings” and of comprehending that modesty
helped him “to shine, humility to conquer, and virtue
to oppress.” At that moment, obsessed by the spectre of
death, he was overwhelmed with a kind of vertigo at
154

The Fall

the thought that if he disappeared no one would ever
know the truth about him. Time pressed, he could no
longer disregard who he was—neither as to his lies nor
his guilt. “To reveal to the eyes of the world the stuff I
was made of, I wanted to break the handsome wax
figure I presented everywhere.” (p. 109) He decided to
cover himself systematically with ridicule, which was a
way of immunizing himself against the laughter he felt
hovering about him. But his exhibitions of sincerity
were taken to be pure eccentricities, and his remarks
interpreted as “charming pleasantries.” No one took
him seriously.
He had recourse to women and naturally fell into his
past errors. Incapable of great love, incapable of
chastity, he but added to his sins, and his suffering be¬
came ever more acute. Whereupon he plunged into
debauchery: alcohol and prostitutes. There, no hy¬
pocrisy, no play-acting, no obligation: a slow anaesthesia
of the conscience. “I lived in a kind of fog in which the
laughter became so muffled that I ended up by not
noticing it any more.” (p. 123) Was it the expected
appeasement, the deliverance, the cure? Clamence could
have hoped so, had not his nocturnal excesses obliged
him to resume a more normal existence. But finally, his
senses were blunted, his vitality weakened, his lucidity
dimmed. “There was nothing more to do but grow old.”
155

Albert Camus

Alas, during a cruise, the sight of a floating debris
not far from the liner disturbed him and revived the
memory of the woman drowned near the Pont Royal.
The cry for help from which he had turned away re¬
mounted from the depths of his memory. He realized,
then, the permanence of his disorder, and his incurable
blight. So then, he must accommodate himself to it, must
“live in the dungeon called little-ease,’ ” with the stab¬
bing pain of desire for innocence crushed beneath the
weight of a guilty conscience.
On the point of concluding his story, Jean-Baptiste
Clamence makes a surprising revelation to his inter¬
locutor when he asks him to take a painting out of one
of his cupboards. The painting is the missing panel
from the Van Eyck “Mystery of the Lamb” altar-piece
in the Ghent Cathedral of Saint-Bavon; it is the panel
entitled “The Righteous Judges” that was stolen in
1934. A customer of the Mexico-City bar had sold it,
one drunken night, for a bottle of wine, and the barkeep had hung it over the counter at first, but when told
by Clamence where it came from he had finally deemed
it more prudent to entrust it to the keeping of our
ex-lawyer.
Stolen goods of inestimable worth, a worth which
to Clamence has become exclusively symbolical. This
affair of “The Righteous Judges” being henceforth pre156

The Fall

vented from adoring the Lamb of God, illustrated the
definitive separation of justice from innocence. Did not
this suggest a solution to his quandary? The only way to
escape laughter reverted to managing things so that
everyone would be subjected to it. Well, since no one
was pure enough to dare to judge others without ex¬
posing himself to be judged, “one had to overwhelm
oneself to have the right to judge others.” Since every
judge ends up one day as a penitent, “one had to travel
the road in the opposite direction and practice the pro¬
fession of penitent in order to end up as a judge.” (pp.
159-160)
This function of judge-penitent to which, since then,
he has dedicated himself, is exercised by Clamence ac¬
cording to a settled technique: “Covered with ashes,
tearing out my hair by slow degrees, clawing my face
with my own nails, but with eyes clear and penetrating,
I stand before all humanity, recapitulating my causes
for shame, without losing sight of the effect I produce,
and saying, 1 was the lowest of the low/ Then, im¬
perceptibly, I go on from the T to the ‘we.’ And when
I reach the ‘This is what we are,’ the trick has been
played and I can tell them some home truths. Of course,
I am like them; we’re in the same boat. However, I have
one superiority, I know what I am and this gives me
the right to speak. Im sure you see the advantage. The
157

Albert Camus

more I accuse myself, the more I have the right to
judge you. Better still, I make you judge yourself and
am relieved of the burden to that extent.” (p. 162)
From that moment onward, the duplicity which yes¬
terday was unendurable becomes comforting and one
settles into it as into a state of happiness. The penitent,
having become judge of those who, surprised at judging
him, are induced, or “oriented” by his dissertation to
become penitents themselves, again dominates and
judges and rules. “What rapture to feel like God the
Father and hand out definitive certificates of bad con¬
duct and behavior!” (p. 165) No longer is there any
question of changing one’s existence. What good would
it do, since infamy is general and one retains the prestige
of having been the first to denounce it in oneself? “Only,
the confession of my faults allows me to begin again
with a lighter heart and to taste a double enjoyment,
first of all in my nature, and secondly in a delightful
repentance.” (p. 164) Unexpected resolution, in which
the rejection of evil savagely disintegrates and yields
to it. But is Clamence sincere, and in displaying
this triumphant cynicism is he not hardening himself
against the secret awareness of being still helplessly
cornered in the impasse from which he thought he had
escaped?
Needless to say that in such an outline, though we
158

The Fall

have given an idea of the logical content of the book,
we have not given its affective tone. Yet the narrative
touches us not only by what it confesses but also by the
atmosphere in which the confessions are made.62 And
that atmosphere is diffused with consummate art not
only by the intimations of the stage-setting but also by
the character of the protagonist and the hidden fires of
his words.
The setting. As we have seen, the setting is an im¬
portant element in the symbolical aesthetics of Camus
and participates in the drama of his previous myths.
“The moral message included in a narrative by Camus
is meant to be conveyed to us as an evocation. In a
way, this type of book, with its ability to render us
sensitive to what it means to communicate, partakes of
the qualities of a prose poem more than of a novel.”63
For the first time, the enchantments of the Mediter¬
ranean region, its light, sky, and sea, have not been
convoked. A passing allusion is made to Greece, to note
the demand of purity it makes upon its chosen ones.
Quite the contrary, in this book where a conscience
plumbs the depths of its impurity, where the mire is
stirred up with cruel intensity, the desolate landscape
62 “. . . he is not the artist who speaks, but who causes to speak.”—
Albert Camus, “Lettre au sujet du Parti Pris,” in Nouvelle N.R.F.,
Sept. 1956.
63 Andre Rousseaux, in Le Figaro Litteraire, May 26, 1956.

159

Albert Camus

of the Last Judgment was needed. And what could
have been more suitable than this landscape of con¬
centric canals that compose Amsterdam with its “breath
of stagnant waters,” this “immense Holy-water font”
of the Zuider Zee; what could be better than this cold,
clinical, sterilized light? “Just look at that heap of ashes
on our left—they call it a dune, here; just notice the grey
dike to our right, the ghastly beach below us, and in
front of us the thin swill that is the sea, and the vast
sky reflecting the pale waters. A soggy inferno, really;
nothing but horizontals, no glitter; space is colorless,
life at a standstill. Isn’t this universal obliteration a
vision of nothingness?” (p. 86)
The judge-penitent has not chosen his retreat by
chance. With a very keen sense of stage-setting, he has
understood that “the most beautiful of negative land¬
scapes” will add to the upward movement of his con¬
fession and will destroy in others any slight inclination
to withhold their own.
But at the very moment when he declares he is
happy, reigning “at the zenith of the Netherlands sky”
over this wilderness of mists, his nostalgia for the
privileged lands of innocence wrings his heart: “Oh,
sun, sands, and islands beneath the trade-winds, Oh
youth, of which memory despairs!” (p. 166) And this
cry—it is again as always the young North African who
160

The Fall

reasserts himself—reveals to us, beneath its rhetorical
wrappings, the unavowed hurt of the protagonist.
The protagonist. Intelligent, lucid, a gifted talker,
Clamence plays a part, or rather improvises it. He is
simultaneously the one who talks, the one who listens
to himself talk, the one who thinks only when talking,
the one who talks without thinking, the one exalted by
an image, depressed by a memory, stirred, slowed down,
disoriented, or stimulated by the reactions of his in¬
terlocutor, or simply inspired by a feature of the land¬
scape. In short, he is alive.
What he has to say does not constitute a report, his
investigation does not comprise an inventory. He is
not soothing his conscience, he is trying to persuade
himself that he has soothed it. He calls his confession
“calculated,” his discourse “oriented”; he believes he is
saying nothing but what he judges opportune to say
and in a suitable manner. But the phrases escape him.
He notices it sometimes and makes excuses:

. . it’s

an overflow; the minute I open my mouth words flow
out . . .” or else: “But I’m letting myself go, I’m plead¬
ing a cause!” or again: “Well now, I’m getting excited,
I’m overdoing it.” And warn us though he will, “Don’t
pay too much attention to my emotional outbursts or
my ravings; they’re controlled,” we are not fooled and
we understand that he is trying to cover up a moment
161

Albert Camus

of unconstraint or distraction by this pretence. At times
his words stimulate his mind, force him to elaborate his
turns of speech, giving us the impression of hearing the
narrator think aloud; at times the confession is hurried
or becomes arrested at a certain altitude, then, either
losing momentum or slackening, it drops into anecdote;
at times it slows down when the avowal becomes diffi¬
cult, and remains suspended; and finally, at times, it
throws off all constraint and pours out in an abstruse
soliloquy or launches towards apocalyptic heights.
In truth, Clamence remains prime listener of Clamence. He reacts to his self-accusation and his penitent’s
lucidity is several times thwarted by the pain it causes
him. We are made all the more aware of this suffering
by the physical depression which progressively over¬
whelms him. On the fifth and last day of this painful
“voyage to the limits of oneself,” the monologist remains
in bed, suffering with a fever, when his visitor comes to
see him. Thus, it is not surprising that some critics,
notably Emile Henriot, have described Clamence as
“taking masochistic pleasure in degrading himself,” and
his confession as “cynical and vain,” even “disgusting.”
Instead, it would appear that this undertaking of “self¬
degradation” singularly yields him up to torture and
that his cynicism is rooted in an emotion of pathos that
162

The Fall

is all the more painful for remaining suppressed. As for
his irony, it is the hair shirt of his clear-sightedness; the
more he presses against it, the more it galls him. And
does one not, as well, touch a form of tragedy with this
conscious confronting of evil discovered within the
self, humiliated in its pure revolt by the ineluctable
infirmity of its nature? For it must be specified—yet is
it really necessary?—that this Camusian hero is of the
line of Sisyphus and cannot conceive of appealing to
divine aid, having “no religion whatever,” no least feel¬
ing of transcendency.
The solution of the judge-penitent has therefore not
offered a solution to anything at all.64 Clamence is aware
of this, but “when you don’t like your life, when you
know that you must change it, you don’t have a choice,
do you?” The fury of impotence then assumes the mask
of triumph. One proclaims one’s happiness: “. . . I’m
happy, I’m happy, I tell you. I forbid you not to believe
that I’m happy. I’m dying of happiness!” (p. 166) The
anxious insistence does not, alas, convince us, but rather
the contrary.
64 Le Mythe de Sisyphe suggested only one way of living the absurd
destiny: to make every effort “to maintain before one’s eyes that
sentiment of the absurd revealed by the consciousness.” We find an
attitude very close to this in Clamence, who comes full circle in his
revolt against evil by maintaining himself in evil.

163

Albert Camus

A few seconds later, recovered from the excitation
which had determined him to arm himself with osten¬
tatious glory, exhausted by that access of fever, the
“empty prophet for mediocre times” comes to grips with
himself and with the inferno of reality: “Fm afraid
I let myself go; but Fm not crying. We let ourselves go
at times, we doubt the evidence, even when weVe dis¬
covered the secrets of a good life. My solution, of course,
is not the ideal.” The truth appears, and with it the
wound opens: “How to become another person? Impos¬
sible. What one must be is nobody, one must forget
oneself for someone, at least once. But how?” (pp. 166167)
There is no solution to the problem; the shadows of
guilt are dense and invincible; the fall, irremediable.
Clamence has disguised as a makeshift a defeat from
which he will never recover. All the same, this does not
give us the right to repulse the mirror he holds out to
us, nor to flee from the light that he has projected on
“the sadness of the common condition of man and the
despair of not being able to escape it.” And here is
where the moralist lies in wait for us.
A disturbing myth. Springing from a personal ex¬
perience, Camus’ narrative work is stripped to the bare
bones of myth, the myth sub specie aeternitatis. This
164

The Fall

quite classic preoccupation with universality is here
expressed in the intentions of the protagonist: “I mingle
what concerns me with what concerns others. I take
our common features and the experiences we have
endured together, the weaknesses that we share, the
good behavior, the man of the time, in short, as he
exists in me and in others. With that material I fabricate
a portrait which is a portrait of everyone and no one.”
(p. 161)
Thus, the judge-penitent’s confession implicates our
own even before asking for it. His clear gaze penetrates
us and forces us to assume his cruel discoveries with
him. And which one of us will not admit recognizing
himself in this figure of an upright man, but a man who
has never had enough sincerity and courage to denounce
openly his moral comfort and beneath the very ap¬
pearance of virtue to denounce the omnipotence of his
egoism? Come what may, we must concede that we
are all accomplices.
After the optimism of La Teste, the impossible revolt
of Clamence and his fallen-angel’s acrimony seem to
mark a volte-face of Camus’ attitude which rather
sharply drives his thought back towards the negative
position of L’Etranger. Just as man’s need of enlighten¬
ment and justice will make him come to grief against
165

Albert Camus

the absurd walls, so his demands for purity and his
yearning for innocence will painfully exhaust him in
his effort to surmount the fatal inevitability of his faults.
The teaching is new and is superimposed upon the other;
but there is the same refusal to be resigned, the same
certitude void of hope, the same imprisonment.
La Chute no more annuls the truths of La Peste, than
La Peste annuled the truths of L’Etranger. What human
dignity can accomplish against historical and collective
evil is one thing, what remains for human dignity to
accomplish against the evil of the individual conscience
is another thing.65
After Meursault (in L’Etranger), after Maria (in
Le Malentendu), after Caligula, Jean-Baptiste Clamence presents a new extreme case, and the narrative of
his experience aims less at instructing than at disturb¬
ing us. His rejection of all complacency, all subterfuge,
all compromise overwhelms us with revelations that
are at times intolerable, but such intransigency, through
the absolute purity to which it refers, heals and stimu¬
lates us in the long run, and far from casting us down
into despair, whips up our energy to live a life finally
disintoxicated and freed from the imposture of false
satisfactions. The clairvoyance which the poet already
65 The question aired in our note 39 here finds a clearer and, in a
way, a more categorical answer.

166

The Fall

magnified in Noces remains for strong souls the only
possible revenge against the rigors of fate.
An undertaking of “moderate demoralization,”66 La
Chute contents itself with repeating “to consciences
that they are not without blemishes,”67 and this re¬
minder, after the warnings of VHomme Revolte, finally
raises to prominence a preoccupation which up to this
point had only insinuated itself discreetly into the main
theme of revolt. One should recall the anxious soul
searchings of Tarrou (in La Peste), and the scruples of
the young revolutionaries in Les Justes. Kaliayev, con¬
fronting the Grand Duchess who urges him to repent,
exclaims, “Let me prepare to die. If I do not die, then
I shall be a murderer”; Clamence, evoking the torment
of Jesus, involuntarily responsible for the massacre of
the innocents, slips in a little remark that is not without
some connection with his own obsession: “Oh! Who
would have believed that the crime is not so much in
causing death as in not dying oneself!” (p. 131) These
quotations placed side by side illuminate the characters,
showing their consanguinity, and attest once more to
the intimate solidarity that reigns among works ap¬
parently foreign to each other.
66 and97 Unpublished statements by Camus, quoted by R. Quillot,

op. cit., p. 238.

167

Albert Camus

L’Exil et Le Royaume68

This collection of six short stories, in which La Chute
was originally destined to be included, confirms the
mastery of Camus and reveals in this stylist possibilities
of renewal which, far from obliterating his personal and
inimitable stamp, heighten it with unexpected charm.
Never have we been given the opportunity to have a
more exact view of his art than in these pages where
the appropriateness of the style to the subject matter
is completely realized six times in succession. Nor have
we ever been better able to perceive the exact phy¬
siognomy and the orientation of his past work than in
the new perspective opened up by this series of narra¬
tives.
The reason is that here the narration develops accord¬
ing to the very laws and rhythm of the literary form,
evolving in descriptive passages of imagery, fingering
over a psychological shudder, carefully recounting the
action in detail, capturing the gesture and fixing the
attitude; here reality irrupts, charged with sensations,
complexity of movement, opulence; a veritable flower¬
ing.
And it is not merely a question of an aesthetic, of a
certain way of gathering and “filtering” reality; the
68 Gallimard, Paris, 1957.

168

L’Exil et Le Royaume

ethical point of view asserts itself equally in the effort
to comprehend total life, to seize the diversity and the
poignancies of life.
In the allegorical form of his previous works, the
linear curve of the narrative not only was drawn with
an extreme economy of detail, but it also set out only
to describe an extreme behavior, and to extract from
it only one single verity of living experience. Unity be¬
ing always a preoccupation of Camus, he sought, in the
past, to compensate for its apparent betrayal by making
one work respond to another: L’Etranger answered by
La Peste, La Peste answered by La Chute.
But L’Exil et le Royaume “contrasts an attempt at
plenitude with the achievements of abstraction,” notes
Gaetan Picon, who, clearly perceiving this new phase,
concludes thus: “The book invites us to seize the very
pulsation of existence, opening and closing, revealing
and concealing itself, increasing and decreasing. To the
moralist who isolates and parcels out, there seems to
have succeeded, here, a poet who assembles and re¬
stores the unique throbbing of life.”69
Nevertheless, these simple tales, situations arrested
and held as if suspended, carry a certain power of
abstraction, since all of them—and each in its own way
69 "A propos de L’Exil et Le Royaume,” in Le Mercure de France,
May, 1957.

169

Albert Camus

—illustrate the same theme, thus giving unity to this
collection, beneath the diversity of expression.
North Africa, the land from which Camus has con¬
stantly drawn his best inspiration, forms the setting of
the first four tales; the fifth one would seem to exploit his
experiences in Paris, and the last one draws upon mem¬
ories of a voyage to South America in the summer of
1949. Even so, these various settings impose no geo¬
graphical necessity; they merely provide the atmos¬
phere, magical at times, for the inner drama of the
characters.
The first story. La Femme Adultere, places on stage
a sensitive and imaginative woman, who has been
dragged along on a business trip among the villages of
the high plateau of southern Algeria by her preoccupied
husband. Confronting there the silent Arabs, particularly
that soldier with the aspect of a jackal who “surveyed
her with his light eyes” in the arid and glacial loneliness
of the desert, she discovers at once her solitude and her
servitude, and all the things her cheated heart has con¬
fusedly yearned for—and, till now, been denied. Per¬
ceiving an encampment of nomads in the distance, she
begins to feel a warm and irresistible complicity with
those few men “who wandered without respite, who
possessed nothing, but who served no one, miserable
yet free lords of a strange realm.” “She knew only that
170

L’Exil et Le Royaume

this realm had been promised her from the beginning of
time but that never would it be hers, unless at this
fugitive instant, perhaps, when she opened her eyes
upon the sky suddenly immobile and upon the floods
of motionless light, while the sound of voices that drifted
up from the Arab village became, all at once, hushed.”
A few hours later, she leaves the hotel to flee into
the night and to yield herself, rapturously, to the posses¬
sion of the “sky in movement.” She then returns to her
room, to the marriage bed, to mediocrity, to her exile,
and begins to weep “with all her tears, unable to hold
them back.”
It is a short story that fills all the strict requirements
of the form: against a realistic background the author
outlines for us, as with the light touches of the engraver’s
needle, a dry-point which depicts all the delicate shad¬
ings of a mood experienced in a moment of time.
In Le Rene gat ou un Esprit confus (“The Renegade
or a Mind Confused”), we are caught in a situation of
horror and atrocity. The story is told in a nightmarish
monologue delivered by a man who has had his tongue
torn out. The tale is of a young missionary with a peasant
background, a stubborn, hard-headed, impulsive in¬
dividual—product of a childhood on the high plateau of
the Massif Central in France, with a “coarse” father and
a “brute” of a mother—who is so enraptured with pros-

Albert Camus

elytism that he mistakes his fierce will to power (dis¬
guised by an inclination for martyrdom) for charity.
Despite the advice and warnings of his superiors, he
had wanted to visit “the town of salt... at the frontier
of the lands occupied by the whites and the blacks”
and convert the barbarous tribes to his religion. He was
not afraid of physical harm; on the contrary, he courted
injuries: “. . . by the way in which I will endure them,
I will subjugate the savages, like a powerful sun. Power¬
ful, yes, that was the word I constantly rolled on my
tongue, I dreamed of absolute power, the power before
which people fall to their knees, the power that forces
the adversary to capitulate and which, in short, converts
the adversary . . .*
Tortures are, indeed, reserved for him, and without
stint, but no one bends the knee. And he it was who,
after long torment and the mutilation inflicted upon
him, began to deny his faith and recognize and worship,
as evil incarnate, the fetich that was in the house where
he was imprisoned.
He had been fooled: good was a chimera; “only the
reign of wickedness was without flaw.” The slave and
admirer of his tormentors, he conceives of but one way
to obtain freedom: to become cruel like them, closed to
pity, ferocious, bloodthirsty.
So it is that when he learns, one day, that an army
172

L’Exil et Le Royaume

chaplain, riding ahead of a garrison of twenty men, has
been authorized to penetrate the village to look after
the children there, he flies into a feverish rage of hatred.
More ingenious in wickedness than he could ever be for
his own good, he manages to escape and, armed with
an old rifle he has seized, stations himself beside the
road. When his co-religionist arrives, he fires upon “his
impotence and charity, fires upon everything that delays
the advent of Evil.” Crucified by his masters, who fear
reprisals, forsaken by his fetich as he had been by his
God, he is filled with anguished doubt: “Oh! Have I
been fooled again!” In the moment of anguish there is
revealed to him the earthly realm which he has always
ignored, and he cannot keep back this overwhelming
entreaty: “O men in other times fraternal, sole recourse,
O solitude, do not forsake me!”
Rejected by love from his tender infancy, seminarist
impatient for revenge, priest of pride and of absolute
power, votary of hate, victim and torturer, this “intelli¬
gent mule” has experienced to the end the calvary of
his infatuation; only the pangs of death have been able
to make him understand that the only possible way out
for the exile is to be found between rejection of servitude
and resignation of power.
Les Muets (“The Mute Men”) are workingmen in a
small coopering shop. Defeated in a strike, they return
173

Albert Camus

to their jobs, having formed a coalition of silence against
their employer who tries in vain to break it down and
secure their good will and sympathy. Assuredly, they
have it in for him; yet he would have liked nothing
better than to satisfy their demands. But let misfortune
crash down upon that man whom they have excluded
from their fraternal universe, and they are immediately
at a loss, “with their rough hands hanging down use¬
lessly against their old sawdust-covered pants . . .” But
not one word will be pronounced, and not one gesture
even vaguely made.
Shut off from each other in their different social
categories, all these individuals suffer at being exiled
from the realm in which love and understanding, with¬
out reserve, could finally exist.
I do not know if L’Hote (“The Guest”) has more
right to our admiration than the other stories, but its
simplicity of plot and the bitter-sweet poesy which it
distills confer a beauty and, yes, a soundness upon it
which has a disintoxicating effect.
The scene is a high Algerian plateau, to which winter
has suddenly come in a blizzard, isolating a schoolhouse
that clings to the side of a hill and is now deserted by
its pupils. In this school, assaulted by the wind, there
is a solitary man, the schoolmaster, fortunately with
enough provisions to “sustain a siege.” “The country
174

L’Exil et Le Royaume

was like that, a cruel place to live, even without the
presence of men who, however, did nothing to improve
matters. But Daru was born there, and he felt exiled
everywhere else.”
And now two men climb up the hill to his refuge: a
gendarme with an Arab at the end of a rope .The Arab
has killed a cousin in a quarrel over grain. He will have
to be taken to a place twenty kilometers away. But since
the gendarme is obliged to return immediately to his
village, the order is given for the schoolmaster to sub¬
stitute for him on this errand.
Daru refuses: “The stupid crime committed by that
man revolted him, but to hand him over to the au¬
thorities was against his principles.” He signs a paper
attesting to the fact that the prisoner has been left in
his charge, and the gendarme goes away.
Next morning, after an hour’s walk, the schoolmaster
puts a parcel of food and some money into the Arab’s
hands; then, turning him away from the road to the
east which ends at “government and the police,” he
shows the Arab the road towards the south, where are
pastures and nomads and where he could find a refuge
—the road to liberty.
His stupefaction knows no bounds when, after a few
minutes, he perceives the Arab “who was slowly walking
along the road to the prison.”
175

Albert Camus

Back in his classroom, the schoolmaster reads the
following inscription on the blackboard, “traced with
chalk by an awkward hand: ‘You have handed over our
brother. You will pay for it.’ ”
And this threat of an invisible witness, in which once
more may be read the “misunderstanding,” makes him
touch the bottom of his solitude and feel the immanence,
in the midst of his realm, of an inevitable exile. Without
being either the slave or the master of anyone, and to
safeguard the liberty of that innocence, he had offended
his old friend, the gendarme; the Arab had chosen
punishment, and he himself will be exposed, on the
morrow, to unjustifiable reprisals ...
Because of its plan, its symbolical plot-lines, and the
humor which constantly underlines it, the narrative
entitled Jonas smacks essentially of the philosophical
tale. The protagonist may be summed up by a few
characteristics:

naivete, simplicity, light-heartedness

and light-mindedness, stupid optimism; the action, in
brief, is a sequence of events which fade into each other
in a smooth continuity.
Jonas is a happy man. He has left his family’s business
—a publishing house—to follow his vocation as an artist.
He has married the woman of his dreams, who has
given him, in quick succession, three adorable children.
He has a sure friend, and fortune has favored him—
176

L’Exil et Le Royaume

he is famous, his paintings sell, the newspapers speak
of him in terms of praise, his name fills the important
art chronicles.
But Jonas’ head is not turned by success; he believes
in his guiding star and attributes this sequence of good
fortune to it.
Alas, reputation has its drawbacks. He is invited
everywhere, his help is demanded everywhere and in
all sorts of ways, his correspondence monopolizes his
time more and more, his home is more and more invaded
by people who are full of respect for him but not for
his work, and his work suffers. His family also begins
to be in the way: the children are growing up and the
apartment lacks space.
But Jonas is good, generous, responsive. Around him
he sees only solicitude, affability, kindness. How to with¬
hold himself from the presence of all these people, even
though they are troublesome? And then, too, there’s
his star, to whose keeping he entrusts himself blindly.
Poor man, he had not foreseen that his star might
grow dim! The day comes when the critics are more
reticent than usual; next day, more severe; the day after,
aggressive, ferocious. If one were to believe them, Jonas
is finished as an artist.
And in fact his inspiration seems to be in some diffi¬
culty. He does not manage to work as before. To find
177

Albert Camus

a semblance of solitude, Jonas leaves his studio for the
bedroom: the visitors, though more infrequent, follow
him there. Then he installs himself in the corridor;
after that, he shifts to the shower-room, and finally he
ends up in the kitchen. What is he now painting? Noth¬
ing, now. He tries hard, but in vain.
Then, on various pretexts, he begins going out. He
discovers that alcohol fleetingly illumines a creative
fire within him, similar to that of his days of feverish
creativity. He even goes so far as to succumb to the
“friendship” of a few women. Despair of the betrayed
wife, tears, repentance of the culprit.
Jonas takes hold of himself. He wants to paint, he will
force himself to paint. He needs to find the light of his
guiding star again. Absolute solitude is indispensable.
What will he do? He builds a kind of garret cubbyhole
in the right angle formed by the two corridors of his
apartment. There, at least, “he will disturb no one.”
Ingenious and aimiable Jonas!
Shut into his bird-roost which he ends up by never
leaving at all, the artist reflects. “He had to pin down
finally that secret which was not merely the secret of
art, he saw quite well. That is why he did not light the
lamp.” And that secret would be discovered shortly
afterwards when, exhausted and at the end of his
strength, he fell down and his canvas, which had re178

L’Exil et Le Royaume

mained entirely blank, was taken from him. In the centre
of it a word was written in very small letters, “a word
that one could decipher, but without knowing whether
it should be read as solitary or solidarity.”
A play on words which is not merely gratuitous, but
is charged with profound value, since it synthesizes the
meaning of the symbol. Solitary, yes, that is the condi¬
tion of the realm of the creator who must in no way be
distracted from his effort; but at the same time he must
endure banishment from the human community. Soli¬
darity, yes, since the artist is a man, that “social animal,”
who has his affections and weaknesses, his need for
communication; but then, his vocation, deranged, be¬
comes unresponsive, his genius dwindles: “Everything
won for life is lost for art.” (Oscar Wilde)
It would seem that La Pierre qui Pousse was reserved,
for more than one reason, to end the collection of stories.
By far the most important, with Jonas, this story is also
one in which the author demonstrates most completely
his resources as a writer of prose. And also, its conclusion
displays, brighter than the flashes of light glimpsed up
to this point, Camus’ optimism in its full brightness.
True, some portions such as the evocation of the
Brazilian forest, with which the narrative opens, or the
extremely exact descriptions of a macumba and of a
religious procession, while heightening the feeling of
179

Albert Camus

the truth of the tale by the authenticity of the local
color, give no less the impression of splendid adorn¬
ments.70 One feels that the author lingers over these
portions as if with pleasure, ensnared by his own spells.
Reality, here, takes its revenge.
D’Arrast, an engineer, fleeing Europe, has been in
Brazil for a month. The notables of the small town of
Iguapa have engaged him to construct a dike “which
will prevent the periodical flooding of the waterfront
sections.” In reality, D’Arrast, like Tarrou and Clamence,
is trying to escape an oppressive memory; “Someone
was going to die on my account ...” A more imperious
necessity than his profession, then, has required this
expatriation. “He waited, in the red heat of the humid
days, under the tiny stars of night, despite the tasks
that were his, the dikes to build, the roads to open, as
if the work he had come to do here was but a pretext,
the occasion of a surprise, or of an encounter that he
did not even imagine, but which would wait patiently
for him to the end of time.”
He is far from suspecting that the native with whom
he has engaged in conversation will be the instrument
of that encounter. Ship’s cook on an oil tanker which
70 All the elements of “the dance in honor of St. George” (pages 210

et seq.) had already figured in Une macumba au Bresil (extract of a
travel diary), published in Livres de France, Hachette, Paris, Novem¬
ber 1951, pp. 5-7.

180

L’Exil et he Royaume

caught fire one night, the man had gone down with the
lifeboat cast out to sea and was very near drowning
when, sighting in the distance the dome of the Iguapa
church, he had promised Jesus that, if saved, he would
walk to the church in a religious procession, carrying
a stone weighing a hundred pounds on his head, Jesus
had saved him; he must keep his promise, and that,
not later than the following day.
But that evening and all night long there will be a
macumba in the long-house, it is the festival “for Saint
George.” The ship’s cook knows the irresistible spell
exercised over him by this part-Christian, part-pagan
ceremony, in which the celebrant dances and sings
until he falls into a trance, to facilitate the descent of
God into him. “And then, there are the cigars and the
saints and the women. You forget everything, you don’t
obey any more.” Yet he must save his strength for the
carrying of the stone ... He asks D’Arrast to accompany
him. “Come to the dance. Afterwards, you can take me
away. If you don’t, I’ll stay and I’ll dance. I’ll not be
able, perhaps, to keep myself from it . . .”
D’Arrast accepts. The cook dances all night long,
although the engineer reminds him of his promise. Next
morning, his strength fails him; the stone slips to the
ground and, exhausted, he collapses.
Then, D’Arrast took up the burden, walking to the
181

Albert Camus

church square, after which, “not knowing why,” he
struck off in the direction of the water front, reached
the cook’s hovel, entered it and, “with one single move¬
ment, he threw the stone upon the fire that was still
burning red in the middle of the room.” The vow was
accomplished. From then on, the foreigner would be a
part of the home he had saved from disgrace.
For D’Arrast, it was life “beginning again.”
Exiled from a Europe “of shame and wrath, exiled
among these languid and restless fools who dance to
die,” exiled from himself, he had, by associating himself
with the pious beliefs of one of his fellow men, recon¬
quered his realm, his faith in an earthly fraternity un¬
trammeled by History and attuned to his “pitiful and
terrible love.”

182

Part iii.

THE AESTHETICIAN
AND ARTIST

• • •

III.

THE AESTHETICIAN
AND ARTIST
It is not surprising that Camus has extended his think¬
ing to questions of literary creation and to the problems
of his own aesthetic, nor that he has applied to this
endeavor the same lucidity that led him from the ab¬
surdist to the rebellious position. He sees man-as-man
and man-as-artist as an entity; everything that concerns
the one implicates the other. Conscious of the dignity
of his mission, he could not stop halfway and leave the
demands of his vocation beyond the conquests of his
thought. Thus we find that each of the two phases of
his moral reflection comports its aesthetic corollary. Le
Mythe de Sisyphe devotes its entire third section to
“Absurd Creation” (creation absurde); VHomme Revolte
returns to the question in its fourth chapter, under the
heading “Rebellion and Art” (creation revoltee).
185

Albert Camus

1. ABSURD CREATION

It is defined as being the expression of an “illumina¬
tion” by which the conscious mind brutally discovers
the nonsense of the universe and the meaninglessness
of human life. The clairvoyant artist is thereby offered
the chance of alerting his awareness and of directing its
adventures, since in the course of creative effort the
artist forces himself to remain mentally “detached”
from life, keeping the perspective which will enable him
to apply his images exactly “to what is reasonless,” while
bewaring of letting anything of this effort appear or
of introducing into his work an order, organization, or
significance of which his model is utterly devoid. Admi¬
ration has been expressed for the way this candid tech¬
nique was employed in L’Etranger, which is a veritable
decalcomania, an exact reproduction, a “miming” of the
absurd; here the creative attitude expresses itself in re¬
volt, freedom, and diversity with the same poignant
limpidity brought by the author to the elaboration of
his line of thought.
The work of art can no more admit a meaning than
the life whose mechanical unfolding it seeks to reflect.
The work of art explains nothing and screens from the
reader even the least indication of that consciousness
affronting a sentient world which repudiates it. In its
186

The Aesthetician and Artist

gratuitousness, it is careful not to entertain the least
principle of explanation, the most furtive illusion, the
faintest glimmer of hope. For its creator, it forever
represents but a useless thing. “Art can never be so
well served as by a negative thought ... To work and
create ‘for nothing,’ to model in clay, to know that one’s
creation has no future . . .” (Le Mythe de Sisyphe, p.

154)
The freedom of the creation which nothing solicits,
neither thesis nor doctrine, and which consequently
has complete access to the field of reality, brings about
the diversity of its realizations. One after another, the
works will succeed each other, without any apparent
bond to unite them; but from the whole body of the
work the thought will radiate like the fire of a manyfaceted diamond. Thought, for Camus, is the opposite
of ideas. It is the mirror of the world and not the
augmenting of the world by adding to it an original
point of view.
The artist finds in his work no consolation, no reason
for hope, no outlet which will enable him to escape
the “absurd walls” and give a meaning to his life. His
creation represents nothing to him but a means of
strengthening his absurdist attitude and sharpening his
vigilance; it is a veritable ascesis which “requires daily
effort, self-discipline, and exact appreciation of the
187

Albert Camus

bounds of truth, moderation, and strength.” Under¬
standably, one can claim that it is “the overwhelming
evidence of man’s sole dignity; the stubborn revolt
against his condition, the perseverance in an effort con¬
sidered sterile.” (Le Mythe de Sisyphe, p. 156)
2. REBELLION AND ART
The absurdist work of art is neither more nor less
free of contradiction than is the attitude upon which it
is based. By the simple fact of existing, it at least signifies
the nonsignificance of the world and of life. In art as
in ethics, the absurd must, then, be surpassed. By the
notion of revolt introduced into his philosophical medi¬
tation, the author makes his aesthetic thought accom¬
plish a progress which we have already traced from
UEtranger to La Peste.
All the arts, when one comes to think of it, obey one
unique impetus: they reject the world and at the same
time consent to it. The composer of music takes sounds
offered in their formless and scattered state and “extracts
from the natural disorder a unity satisfying to the mind
and heart.” Sculpture stylizes the attitude of the model
and, without refusing to give resemblance, seeks to free
it from anecdote in such a way as to express “the gesture,
the attitude, or the empty stare which will sum up all
the gestures and all the stares in the world.” The land188

The Aesthetician and Artist

scape painter or the painter of still-lifes chooses his sub¬
ject in time and space, isolates within the limitations of
a canvas and in an unchangeable light a selection of
scattered realities situated in an infinite mobility of
light. As for subject-painting, it fixes in one single choice
and isolation the image of human actions which, in
fact, appear detached from their destiny and “continue
to live, while ceasing to be mortal.”
The author now devotes himself to an analysis of the
novel, and notes that fiction, remarkably enough, coin¬
cides historically with the beginning of the spirit of
revolt. By common consent the novel is expected to open
up an imaginary world to the reader, into which he
escapes and takes refuge from the crushing world of
reality. More than one revolutionary reformer has taken
up this argument—using it as a red herring, actually—
to justify condemnation of creative art. However, it is
quite clear that the majority of men, although they may
reject reality, do not for that reason want to withhold
themselves from it or escape from it. On the contrary,
they sufFer from the fact that reality, forever uncom¬
pleted, forever eludes them. They are devoured with a
longing to discover the complete curve of their existence,
to “know where it leads, to dominate the course of the
flood, in a word, to seize life as destiny.” They experience
the heartbreak of wanting their love to endure, while
189

Albert Camus

knowing that it will not endure, of wanting to possess
the loved one without ever being able utterly to possess,
to bum with the feeling of the absolute and to learn
that “absolute communion throughout a lifetime is an
impossible demand.” Finally, they would like to as¬
semble and coordinate their existence, give it the unity
it lacks, organize their ideas and actions in such a way
as to give their life a unity of style.
The world of the novel exactly responds to all these
aspirations. “It is only a rectification of the world we
live in, according to our deepest wishes.” The same
world as our own, however, the same sentiments and
language; with one sole difference, one single superi¬
ority: in the novel the heroes pursue their destiny to
the end, their passions are engraved upon it in firm and
continuous lines, everything is resolved in a pure, clear,
and perfect curve.
Thus, in offering to man’s metaphysical aspirations
the opportunity of surmounting for a moment his im¬
potence and the possibility of serene appeasement, the
novel reveals itself as a movement of revolt against
creation, which it is pleased to rectify. The novel pro¬
tests against the imperfection of a real world, in which
nothing lasts or is completed, by insisting on an imagi¬
nary world “in which suffering can, if it likes, endure
till death, where passions are never bemused, where
190

The Aesthetician and Artist

people are given over to obsessions and are always
present to one another.” (L’Homme Revolte, p. 326)
In order to make us grasp concretely this unity to
which the fictional work aspires, Camus studies and
compares two opposite attempts: the American novel
of the 1930s and 1940s, and the work of Marcel Proust.
The American novel depicts humanity objectively, with¬
out commentaries, strictly abstaining from accounting
for the motives or the deep springs of behavior. En¬
chained by their daily automatisms, the characters per¬
form before our eyes like so many puppets assimilated
to the same significance and “interchangeable.” The
sought-for unity seems to be reached, but it is a unity
of stage-lighting, not of structure, it is “a degraded
unity.” Instead of trying to obtain unity by the process
of revolt, the authors of the “tough” novels have found
it more expeditious to deny what diversifies and in¬
dividualizes human reality: the inner life. The imaginary
man thus described represents nothing but an abstract
and imaginary being; the “correction” of reality under¬
taken here amounts to an amputation.
Quite the contrary, Marcel Proust rejects reality but
does not deny it. His world is the world of the inner life,
of memory, in which he chooses to resuscitate from a
present moment such and such a fragment of the past
and at the same time to discard “immense blank spaces”
191

Albert Camus
from life. He surmounts the dispersal of the actual
world by bringing together “into a superior form of
unity, the memory of the past and the immediate sensa¬
tion, the sprained foot and the happy days of times
gone by.” Le Temps retrouve (“Time Regained”) is
creation without God; in it, Proust consecrates in an
eternity of perfection the victory of his unified universe
and the victory of man over “the powers of death and
oblivion.”
We now understand that, on the aesthetic as on the
historical level, the movement of true revolt asserts it¬
self in the equilibrium of a Yes or a No. If absolute nega¬
tion, the work of art escapes into a purely formal crea¬
tion, from which “reality is completely expelled.” If
absolute affirmation, it sinks to the level of “brute
reality.” Despite their color, the "roman rose” or the
“roman noir” are twin brothers and the offspring of the
same nihilism. The unity obtained in both cases by the
suppression of one of the terms of revolt (reality or
consciousness) is revealed to be quite illusory. The most
strictly formalistic art, even the most geometrical, can¬
not dispense utterly with reality; the most realistic art,
even photographic art, cannot help but interpret and
betray—no matter how slightly—the sentient world.
“On the other hand, unity in art appears at the limit
of the transformation that the artist imposes on reality
192

The Aesthetician and Artist
. . . This rectification of reality which the artist under¬
takes by his language and by a redistribution of elements
derived from reality is called style and gives the
recreated

universe

its

unity

and

its

boundaries.”

(L’Homme Revolte p. 332) In the work inspired by re¬
volt, the style will consequently bear witness to an un¬
interrupted tension between form and matter, between
a faithfulness to reality and a conscious protestation
against certain aspects of it.71 The style will be just
sufficiently present to take on the image of the world as
far as the form towards which it tends, but will nonethe¬
less attempt to efface its presence “so that the demand
which gives birth to art should be expressed in its most
extreme tension.” (L’Homme Revolte, p. 335)
3. THE MISSION OF THE ARTIST
On this point, too, Albert Camus has clearly explained
himself several times. First of all, in an address made at
71 Actually the same concept, although not centred upon the notion
of revolt, is expressed by Wladimir Weidle in Les Abeilles d’Aristee,
Essai sur de destin actuel des Lettres et des Arts, (Gallimard, 1954):
“It is impossible to dream of installing man in the written work, so
long as he has not been imagined in his totality. Otherwise, under
the name of ‘man,’ the writer ends up with the sub-human and forgets
that empty form is exactly equivalent to raw material, incapable of
assuming a form. No choice is possible between a purely artificial
literature and a literature which repudiates all art under the pretext
of seeing nothing in it but artifice. Man dispossessed of art is as in¬
human as art deprived of man. For the measure of man, his grandeur
as well as his misery, is art.”

193

Albert Camus

the Salle Pleyel in November 1948 and published under
the title “Les Temoins de la Liberte” in Actuelles I (pp.
251-267). What should the attitude of a writer be at
a time ‘when Cain kills Abel in the name of logic and
afterwards asks to be rewarded by the Legion of
Honor?” Can the world of art adjust itself to the ideo¬
logical world, can the ambition of the artist adjust itself
to that of the conqueror? True, the one and the other
meet in their desire to overcome the disorders of reality,
but the very movement of their revolt places them ir¬
remediably in opposition. The first seeks unity “in the
harmony of opposites,” the second “in totality, which
is the wiping out of differences.” The work of art builds
its living unity in argument, in comprehension, and in
love; imperialism installs its mute empire of slavery in
blood and hatred. All artists worthy of the name reject
such an empire. By their vocation they are “the wit¬
nesses of the flesh, not of the law,” the witnesses of
freedom. They are the ones upon whom it is incumbent
to proclaim to the face of the world, and before the
spectacle of its totalitarian folly, that “it is worth more
to be wrong without killing anyone and in allowing
others to talk, than to be right in the midst of silence
and charnel-houses.” (Actuelles I, p. 267)
In fact, the artist does not choose to fight against
tyranny, and it is beside the point to talk about “en194

The Aesthetician and Artist
gagement.” Simply, fidelity to his vocation does not
allow him to remain silent before the tyrant who vocif¬
erates, nor to abstain from exalting life, when history
is preparing to swallow up humanity in the abyss of
nothingness. This is what the author reminds us of in the
chapter “The Artist and his Time,” which groups, in
Actuelles II (pp. 173-182), a series of replies to some
questions asked on the radio or in foreign newspapers.
“The miner who is exploited or who is shot down, the
slaves of the concentration camps and the slaves of the
colonies, the persecuted legions throughout the world
have need, for their part, that all those who can speak
should give voice to their silence

and not hold

themselves apart from them.” At any rate there can be
no question, when one has placed his life at the service
of beauty, of his apostasy in behalf of no matter what
“social preachings.” In this hour when the world seems
to have gone beyond nihilism, it has as much need of
beauty as of love, and it is inconceivable that it could
do without one of these values without necessarily hav¬
ing to abdicate the other. Between the ivory tower and
the roll call of “the social church,” is there room for a
creative attitude which will reconcile aesthetic demands
with the duty of brotherhood? Yes, on condition that
we endure the tension of the man who imposes his social
will upon himself as artist and his aesthetic scruples as
195

Albert Camus

artist upon his will as man. The creative artist from that
point onward must accept the dangers which threaten
him and repel the bitterness his sense of alienation
sometimes inspires. Let him never lose sight of the fact
that “all authentic creation is a gift to the future.”
This brings us to the conclusion reached in L’Homme
Revolte (pp. 341-342) about this apocalyptic light that
art renders to the road of revolution: “In upholding
beauty, we prepare the way for the day of regeneration
when civilization will give first place—far above the
formal principles and degraded values of history—to
this living virtue on which is founded the common dig¬
nity of man and the world in which he lives.”
4. THE END OF ART
Camus has had the chance to air these convictions in
public, notably in a talk that he gave at Turin on No¬
vember 26, 1954 and, during the following days, suc¬
cessively at Genoa, Milan, and Rome. He reaffirmed
them in a recent interview with Jean Bloch-Michel, and
underscored the strikingly delicate position of the con¬
temporary artist who is faced with a choice between
total engagement or total isolation: “That’s how it is
with the artist of our age: he runs the risk, if he stays
in his ivory tower, of cutting himself off from reality, or,
196

The Aesthetician and Artist

if he gallops forever around the political arena, of drying
up. The ticklish paths of true art lie somewhere between
the two. It seems to me that the writer should not ignore
the conflicts of his time, and that he should take part in
them when he knows that he can. But he should also
keep, or from time to time recover, a definite perspective
towards our history. Every work presupposes some fac¬
tual content to which a creator has given shape. Though
the artist should share in the misfortunes of his age, he
must also try to stand off a bit to contemplate and for¬
malize what he sees. This eternal return, this tension
which can be, frankly, a dangerous game at times, is
the burden of the artist today. Perhaps this means that,
in short order, there will no longer be any artists. But
maybe not. It is a question of time, of energy, of free¬
dom, and also of chance.”
When Camus speaks here of a work so balanced be¬
tween a negation and an affirmation, of the work of a
witness (not of a partisan), and of a work of art (not
of dilettantism), he is assuming that literature has a
moral purpose. But it would be totally false to confuse
what he says with a mere moralistic pretension. He is
very clear about this: “. . . I detest virtue that is only
smugness, I detest the frightful morality of the world,
and I detest it because it ends, just like absolute cyn197

Albert Camus

icism, in demoralizing men and keeping them from run¬
ning their own lives with their own just measures of
meanness and magnificence.”
Triumphing at once in the exigency of reality and in
the expendability of illusion, the work of art charges
every consciousness with the vibrations of the same
freedom that has set it in motion: “The end of art, the
end of each life, can only be to add to the sum of free¬
dom and responsibility that is in every heart and in the
world. It can never be, whatever the provocation, to
dimmish or to suppress, even provisionally, this free¬
dom. There are works that try to sway men and to con¬
vert them to authoritarian rules. Others cater to what is
bad in men, to their fears and their hates. I find no
value in such works. No master work has ever been
based on hatred or contempt. On the contrary, there has
never been a work of true art that has not in the end
added to the personal freedom of everyone who has
known and loved it.”
5. THE NOBEL PRIZE FOR LITERATURE, 1957
The ultimate confirmation of Camus’ literary theory
and practice came on Thursday, October 17,1957, when
the Swedish Academy awarded him the Nobel Prize for
Literature and congratulated the laureate “for his im¬
portant literary work which illuminates, with pene198

The Aesthetician and Artist

trating purposiveness, the problems of the human
conscience in the contemporary world.” The award was
all the greater a distinction because of the achievements
of Camus’ competitors, prominent among whom were
Andre Malraux, Saint-John Perse, and Nikos Kazan tzakis.
Camus was surprised by the news of his success:
“Had I been a judge, I would have voted for Andre
Malraux,” he said.
This tribute—which is not mere courtesy—is typical
of what the man is and always has been: sincere, gen¬
uine, uninhibited, completely indifferent to his fame,
and, to borrow a phrase from his friend, Rene Char, “a
stranger to himself.”
When all is said, the award of the Academy at Stock¬
holm merely heightens the brilliance of Camus’ wellfounded fame. It confirms, in effect, only that he has
arrived: at 43 years of age, in the full flower of his
creative genius, Albert Camus still awaits his future,
secure in the harvest that he has already reaped.

199

Appendix

REFLEXIONS SUR
LA GUILLOTINE
Reflexions sur la Guillotine, which Albert Camus published

last May in a tandem edition with Arthur Koestler’s Reflex¬
ions sur la Potence,72 has been read with such interest both
in France and abroad that it seems fitting to give the work
some special notice over and above the mention it received
in the original plan of this book. Actually, Reflexions sur la
Guillotine first appeared in two successive editions of La
Nouvelle N.R.F. (Nos. 54 and 55, June and July, 1957). As
articles on a seemingly new and topical subject, they have
been classed with the “Rediscoveries” of the author. Such
a classification is misleading, for they are really restate¬
ments, with greater precision and subtler technique, of
sentiments that he has avowed with greater or lesser insist¬
ence throughout his career. Did not The Stranger, for ex¬
ample, constitute a brief against capital punishment? Since
then, the author has been persistently haunted by the horror
72 Arthur Koestler-Albert Camus, Reflexions sur la Peine Capitate,
with an Introduction and Appraisal by Jean Bloch-Michel, Paris, Calmann-Levy, 1957.

200

Appendix

of legal execution and, in a larger sense, of rationalized mur¬
der. Is it not possible to cite the confession of the character
Tarrou in The Plague, the indecision and heartache of
Kaliayev, the assassin in Les Justes, and the disturbing in¬
sights of the judge-penitent in The Fall? Is it necessary to
evoke the bruising pages of The Rebel? Albert Camus was,
as it were, ordained to plead before the French people the
case for the abolition of capital punishment that Koestler
had successfully presented, in 1955, to his English public.
Before beginning his argument, the author analyzes the
nature of his conviction: “Across the years, I have found
the idea of the death sentence either too painful to think
about or such a sleazy rationalization that it has outraged
my sense of logic. However, I was willing to suppose that
I was being swayed by my imagination. But, truthfully, I
have come across nothing in these past weeks that has
weakened my conviction or forced me to alter my argument.
In fact, I have discovered other arguments to support those
I originally held. Now I subscribe wholly to Koestler’s con¬
tention: capital punishment is a disgrace to our society and
its advocates cannot reasonably defend their position.” (pp.
128-129)
It would be worthwhile to give here a brief synopsis of
Camus’ arguments before going on to show how they relate
to his characteristic ideas:

a) The assumption of the modern State that capital pun¬
ishment is an exemplary sentence which seeks to deter
rather than to punish crime is shameful and ambiguous.

If the State actually subscribes to this principle, then it
should give executions the widest publicity. Instead, it
carries them out in secret and even takes pains to conceal
201

Appendix

the objective reports of the witnesses and the doctors who
have written about the procedure. The evolution of public
sensibility has forced the State to take measures that refute
the traditional defense of capital punishment.
b) Capital punishment does not prevent crime, and it
even arouses an unfortunate morbidity in certain minds.

Surely it does not intimidate the majority who are apt to
be the hapless victims of the crime. But it also does nothing
to deter those who make their living by crime. The mere
threat of legal vengeance cannot check intense passion, and
the fear of death seizes the murderer after his conviction,
not before his crime. The instinct for self-preservation is too
unstable—it is even at times completely supplanted by its
opposite, the will to self-destruction—to be paralyzed by the
fear of death which, if the legislator is to be believed, should
be a sufficient deterrent in itself. Finally, far from accom¬
plishing its desired end, the spectacle of an execution some¬
times succeeds in arousing latent traces of sadism in the
public mind and in winning a hideous fame for certain
criminals.
c) Capital punishment is more than merely vengeance:
it is premeditated murder and it taints not only its victim,
but also his next of kin.

“The real name of punishment that is inflicted without
any melioristic intention is vengeance.” What is capital
punishment except a reply to blood with blood and a peren¬
nial recourse to the lex talionis? Even that barbarous law,
in its own gross calculations, aspired to a kind of justice.
But capital punishment exacts only a death “with suffering
worse than death.”
On the terrors of the prisoner in death’s row, on his slow
202

Appendix
disintegration in fear, and the pointlessness of his suffering,
Camus has written five unforgettable pages which are ob¬
jective without dryness, eloquent without bombast, and,
quite simply, edifying. He concludes: “As a general rule,
the prisoner is destroyed by his anticipation of death long
before he actually dies. Though he himself has killed only
once, he really dies twice, and the first death is worse
than the second. Compared to such cruelty, even the lex
talionis seems civilized. At least it never insisted that the
man who blinded his brother had to lose both of his own
eyes.” (p. 153) And what, if anything, can be said for the
parents of the condemned man, or for his kinsmen, who suffer
so undeservedly from this injustice?
d) The death sentence is absolute and irreparable, but
the guilt it punishes is, of necessity, relative.
No one is totally responsible, either for the good or for
the evil that he does. In any event, a State such as France,
which tolerates gin-mills and dives, and subsidizes “the
sugar-beet at the expense of public housing,” should surely
ask, before passing sentence, in what way she has herself
contributed to the crimes that she judges. Should not some¬
thing be said then about the incomparable catalogue of
crimes committed by alcoholics and the children of alcohol¬
ics? But the conscience of France is apparently easy, for
she goes on chopping off the very heads that she helps drive
insane, with no second thought about the relation between
the punishment and the crime.
e) Capital punishment does away with the criminal, but
this really begs rather than solves the whole question of
human evil.
Capital punishment destroys the criminal and, with him,

203

Appendix
every chance to amend a miscarriage of justice. It ties, in
one remorseless knot, the quivering threads of chance, and,
in passing sentence, sums up in a final, logical sentence the
actual relativity of human affairs. Yet, except for certain
“incorrigible monsters,” criminals are only sorrier specimens
of our common human weakness. “Even in error and evil,
mankind is a community.” (p. 164) We could wish, there¬
fore, that the compassion that should temper human justice
would keep this community in mind and do away with the
“supreme penalty.”
Here Camus interrupts his argument to ask this question:
“What does the death penalty actually mean to the men
of the middle of the Twentieth Century?”
His detailed answer constitutes, in our opinion, the most
characteristic part of his exposition. By grounding the de¬
bate in the field of historical fact, the author aligns himself
with the trend of thought that, from The Plague to The

Rebel, and from Les Justes to The Fall, has crystallized
around the theme of human and natural evil.
Both logic and fact, he says, demand the abolition of
capital punishment:

By reason of logic:
In earlier times when the king, acting as God’s earthly
deputy, or the clergy pronounced the death penalty, they
did not cut off the criminal from salvation. The punishment
was provisional and it left the final judgment, which rested
with God, in suspense. At the hour of his death, the con¬
demned man could still repent and be saved. The Catholic
Church could, on these grounds, consider capital punish¬
ment “as a powerful means of salvation.” “Only religious
values, particularly belief in an afterlife, can justify capital

204

Appendix
punishment since, according to their peculiar logic, they
deny that it is absolute and irreparable. It is defensible
because it is not final.” (pp. 169-170)
But, in our secularized society, such a justification can
scarcely be said to exist. “When a judge who is an atheist, or
a skeptic, or an agnostic, passes the death penalty on an
unbeliever, he pronounces a sentence beyond recall. He
places himself on the throne of God, though his authority
hardly rivals his ambition, and he would be the first to deny
that this is what he is doing.” (p. 172) Moreover, who of us
can say in his heart that he is an absolute innocent, and so
claim the right to set himself up as a supreme judge? “There
are no just men, but only hearts that are more or less meanly
just. For as long as we live, we are at least aware of this, and
have the power to add to the sum of our actions some little
good that may compensate in part for the evil that we sow
through the world.” (p. 168) The community of men in
evil is strengthened by whatever mobilizes it against evil,
and most of all, against death. Capital punishment, although
it no longer has a religious sanction, yet militates against
both the heavenly and earthly communities: against the
heavenly, by presuming to judge that any man, however
evil he may be, deserves no chance to be better; against the
earthly, by adding to human evil a punishment that no
transcendent reason can justify.

By reason of fact:
So many crimes have been, and are being, committed in
the name of the modem State—it is not even necessary to
include the wars that have ravaged, and will ravage, the
earth—that today the tables have been turned: it is no
longer society that must protect itself against the depreda-

205

Appendix
tions of the individual, but the individual who must protect
himself against the madness of a deified society that has
become through the erosion of faith the object of its own
devotion.
“To abolish capital punishment would constitute a public
declaration that society and the State are not, in themselves,
absolute values, and that they have no authority to legislate
absolutely, or to do what cannot be undone.” (p. 175) Such
a move would rescue the individual from the rampages of
the social monster that threatens him, and perhaps permit
Europe to regain the poise that her drunken pride has com¬
promised. “In the united Europe of tomorrow, in behalf of
which I am speaking, the formal abolition of the death
penalty should be the first article of the Code europeen that
all of us are hoping for.” (p. 176)
On this final note Camus reaffirms and strengthens the
reasoning that, since The Plague, and especially since The
Rebel, he has been systematizing and defining with in¬
creasing clarity and precision. There are echoes here, even
in the style, of the discourse of Tarrou on the problem of
evil and of our need to counteract it as best we can with
the little good that is in us; of the words of Clamance about
the depth of the roots that this evil sinks into us and about
the community in misery that unites the judge and the
suppliant; of the voice of the Rebel as he denounces the
philosophy of nihilism and our mechanistic civilization; and,
finally, the accents of the man of the Mediterranean as he
diagnoses the delirium that has seized Europe and, with
modesty and hope, heralds a renaissance.

206

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. The Works of Albert Camus

1. Novels, Essays, Dramas
1937

I/ENVERS ET L’ENDROIT, Essays, in Coll. Mediterraneennes, Algiers, Chariot, 1937. Jean-Jacques
Pauvert issued a limited edition of 100 copies.

1939

NOCES, Essays.
a) First edition, Algiers, Chariot, 1939.
b) New edition, Paris, Chariot, 1945.
c) New edition, Paris, Gallimard, 1947.

1942

L’ETRANGER, Novel.
a) First edition, Paris, Gallimard, 1942.
b) New York, Pantheon Books, 1946.
c) With 29 etchings by Mayo, Paris, Gallimard, 1946.
d) Private edition of the Club du Meilleur Livre,
Paris, January 1954.

207

Bibliography
LE MYTHE DE SISYPHE, Essay.
a) First edition, Coll. “Les Essais, XII,” Paris, Gallimard, 1942.
b) New edition, Paris, Gallimard, 1945.
c) Enlarged edition, after the design of Mario Prassinos, Paris, Gallimard, 1953.
1944

LE MALENTENDU, a Play in Three Acts, and
CALIGULA, a Play in Four Acts, Paris, Gallimard,
1944.
CALIGULA, a Play in Four Acts, in a new edition,
Paris, Gallimard, 1946.

1945

LETTRES A UN AMI ALLEMAND, Essays.
a) First edition, Paris, Gallimard, 1945.
b) New edition, with a previously unpublished pref¬
ace, Paris, Gallimard, 1948.
c) Lausanne, Marguerat, 1946.
REMARQUE SUR LA REVOLTE, Essay, in Ex¬
istence (essays by A. Camus, E. Gilson, J. Grenier,
etc.), Coll. “La Metaphysique,” I, Paris, Gallimard,
1945.

1947

LA PESTE, a Novel.
a) First edition, Paris, Gallimard, 1947.
b) Collection pourpre, Paris, Gallimard, 1949.
c) With 12 water-colors by Edy Legrand, Coll. “Le
Rayon d’Or,” Paris, Gallimard, 1950.
d) Abridged and annotated by J.-A. G. Tans and
J.-P. Van der Linden, Bibliotheque frangaise Paul
Brand, serie jaune, I, Bussum, 1951.
e) Private edition of the Club du Meilleur Livre,
Paris, January 1955. With a previously unpub208

Bibliography
lished preface: Exhortation aux medecins de la
peste. (See Archives de la Peste).
ARCHIVES DE LA PESTE, Cahiers de la Pleiade,
April 1947.
PROMETHEE AUX ENFERS, Essay. Paris, Palimugre, 1947.
1948

L’ETAT DE SIEGE, a Spectacle in Three Parts, Paris,
Gallimard, 1948.
L’EXIL D’HELENE, Essay, in Permanence de la
Grece, Paris, Editions des Cahiers du Sud, 1948.
(See, L’ETE)
LES MEUTRIERS DELICATS, Essay, in La Table
Ronde,

January

1948.

(See

L’HOMME

RE-

VOLTE)
1949

LE MEURTRE ET L’ABSURDE, Essay, in Empedocle, no. 1, April 1949. (See L’HOMME REVOLTE).

1950

ACTUELLES, Chroniques (1944-1948), Paris, Galli¬
mard, 1950.
LES JUSTES, a Play in Five Acts, Paris, Gallimard,
1950.
LE MINOTAURE ou LA HALTE D’ORAN, Essay,
Paris, Chariot, 1950. (See L’ETE).

1951

NIETZSCHE ET LE NIHILISME, Essay, in Les
Temps Moderne, August 1951. (See L’HOMME
REVOLTE).
L’HOMME REVOLTE, Essay, Paris, Gallimard, 1951.

1953

ACTUELLES II, Chroniques
Gallimard, 1953.

209

(1948-1953), Paris,

Bibliography
RETOUR A TIPASA,

in

Terrasses,

1953.

(See

L’ETE).
1954

LA MER AU PLUS PRES, a Poetic Essay, in La
Nouvelle N.R.F., January 1954. (See L’ETE).
L’ETE, Essays (Le Minotaure, Les Amandiers, Promethee aux Enfers, L’Exil d’Helene, VEnigme,
Retour a Tipasa, La Mer au plus pres), Paris, Gallimard, 1954.
ART

(one page), Essay, Paris-Brussels, Editions

G.-M. Dutilleul, 1954.
1955

LA FEMME ADULTERE, a Short Story, Algiers,
Edition de l’Empire, 1955. Lithographs by Clairin.
(See L’EXIL ET LE ROYAUME).

1956

L’ESPRIT CONFUS, a Short Story, in La Nouvelle
N.R.F., June, 1956. (See L’EXIL ET LE ROY¬
AUME).
LA CHUTE, a Novel. Paris, Gallimard, 1956.

1957

L’EXIL ET LE ROYAUME, Short Stories, Paris,
Gallimard, 1957.
REFLEXIONS SUR LA GUILLOTINE, in Arthur
Koestler-Albert Camus, Reflexions sur la peine
capitale,

Introduction

and

Appraisal

by

Jean

Bloch-Michel, Paris, Colmann-Levy, 1957. (See also
La Nouvelle N.R.F., nos. 54 and 55, June and July,
1957).
2. New Versions and Adaptations
1953

Pedro calderon de la barca. La Devotion a la Croix,
a Play in Three Days, French text by Albert Camus,
Paris, Gallimard, 1953.

210

Bibliography
Pierre de lartvey, Les Esprits, a Comedy, adapted by
Albert Camus, Paris, Gallimard, 1953.
1955

Dino buzzati, Un cas interessant, a Play in Two Parts
and 11 Scenes, adapted by Albert Camus, per¬
formed at the Theatre La Bruyere by Georges
Vitaly in March 1955. Published in L’Avant-Scene,
No. 105.

1956

After William faulkner, Requiem pour une nonne,
adapted by Albert Camus, Paris, Gallimard, Coll.
“Le Manteau d’Arlequin,” 1956.

1957

lope de vega, Le Chevalier d’Olmedo, French adapta¬

tion by Albert Camus, Paris, Gallimard, 1957.
3. Prefaces
1944

S. chamfort, Maximes et anecdotes, preface by Al¬
bert Camus, biography of Ginguene, Coll. “Inci¬
dences,” 2, Monaco, Dac, 1944.

1945

Andre salvet, Le Combat silencieux, prefaced with
a letter by Albert Camus, Paris, Le Portulan, 1945.

1946

Pierre-Eugene clairin, Dix estampes originales, pre¬
sented by Albert Camus, Paris, Rombaldi, 1946.

1947

Rene leynaud, Poesies posthumes, preface by Albert
Camus, Paris, Gallimard, 1947.
Jacques mery, Laissez passer mon peuple, preface by
Albert Camus, Coll. “Esprit,” Paris, Editions du
Seuil, 1947. (See ACTUELLES II).

1951

Dr. Jeanne heon-canonne, Devant la mort, preface in
the form of a letter by Albert Camus, Algiers,
Siraudeau, 1951. (See ACTUELLES II).

211

Bibliography
1952

Oscar wilde, La Ballade de la Geole de Reading,
foreword by Albert Camus: “UArtiste en prison.”
(Sections appeared in Arts).

1953

Alfred rosmer, Moscou au temps de Lenine, preface
by Albert Camus, 1953. (See ACTUELLES II).
Louis guilloux, La Maison du peuple, followed by
Compactions, foreword by Albert Camus, Paris,
Grasset, 1953.

1955

Konrad bieber, VAllemagne vue par les ecrivains de
la Resistance frangaise, preface by Albert Camus:
“Le rufus de la haine.” (See Temoins, Spring
1955).
Roger martin du gard. Oeuvres Completes, volume
I, preface by Albert Camus: Roger Martin du Gard,
Bibliotheque de la Pleiade, Paris, Gallimard, 1955.
(See also La Nouvelle N.R.F. No. 34).

1957

William faulkner, Requiem pour une nonne, trans¬
lated by Maurice-E. Coindreau, preface by Albert
Camus, Coll. “Du Monde Entier,” Paris, Gallimard,
1957.
4. Lectures'*

1948

Le temoin de la liberte, lecture delivered at the Salle
Pleyel to an International Meeting of writers.
L’incroyant et les chretiens, a talk to the Dominicans
of the Avenue Latour-Maubourg, Paris.

1952

L’Espagne et la culture, lecture delivered at the Salle
Wagram.

* The first two lectures are reprinted in ACTUELLES, Chroniques
1944-1948; the last two in ACTUELLES II, Chroniques 1948-1953.

212

Bibliography
Le Pain et la Liberte, lecture delivered at the Bourse
du Travail de Saint-Etienne.
5. Articles
Since the author has included most of his articles in the
two volumes entitled ACTUELLES, it is not necessary to
list them here in detail. But special notice must be given to
the brilliant editorials that he contributed to Combat (re¬
printed in ACTUELLES, Chroniques 1944-1948), and to
the famous Lettre au Directeur des “Temps Modernes” (re¬
printed in ACTUELLES, Chroniques 1948-1953). Of par¬
ticular importance, too, is his Lettre a Roland Barthes sur
“La Peste”, which appeared in Club, the monthly review
of the “Club du Meilleur Livre,” Paris, February 1955; his
Lettre au sujet du “Parti pris” de Fr. Ponge (dated 1943),
which appeared in La Nouvelle N.R.F. No. 45, September
1956; and, finally, his Reflexions sur la Guillotine, which ap¬
peared in La Nouvelle N.R.F. Nos. 54 and 55, June and
July 1957 (see The Works of Albert Camus above).
6. Interviews
Of the six or so interviews that are collected in the two
volumes of ACTUELLES, the following are cited by R.
Quilliot in La Mer et les Prisons as the most significant:
the interviews dated 15 November 1945, Nouvelles Litteraires; December 1945, Servir (Lausanne); 10 May 1951,
Gazette des Lettres; and 28 March 1954, Gazette de Laus¬
anne. Mention must also be made of the most recent inter¬
view with the Nobel Prize laureate, “Le pari de notre gene¬
ration,” in “Demain, no. 98, 24-30 October, 1957.

213

Bibliography
7. Recordings
Chez Festival, Long Playing Recording: Albert Camus
(Le Malentendu, VEtranger, Les Amandiers), with the
author, Maria Casares, Alain Cuny, and Serge Reggiani.
Chez Philipps, Long Playing Recording: Albert Camus
(Les Justes, L’Etat de Siege, Le Malentendu), with the
author, Maria Casares, Dominique Rlanchar, Michel Bou¬
quet, and Serge Reggiani.
II. Books and Articles in French and Italian Devoted
to Albert Camus

(Articles which appeared between 1942 and 1949 are not
cited, because they are already included in the work of
Marguerite L. Drevet, Bibliographie de la Litterature frangaise (1940-1949), Geneve-Lille, 1954, pp. 116-118, which is
a supplement to the Bibliographie of H. P. Thieme.)
R.-M. alberes, Portrait de notre heros, Essay on the Novel,
Paris, Le Portulan, 1945. “Albert Camus et le mythe de
Promethee” in La Revolte des ecrivains d’aujourd’hui,
Paris, Correa, 1949. VAventure intellectuelle du XXe
siecle (1900-1950), Paris, La Nouvelle Edition, 1950.
“Albert Camus ou la nostalgie de l’Eden” in Les Hommes
Traques, Essay, Paris, La Nouvelle Edition, 1953. Bilan
Litteraire du XXe siecle, Paris, Aubier, 1956.
Francis

ambriere,

La Galerie dramatique

(1945-1948),

“Le Theatre en France depuis la Liberation,” Paris,
Correa, 1949.
G. antonini, “Les Justes di Albert Camus,” in La Fiera
Letteraria, 22 January 1950.

214

Bibliography
Roland

barthes,

“L’Etranger, roman solaire,”

in

Club

(monthly review of the “Club du Meilleur Livre”), April
1954. “La Peste, annales dune epidemie ou roman de la
solitude?”, in Club, February 1955.
Rachel bespaloff, “Le monde du condamne a mort,” in
Les Carrefours de Camus, special issue of the review
Esprit, January 1950.
Maurice blanchot, “Le Mythe de Sisyphe,” in Faux Pas,
Paris, Gallimard, 1943.
Pierre brodin, Presences Contemporaines—Litterature, vol¬
ume I, Paris, Nouvelles Editions Debresse, 1955. Id.,
volume III, C our ants et Themes principaux de la Lit¬
terature Frangaise contemporaine, Paris, Nouvelles Ed.
Debresse, 1957.
R. cantoni, “L’uomo assurdo di Albert Camus,” in Studi
filosofici, January-April 1948; See La coscienza inquieta,
Milano, Mondadori, 1949.
Maria carrazzolo, “L’etica di Albert Camus,” in Humanitas,
V, 1950.
G. C. castello, “I Giusti di Albert Camus,” in Sipario, May
1950.
criticus, Le Style au Microscope, II, “Jeunes Gloires,” Paris,

Calmann-Levy, 1951.
Bertrand d’astorg, Aspects de la Litterature Europeenne
depute 1945, Paris, Ed. du Seuil, 1952. “L’homme engage,”
in Esprit, October 1947.
Pierre neraud de boisdeffre, “Albert Camus ou l’experience
tragique,” in Etudes, December 1950. Reprinted with
additions in Syntheses (Brussels), December 1950. “Albert
Camus,” in Metamorphoses de la Litterature, volume II,

215

Bibliography
Paris, Alsatia 1951 (new edition revised and brought up
to date, 1952).
Pierre neraud de boisdeffre, Etienne borne, R.-P. dubarle,
“L’Homme Revolte de Camus,” Debates, in Psychologie
Moderne

et

Reflexion

Chretienne,

Paris,

Librairie

Artheme Fayard, cahier no. 3, January 1953. (Based on a
discussion at the Centre Catholique des Intellectuels).
Gerard deledalle, L’existentiel, philosophies et litteratures
de l’existence, Paris, Lacoste, 1949.
Robert de luppe, Albert Camus, Paris, Edition du Temps
Present, 1951. Albert Camus, Classiques du XXe siecle,
Paris, Editions Universitaires, 1952.
J. du rostre, “Un Pascal sans Christ,” in Les Etudes, 1948.
F. federici, Introduzione al “Mito di Sisifo”, trad. A. Borelli,
Milano, Bompiani, 1947.
P. foulquie, “De la revolte a la charite,” in L’Ecole, Paris,
March 1952.
Andre frankin, “L’Homme Revolte, un plaidoyer pour la
vie,” in Passages (Liege), April-May 1952.
Gilbert ganne. Interviews impubliables, Paris, ed. Andre
Bonne.
F. goosens, “Presentation de La Peste d’ Albert Camus,” in
S. renard and J. gueritte, Le chretien devant le trial,
Saint-Paul, 1949.
Francis jeanson, “Albert Camus ou l’ame revoltee,” in Les
Temps Modernes, May 1952. “Pour tout vour dire . . . ,”
in the August issue of the same review.

Robert kanters, “Moralistes et Prophetes,” in Des Ecrivains
et des Hommes, Paris, Julliard, 1952.
M. laparade, Reflexions sur quatre medecins de roman:

216

Bibliography
essai de definition d’un humanisme medical contemporain,
Bordeaux, Samie, 1948.
A. la penna, “Albert Camus o la conversione degli indifferenti,” in Belfagor, November 1950.
Marcel laville, “Homothetie,” in the Journal des Professeurs, Paris, 23 June 1951. (Reply to the criticism of
Criticus).
LivKES de France (Bull, d’inf. du dep. etr. Hachette), No¬

vember 1951, devoted to Albert Camus. The issue in¬
cludes:

Camus VAfricain, by Jean-Pierre Vivet;

Une

Macumba au Bresil, by Albert Camus; L’Homme Revolte,
by Andre Billy; and a Bibliography of the works of Albert
Camus.
Claudine

mersch,

Les

Essais

mediterraneans

d’Albert

Camus, Memoire de Licence in Philosophy and Letters,
University of Liege, 1955. (Manuscript).
Charles moeller, “Albert Camus ou l’honnetete desesperee,”
in Litterature du XXe siecle et Christianisme, I, Silence
de Dieu, Toumai, Casterman, July-August 1954.
Emmanuel mounier, “Albert Camus ou Tappel des humilies,”
in Les Carrefours de Camus, special issue of the review
Esprit, January 1950. L’Espoir des Desesperes, Coll.
“Esprit,” Paris, Ed. du Seuil, 1953.
Maurice nadeau, “Albert Camus et la tentation de la
saintete,” in Litterature presente, Paris, Correa, 1952.
G. natoli, “Albert Camus o la lotta contro l’assurdo,” in La
Fiera letteraria, 18 September 1947. See Scrittori francesi,
Florence, La Nuova Italia, 1950.
Louis negre, “Les estapes d’Albert Camus,” in the Bulletin
de VAssociation Guillaume Bude, October 1955.

217

Bibliography
N. nicolas. La pensee existentielle d’Albert Camus, Doc¬
torate Thesis submitted to the Faculte de Grenoble, May
1955. (Cited by R. Quilliot).
Liano petroni, “Albert Camus, cratore di miti,” in II Ponte,
Firenze, March 1950. “Le Actuelles di Albert Camus,” in
the Rivista di Letterature moderne, Florence, no. 2, new
series, 1951.
Henri perruchot, La Haine des Masques (Montherlant,
Camus, Shaw), Paris, La Table Ronde, 1955.
Gaetan picon. Panorama de la nouvelle litterature frangaise,
Paris, Point du Jour, 1949. “A propos de L’Exil et le
Royaume” in Le Mercure de France, May 1957.
Robert

poulet,

La Lanterne Magique, Paris, Nouvelles

Editions Debresse, 1956.
Roger quilliot, La Mer et les Prisons (Essay on Albert
Camus), Paris, Gallimard, 1956.
Paul rostenne, “Un honnete homme: Albert Camus,” in La
Revue Nouvelle, Tournai, Casterman, March 1950. “Albert
Camus, L’Homme Revolte,” in the February issue of the
same review. La Foi des Athees (Introduction a une vue
chretienne de l’Histoire), Coll. “Presences,” Paris, Plon,
1953.
Andre rousseaux, “Albert Camus et la philosophic du bonheur,” in Litterature du XXe siecle (third series), Paris,
Albin Michel, 1949. “La morale d’Albert Camus,” in Le
Figaro Litteraire, 21 October 1950.
M. saint-clair, Galerie privee, Paris, Gallimard, 1947.
Jean-Paul sartre, “Explication de l’Etranger,” in Situations
I, Paris, Gallimard, 1947; hard-cover edition published by
Palimugre, January 1946. “Reponse a Albert Camus,” in

218

Bibliography
Les Temps Modernes, August 1952.
Gilbert sigaux, “Avec Albert Camus,” in the review Preuves,
no. 35, January 1954.
Pierre-Henri simon, L’Homme en proces (Malraux, Sartre,
Camus, Saint-Exupery), Neuchatel, Ed. de la Baconniere,
1950. Les Temoins de THomme (de Proust a Camus),
Paris, A. Colin, 1951. “Albert Camus, du nihilisme a
l’humanisme,” in Histoire de la Litterature fran£aise au
XXe siecle, volume 2 (1900-1950), Paris, A. Colin, 1956.
Philip

thody,

“Albert Camus and La Remarque sur la

Revolte,” in French Studies, October 1956.
Leon thorens, A la rencontre d’Albert Camus, Coll. “A la
rencontre de . . . ,” Paris-Bmssels-Paris, La Sixaine, 1946.
Alfred wild, “La philosophic de l’absurde,” in Suisse contemporaine, Lausanne, December 1945.
III. Translations
This is a listing of the countries where the specified works
of Albert Camus have appeared in translation:
NOCES:

Switzerland (Die Arche);

L’ETRANGER:

England, U.S.A., Germany, Italy, Den¬
mark, Sweden, Norway, Holland, Finland,
Iceland, Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Po¬
land, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Portugal, Ja¬
pan;

LE MYTHE DE SISYPHE:

England, U.S.A., Germany,
Italy,

Sweden,

Denmark,

Norway, Argentina;

219

Bibliography
CALIGULA—LE MALENTENDU:

England, Germany,

Italy, Denmark and Sweden (CALIGULA
only), Argentina, U.S.A.;
LETTRES A UN AMI ALLEMAND:
LA PESTE:

Italy, Japan;

England, U.S.A., Germany, Austria, Italy,
Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Hol¬
land, Argentina, Portugal, Yugoslavia, Japan,
Israel;

L’ETAT DE SIEGE:

Germany, Japan;

ACTUELLES I et II:

Japan;

LES JUSTES:

Japan;

L’HOMME REVOLTE:

England, U.S.A., Germany, Italy,
Sweden, Argentina, Japan;

L’ETE:

Switzerland (Die Arche), Argentina, Japan.

IV. Articles in English Devoted to Albert Camus
1946

“Absurdiste,” New Yorker, April 20.
Eric bentley “Note on French Existentialism, ” (In¬
cludes a list of Camus’ writings); Books Abroad
20, no. 3.
N.

chiaromonte,

“Albert Camus,” New Republic,

April 29.
“Eternal Rock Pusher,” Newsweek, April 15.
“Man in a Vacuum,” Time, May 20.
Portrait, Books Abroad 20, no. 4.
Portrait, Saturday Review of Literature, May 18.
1947

B. R. lang, “Two Books, Two Creeds: Andre Gide’s
Theseus and The Stranger, by Albert Camus,”
Books Abroad, 21, no. 4.

220

Bibliography
Portrait, Theatre Arts, March.
1948 Biographical Sketch, Saturday Review of Literature,
July 31.
Victor brombert, “Camus and the Novel of the ‘Ab¬
surd,’ ” Yale French Studies, Summer.
“Camus the Classicist,” Newsweek, August 2.
Chamfort, (Translated by L. Le Sage), Sewanee Re¬
view, January.
Anthony curtis, New development in the French
theatre, London, Curtain Press.
George jagger, “Camus’ LA PESTE,” Yale French
Studies, Summer.
Michael mohrt, “Ethic and Poetry in the Work of
Albert Camus,” Yale French Studies, Summer.
Portrait, Time, August 16.
V. S. pritchett, THE PLAGUE, (Review), New
Statesman and Nation, August 21.
1949 “The Artist as Witness of Freedom,” (Translated by
B. Frechtman), Commentary, December.
Between Yes and No, (Short Story, translated by B.
Frechtman), Partisan Review, November.
CALIGULA, (Criticism), Illustrated London News,
March 26.
Walter A. strauss, Albert Camus’ CALIGULA:
ancient sources and modern parallels, Cambridge,
Harvard University
1950 N. chiaromonte, “Paris Letter,” Partisan Review,
September.
“Exile in Gotham,” Americas, May.
1951 Portrait, Saturday Review of Literature, January 13.
221

Bibliography
1952

“Art and Revolt,” (Excerpted and translated by J.
Frank), Partisan Review, May.
N. chiaromonte, “Sartre versus Camus; a Political
Quarrel,” Partisan Review, November.
W. fowlie, “French Literary Scene,” Commonweal,
May 30.
K. lansner, “Albert Camus,” Kenyon Review, 14, no.
4.
Richard seaver, “Revolt and Revolution,” Merlin, vol.
1, no. 3, Winter 1952-53.

1953

J.-M.

domenach,

“Camus-Sartre Debate: Rebellion

vs. Revolution,” Nation, March 7.
genet, “Letter from Paris,” New Yorker, May 30.

“Vhomme revolte” Review of Philosophy, January.
R.

warner,

THE REBEL,

(Review), Spectator,

December 4.
“What a Writer Seeks,” Atlantic Monthly, June.
1954

Michael harrington, “Ethics of a Rebellion,” Com¬
monweal, January 29.
“Hopeful Frenchman,” Newsweek, September 20.
H.

kohn,

“Man the Undoer,” Saturday Review of

Literature, February 13.
Portrait, Life, October 4.
1955

K. bieber, “Engagement as a Professional Risk,” Yale
French Studies, no. 16, Winter, 1955-56.
Waldo frank, “Life in the Face of Absurdity,” New
Republic, September 19.
“How Good Without God,” Time, October 3.
S. John, “Image and Symbol in the Work of Albert
Camus,” French Studies, Oxford, January.

222

Bibliography
J. korg, “Cult of Absurdity,” Nation, December 10.
“The Writer and His Times,” (Translated by Justin
O’Brien), Partisan Review, Summer.
1956

John

cruickshank,

“Camus’s Technique in L’ET-

RANGER,” French Studies, Oxford, July.
Leslie A. fiedler, “Pope and the Prophet,” Commen¬
tary, February.
H. R.

garvin,

“Camus and the American Novel,”

Comparative Literature, Summer.
T. L. hanna, “Albert Camus and the Christian Faith,”
Journal of Religion, October.
P.

thody,

“Albert Camus,” Contemporary Review,

December.
C. A. vtggiani, “Camus’ L’ETRANGER,” Publications
of the Modern Language Association of America,
71: 865-87, December.
1957

L. abel, “Man Without Grace,” Commentary, May.
J. D. boyd, “No Man an Island?” America, March 23.
Edmund egan, “The Situation is Sin,” (Review of
THE FALL), Catholic Worker, vol. 23, no. 10, May.
H. goldberg, “Violence of Virtue,” Nation, March 30.
I. Hamilton, THE FALL, (Review), Spectator, Feb¬
ruary 22.
I. howe, “Weight of Days,” New Republic, March 11.
Discussion, March 25.
Portrait, Saturday Review of Literature, February 16.
Portrait, Time, February 18.
R. russell, “The Inferno of Albert Camus,” Reporter,
April 4.

223

Bibliography
Philip thody, “A note on Camus and the American
Novel,” in Comparative Literature, vol. IX, no. 3,
Summer.

Note
On Albert Camus, Nobel Prize Winner for Literature
in 1957, see especially the article by Emile Henriot in
Le Monde of 18 October; the article by Jules Roy and
the report by Andre Bourin in Les Nouvelles Litterair es of 24 October; and the articles by Roger Martin
Du Gard, Frangois Mauriac, Jean Grenier, Rene Char,
J.-C. Brisville, Jean Senard, and Andre Alter in Le
Figaro Litteraire of 26 October.

224

about the author
Albert Maquet was born May 22,1922
at Liege, Belgium. He completed his
degree in Philosophy and Letters at
the University of Liege in 1945.
French literature of the eighteenth
and twentieth centuries is his special
field, and he has contributed many
articles on his subject to magazines
here and abroad.

Two volumes of

poetry, Djeu d’Apeles (Jeu d’Appeaux) (1947) and Luire dans le noir
(1945), which are written in the Wal¬
loon dialect of his native Belgium, are
the fruit of his research in French
regional dialects and literature.
Recently he has been appointed head
of a cultural exchange mission by the
Belgian Ministry of Public Education.
In this capacity he will be serving as
instructor in French Language and
Literature on the Faculty of Letters
of the University of Turin (Italy) for
the next few years.
ALBERT CAMUS: the invincible
summer has been honored by the Bel¬

gian Royal Academy of French Lan¬
guage and Literature.

george braziller, inc.
215 FOURTH AVENUE
NEW YORK 3, NEW YORK

ALBERT CAMUS, at 43, is the second youngest
writer ever to have been awarded the Nobel Prize
for literature. In fifteen years of intense literary
activity, he has produced a body of work of such
variety and depth that it has won him worldwide acclaim. Yet
only a handful of his many books has been translated and
published in the United States. ALBERT CAMUS: THE
INVINCIBLE SUMMER is the first

full-length portrait of
this astonishing
career. It is an
incomparable
introduction both
to the man and
to his work.

albert camus

Nobel Prize Winner
in Literature, 1957

INP

