



FIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, SEPTEMBER 1995
Copyright © 1972 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published
in the United States by Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published in France as  La Mort
Heureuse  by Editions Gallimard, Paris, in 1971.
Copyright © 1971 by Editions Gallimard.
This edition was originally published by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, in May 1972.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Camus, Albert, 1913–1960.
A happy death.
(His Cahier 1) Translation of La mort heureuse.
I. Title.
[PZ3.C1574Hap4] [PQ2605.A3734] 843′.9′14
eISBN: 978-0-307-82784-5     72-8028
Cover design by Helen Yentus.
v3.1

The publication of the  C a h i e r s   A l b e r t   C a m u s  has been decided upon by the writer’s
family  and  publishers,  in  answer  to  the  wishes  of  many  scholars  and,  more
generally, of all those interested in his life and thought.
It is not without some scruple that this publication has been undertaken. A severe
critic of his own work, Albert Camus published nothing heedlessly. Why, then, oer
the public an abandoned novel, lectures, uncollected articles, notebooks, drafts?
Simply because, when we love a writer or study him closely, we want to know
everything  he  has  written.  Those  responsible  for  Camus’  unpublished  writings
consider it would be a mistake not to respond to these legitimate wishes and not to
satisfy those who desire to read  A   H a p p y   D e a t h , for example, or the travel diaries.
Scholars whose research has led them—on occasion during Camus’ lifetime—t o
consult  his  youthful  writings  or  later  texts  which  remain  unfamiliar  or  even
unpublished, believe that the writer’s image can only be claried and enriched by
making them accessible.
The  publication  of  the  C a h i e r s   A l b e r t   C a m u s   is  under  the  editorship  of  Jean-
Claude Brisville, Roger Grenier, Roger Quilliot, and Paul Viallaneix.

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
PART ONE
Natural Death
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
PART TWO
Conscious Death
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Afterword
Notes and Variants
Other Books by This Author
About the Author

PART ONE
Natural Death

1
It  was  ten  in  the  morning,  and  Patrice  Mersault  was  walking
steadily toward Zagreus’ villa.  By now the housekeeper had left for
the market, and the villa was  deserted. It was a beautiful April
morning, chilly and bright; the sky was radiant, but there was no
warmth  in  the  glistening  sunshine.  The  empty  road  sloped  up
toward  the  villa,  and  a  pure  light  streamed  between  the  pines
covering the  hillside. Patrice Mersault was carrying a suitcase, and
as he walked on through that primal morning, the only sounds he
heard were the click of his own footsteps on the cold road and the
regular creak of the suitcase handle.
Not far from the villa, the road crossed a little square decorated
with owerbeds and benches. The eect of the early red geraniums
among gray aloes, the blue sky, and the whitewashed walls was so
fresh, so childlike that Mersault stopped a moment before walking
on through the square. Then the road sloped down again toward
Zagreus’ villa. On the doorstep he paused and put on  his gloves.
He opened the door which the cripple never locked and carefully
closed it behind him. He walked down the hall to the third door on
the  left,  knocked  and  went  in.  Zagreus  was  there,  of  course,  a
blanket over the stumps of his legs, sitting in an armchair by the
re exactly where Mersault had sat two days ago. He  was reading,
and his book lay open on the blanket; there was no surprise in his
round eyes as he stared up at Mersault, who was standing in front
of the closed door. The curtains were drawn back, and patches of
sunshine lay on the oor, the furniture, making objects glitter in
the room. Beyond the window, the  morning rejoiced over the cold,
golden earth.  A great icy joy, the birds’ shrill, tentative outcry, the
ood  of  pitiless  light  gave  the  day  an  aspect  of  innocence  and
truth. Mersault stood motionless, the room’s stiing heat lling his
throat, his ears. Despite the change in the weather, there was a

blazing re in the grate. And Mersault felt his blood rising to his
temples, pounding at the tips of his ears. Zagreus’ eyes followed
his  movements,  though  he  did  not  say  a  word.  Patrice  walked
toward  the  chest  on  the  other  side  of  the  replace  and  put  his
suitcase down on a table without looking at the cripple. He felt a
faint tremor in his ankles now. He took out a cigarette and lit it—
clumsily,  for  he  was  wearing  gloves.  A  faint  noise  behind  him
made him turn around, the cigarette between his lips. Zagreus was
still staring at him, but had just closed the book. Mersault—the re
was  painfully  hot  against  his  knees  now—could  read  the  title
upside down:  T h e   C o u r t i e r  by Baltasar Gracián. Then he bent over
the chest and opened it. The revolver was still there, its lustrous
black, almost feline curves on the white letter. Mersault picked up
the envelope with his left hand and the revolver with his right.
After an instant’s  hesitation, he thrust the gun under his left arm
and opened the envelope. It contained one large sheet of paper,
with only a few lines of Zagreus’ tall, angular handwriting across
the top:
“I  am  doing  away  with  only  half  a  man.  It  need  cause  no
problem—there  is  more  than  enough  here  to  pay  o  those  who
have taken care of me till now. Please use what is left over to
improve conditions of the men in death row. But I know it’s asking
a lot.”
Expressionless, Mersault folded the sheet and put it back in the
envelope. As he did so the smoke from his cigarette stung his eyes,
and a tiny chunk of ash fell on the envelope. He shook it o, set
the envelope on the table where it was sure to be noticed, and
turned toward Zagreus, who was staring at the envelope now, his
stubby powerful ngers still holding the book. Mersault bent down,
turned the key of the little strongbox inside the chest, and took out
the  packets  of  bills,  only  their  ends  visible  in  the  newspaper
wrappings. Holding the gun under one arm, with the other hand he
methodically lled up the suitcase. There were fewer than twenty
packets  of  hundreds,  and  Mersault  realized  he  had  brought  too
large a suitcase. He left one packet in the safe. Then he closed the

suitcase, icked the half-smoked cigarette into the re and, taking
the revolver in his right hand, walked toward the cripple.
Zagreus  was  staring  at  the  window  now.  A  car  drove  slowly
past, making a faint chewing sound.  Motionless, Zagreus seemed
to be contemplating all the inhuman beauty of this April morning.
When he felt the barrel against his right temple, he did not turn
away. But Patrice, watching him, saw his eyes ll with tears. It
was  Patrice  who  closed  his  eyes.  He  stepped  back  and  red.
Leaning against the wall for a moment, his eyes still closed, he felt
his blood throbbing in his ears. Then he opened his eyes. The head
had fallen over onto the left shoulder, the body only slightly tilted.
But it was no longer Zagreus he saw now, only a huge, bulging
wound of brain, blood, and bone. Mersault began to tremble. He
walked  around  to  the  other  side  of  the  armchair,  groped  for
Zagreus’  right  hand,  thrust  the  revolver  into  it,  raised  it  to  the
temple, and let it fall back. The revolver dropped onto the arm of
the  chair  and  then  into  Zagreus’  lap.  Now  Mersault  noticed  the
cripple’s  mouth  and  chin—he  had  the  same  serious  and  sad
expression as when he was staring at the window. Just then a shrill
horn sounded in front of the door. A second time. Mersault, still
leaning over the armchair, did not move. The sound of tires meant
that the butcher had driven away. Mersault picked up his suitcase,
turned the doorknob gleaming suddenly in a sunbeam, and left the
room, his head throbbing, his mouth parched. He opened the outer
door and walked away quickly. There was no one in sight except a
group of children at one end of the little square. He walked on.
Past the square, he was suddenly aware of the cold, and shivered
under  his light jacket. He sneezed twice, and the valley lled with
shrill  mocking  echoes  that  the  crystal  sky  carried  higher  and
higher.  Staggering  slightly,  he  stopped  and  took  a  deep  breath.
Millions  of  tiny  white  smiles  thronged  down  from  the  blue  sky.
They played over the leaves still cupping the rain, over the damp
earth of the paths, soared to the blood-red tile roofs, then back into
the lakes of air and light from which they had just overowed. A
tiny plane hummed its way across the sky. In this owering of air,
this fertility of the heavens, it seemed as if a man’s one duty was to

live and be happy. Everything in Mersault fell silent. He sneezed a
third time, and shivered feverishly. Then he hurried away without
glancing around him, the suitcase creaking, his footsteps loud on
the road. Once he was back in his room and had put the suitcase in
a corner, he lay down on his bed and slept until  the middle of the
afternoon.

2
Summer  crammed  the  harbor  with  noise  and  sunlight.  It  was
eleven thirty. The day split open down the middle, crushing the
docks  under  the  burden  of  its  heat.  Moored  at  the  sheds  of  the
Algiers  Municipal  Depot,  black-hulled,  red-chimneyed  freighters
were loading sacks of wheat. Their dusty fragrance mingled with
the  powerful  smell  of  tar  melting  under  a  hot  sun.  Men  were
drinking at a little stall that reeked of creosote and anisette, while
some  Arab  acrobats  in  red  shirts  somersaulted  on  the  scorching
agstones in front of the sea in the leaping light. Without so much
as a glance at them, the stevedores carrying the sacks walked up
the two sagging planks that slanted from the dock to the freighter
decks. When they reached the top, their silhouettes were suddenly
divided between the sea and the sky among the winches and masts.
They stopped for an instant, dazzled by the light, eyes gleaming in
the whitish crust of dust and sweat that covered their faces, before
they plunged blindly into the hold stinking of hot blood. In the
ery air, a siren blew without stopping.
Suddenly the men on the plank stopped in confusion. One of
them  had  fallen,  and  was  caught  between  the  planks,  his  arm
pinned under his body, crushed under the tremendous weight of the
sack,  and  he  screamed  with  pain.  Just  at  this  moment,  Patrice
Mersault emerged from his oce, and on the doorstep, the summer
heat took his breath away. He opened his mouth, inhaled the tar
vapors,  which  stung  his  throat,  and  then  he  went  over  to  the
stevedores. They had moved the man who had been hurt, and he
was lying in the dust, his lips white with pain, his arm dangling,
broken above the elbow. A sliver of bone had pierced the esh,
making an ugly wound from which blood was dripping. The drops
rolled down his arm and fell, one by one, onto the scorching stones
with  a  tiny  hiss,  and  turned  to  steam.  Mersault  was  staring,

motionless,  at  the  blood  when  someone  took  his  arm.  It  was
Emmanuel, one of the clerks. He pointed to a truck heading toward
them with a salvo of backres. “That one?” Patrice began to run as
the truck drove past them, chains rattling. They dashed after it,
swallowed up by dust and noise, panting and blind, just conscious
enough  to  feel  themselves  swept  on  by  the  frenzied  eort  of
running, in a wild rhythm of winches and machines, accompanied
by  the  dancing  masts  on  the  horizon  and  the  pitching  of  the
leprous  hulls  they  passed.  Mersault  was  the  rst  to  grab  hold,
condent of his strength and skill, and he jumped onto the moving
truck. He helped Emmanuel up, and the two men sat with their
legs dangling in the chalk-white dust, while a luminous suocation
poured out of the sky over the circle of the harbor crowded with
masts  and  black  cranes,  the  uneven  cobbles  of  the  dock  jarring
Emmanuel and Mersault as the truck gained  speed, making them
laugh until they were breathless, dizzied by the jolting movement,
the searing sky, their own boiling blood.
When they reached Belcourt, Mersault slid o with Emmanuel,
who was singing now, loud and out of tune. “You know,” he told
Mersault, “it comes up in your chest. It comes when you feel good.
When you’re in the water.” It was true: Emmanuel sang when he
swam, and his voice, hoarse from shouting, inaudible against the
sea, marked time for the gestures of his short, muscular arms. They
were  walking  down  the  rue  de  Lyon,  Mersault  tall  beside
Emmanuel, his broad shoulders rolling. In the way he stepped onto
the  curb,  the  way  he  twisted  his  hips  to  avoid  the  crowd  that
occasionally closed in on him, his body seemed curiously  young
and vigorous, capable of bearing him to any extreme of physical
joy. Relaxed, he rested his weight on one hip with a self-conscious
litheness, like a man whose body has acquired its style  from sports.
His  eyes  sparkled  under  the  heavy  brows,  and  as  he  talked  to
Emmanuel he would tug at his collar with a mechanical gesture to
free his neck muscles, tensing his curved mobile lips at the same
time. They walked into their restaurant, sat down at a table, and
ate in silence. It was cool inside, among the ies, the clatter of
plates, the hum of conversation. The owner, Celeste, a tall man

with  huge  mustaches,  walked  over  to  greet  them,  scratching his
belly  under  his  apron.  “Pretty  good,”  Celeste  answered  them,
“good  for  an  old  man.”  Celeste  and  Emmanuel  exchanged
exclamations and thumped each other on the shoulder. “Old men,”
Celeste said, “you know what old men are, they’re all the same.
Shitheads.  They  tell  you  a  real  man’s  got  to  be  fty.  But  that’s
because  t h e y ’ r e  fty. I knew this one guy who could have his good
times  just  with  his  son.  They’d  go  out  together.  On  the  town.
They’d go to the Casino, and this guy would say: ‘Why should I
hang around with a lot of old men! Every day they tell me they’ve
taken some medicine, there’s always something wrong with their
liver. I have a better time with my son. Sometimes he picks up a
whore,  I  look  the  other  way,  I  take  the  streetcar.  So  long  and
thanks.  Fine with me.’ ” Emmanuel laughed. “Of course,” Celeste
said,  “the  guy  was  no  authority,  but  I  liked  him  all  right.”  He
turned  to  Mersault.  “Anyway,  it’s  better  than  this  other  guy  I
knew. When he made his money, he would talk with his head way
up making gestures all the time. Now he’s not so proud of himself
—he’s lost it all.”
“Serves him right,” Mersault said.
“Oh, you can’t be a bastard in life. This guy took it while he had
it, and he was right. Almost a million francs he had ... Now if it
had been me!”
“What would you do?” Emmanuel asked.
“I’d buy myself a cabin on the beach, I’d put some glue in my
navel, and I’d stick a ag in there. Then I’d wait to see which way
the wind was blowing.”
Mersault  ate quietly until Emmanuel started to tell Celeste how
he had fought the battle of the Marne. “See, they sent us Zouaves
out in front ...”
“Cut the bullshit,” Mersault said calmly.
“The major said, ‘Charge!’ and we ran down into a kind of gully,
only with trees in it. He told us to charge, but no one was there. So
we  just  marched  right  on,  kept  on  walking.  And  then  all  of  a
sudden these machineguns are ring right into us. We all fall on
top of each other. There were so many dead and wounded that you

could have rowed a boat across the blood in that gully. Some of
them kept screaming, ‘Mama!’ Christ, it was awful.”
Mersault  stood  up  and  tied  a  knot  in  his  napkin.  The  owner
walked over to the kitchen door and chalked the price of his dinner
on it. When one of his customers hadn’t paid up, Celeste would
take the door o its hinges and bring the evidence  on his back.
René, his son, was eating a boiled egg over in a corner. “Poor kid,”
Emmanuel said, thumping his own chest, “he’s had it.” It was true.
René was usually quiet and serious. Though he was not particularly
thin, his eyes glittered. Just now another customer was explaining
to  him  that  “with  time  and  patience,  TB  can  be  cured.”  René
nodded  and  answered  solemnly  between  bites.  Mersault  walked
over to the counter and ordered coee, leaning on his elbows. The
other  customer  went  on:  “Did  you  ever  know  Jean  Perez?  He
worked for the gas company. He’s dead now. He had this one bad
lung. But  he wanted to get out of the hospital and go home. His
wife was there, see. She was nothing but his horse. You know, his
sickness made him like that—he was always on top of her. She
wouldn’t want it, but he had to. So two, three times, every day of
the week—it ends up killing a sick man.” René stopped eating, a
piece of bread between his teeth, and stared at the man. “Yes,” he
said nally, “the thing comes on fast, but it takes time to get rid of
it.” Mersault wrote his name with one nger on the steamed-over
percolator.  He  blinked  his  eyes.  Every  day  his  life  alternated
between this calm consumptive and Emmanuel bursting into song,
between the smell of coee and the smell of tar, alienated from
himself and his interests, from his heart, his truth. Things that in
other  circumstances  would  have  excited  him  left  him  unmoved
now, for they were simply part of his life, until the moment he was
back in his room using all his strength and care to smother the
ame of life that burned within him.
“What do you think, Mersault? You’ve been to school,” Celeste
said.
“Oh, cut it out,” Patrice said, “you’ll get over it.”
“You’re touchy this morning.”

Mersault smiled and, leaving the restaurant, crossed the street
and went upstairs to his room. The apartment was over a horse
butcher’s.  Leaning  over  his  balcony,  he  could  smell  blood  as  he
read the sign: “To Man’s Noblest Conquest.” He stretched out on
his bed, smoked a cigarette, and fell asleep.
He slept in what used to be his mother’s room. They had had this
little three-room apartment a long time. Now that he was alone,
Mersault rented two rooms to a man he knew, a barrelmaker who
lived with his sister, and he had kept the best room for himself. His
mother had been fty-six when she died. A beautiful woman, she
had enjoyed—and expected to enjoy—a life of diversion, a life of
pleasure. At forty, she had been stricken by a terrible disease. She
had had to give up her clothes, her cosmetics, and was reduced to
hospital  gowns,  her  face  deformed  by  terrible  swellings;  her
swollen legs and her weakness kept her almost immobilized, and
she  would  grope  frantically  around  the  colorless  apartment  she
could no longer take care of, for she was half blind as well. The
diabetes  she  had  neglected  had  been  further  aggravated  by  her
careless life. Mersault had had to abandon his studies and take a
job. Until his mother’s death; he had continued to read, to reect.
And for ten years, the sick woman endured that life. The suering
had lasted so long that those around her grew accustomed to her
disease and forgot that she was deathly ill, that she would die. One
day she died. People in the neighborhood felt sorry for Mersault.
They expected a lot from the funeral. They recalled the son’s deep
feeling for his mother. They warned distant relatives not to mourn
too  much,  so  that  Patrice  would  not  feel  his  own  grief  too
intensely. They were asked to protect him, to take care of him. But
Patrice, dressed in his best and with his hat in his hand,  watched
the  arrangements.  He  walked  in  the  procession,  listened  to  the
service,  tossed  his  handful  of  earth,  and  folded  his  hands.  Only
once did he look surprised, expressing his regret that there were so
few cars for those who had attended the service. That was all. The
next day, a sign appeared in one of the apartment windows: “For
rent.” Now he lived in his mother’s room. In the past, the poverty
they shared had a certain sweetness about it: when the end of the

day came and they would eat their dinner in silence with the oil
lamp between them, there was a secret joy in such simplicity, such
retrenchment. The neighborhood was a quiet one. Mersault would
stare at his mother’s slack mouth and smile. She would smile back.
He would start eating again. The lamp would smoke a little. His
mother tended it with the same exhausted gesture, extending only
her right arm, her body slumped down in her chair. “You’re not
hungry  any  more?”  she  would  ask,  a  moment  later.  “No.”  He
would smoke, or read. If he smoked, she always said: “Again!” If
he read: “Sit closer to the lamp, you’ll ruin your eyes.” But now the
poverty in solitude was misery. And when Mersault thought sadly
of the dead woman, his pity was actually for himself. He could
have  found  a  more  comfortable  room,  but  he  clung  to  this
apartment and its smell of poverty. Here, at least, he maintained
contact with what he had been, and in a life where he deliberately
tried to expunge himself, this patient, sordid confrontation helped
him to survive his hours of  melancholy and regret. He had left on
the door the frayed gray card on which his mother had written her
name in blue pencil. He had kept the old brass bed with its sateen
spread, and the portrait of his grandfather with his tiny beard and
pale,  motionless  eyes.  On  the  mantelpiece,  shepherds  and
shepherdesses  framed  an  old  clock  that  had  stopped  and  an  oil
lamp  he  almost  never  lit.  The  dreary  furnishings—some  rickety
rattan chairs, the wardrobe with its yellowed mirror, a dressing
table missing one corner—did not exist for him: habit had blurred
everything.  He  moved  through  the  ghost  of  an  apartment  that
required no eort of him. In another room, he would have had to
grow accustomed to novelty, to struggle once again. He wanted to
diminish the surface he oered the world, to sleep until everything
was consumed. For this purpose, the old room served him well.
One window overlooked the street, the other a yard always full of
laundry, and, beyond it, a few clumps of orange trees squeezed
between  high  walls.  Sometimes,  on  summer  nights,  he  left  the
room dark and opened the window overlooking the yard and the
dim trees. Out of the darkness the fragrance of orange blossoms
rose into the darkness, strong and sweet, surrounding him with its

delicate shawls. All night during the summer, he and his room were
enclosed in that dense yet subtle perfume and it was as if, dead for
days at a time, he had opened his window on life for the rst time.
He  wakened,  his  mouth  full  of  sleep,  his  body  covered  with
sweat. It was very late. He combed his hair, ran downstairs, and
jumped onto a streetcar. By ve past two he was in his oce. He
worked  in  a  big  room  where  the  walls  were  covered  with  414
pigeonholes into which folders were piled. The room was neither
dirty  nor  sordid,  but  it  suggested,  at  any  hour  of  the  day,  a
catacomb  in  which  dead  hours  had  putreed.  Mersault  checked
shipping  bills,  translated  provision  lists  from  English  ships,  and
between three and four dealt with clients who wanted crates or
luggage shipped. He had asked for this work, which really wasn’t a
part of his job. But at the start, he had found it a way of escaping
into  life.  There  were  living  faces,  familiar  encounters,  and  a
passing breath of life in which at last he felt his own heart beating.
And it allowed him to avoid the faces of the three secretaries and
the supervisor,  Monsieur Langlois. One of the secretaries was quite
pretty  and  had  been  recently  married.  Another  lived  with  her
mother, and the third was a dignied and energetic old lady whom
Mersault liked for her orid way of talking and her reticence about
what  Langlois  called  her  “misfortunes.”  The  supervisor  would
engage in peremptory arguments with old Madame Herbillon, who
always  emerged  victorious.  She  despised  Langlois  for  the  sweat
that pasted his trousers to his buttocks when he stood up and for
the panic which seized him in the presence of the head of the rm
and occasionally on the phone when he heard the name of some
lawyer or even of some idiot with a  d e  in front of his name. The
poor  man  was quite unable to soften the old lady’s heart or to win
his  way  into  her  good  graces.  This  afternoon  he  was  strutting
around the middle of the oce. “We really get along very well
together, don’t we, Madame Herbillon?” Mersault was translating
“ vegetables,”  staring  over  his  head  at  the  lightbulb  in  its
corrugated green cardboard shade. Across from him was a bright-
colored calendar showing a religious procession in Newfoundland.
Sponge, blotter, inkwell, and ruler were lined up on his desk. The

windows  near  him  looked  out  over  huge  piles  of  wood  brought
from Norway by yellow and white freighters. Mersault listened. On
the other side of the wall, life had its own deep, mued rhythm, a
respiration that lled the harbor and the sea. So remote, and yet so
close to him ... The six o’clock bell released him. It was a Saturday.
Once home, he lay down on his bed and slept till dinnertime. He
made himself some eggs and ate them out of the pan (with no
bread; he had forgotten to buy any), then stretched out again and
fell  asleep  at  once.  He  awoke  the  next  morning  just  before
lunchtime, washed and went downstairs to eat. Back in his room
he did two crossword puzzles, carefully cut out an advertisement
for Kruschen Salts which he  pasted into a booklet already lled
with jovial grandfathers sliding down banisters. Then he washed
his  hands  and  went  out  onto  his  balcony.  It  was  a  beautiful
afternoon. Yet the sidewalks were damp, the occasional passer-by
in a  hurry. Mersault stared after each one until he was out of sight,
then attached his gaze to a new arrival within his eld of vision.
First  came  families  walking  together—two  little  boys  in  sailor
suits, uncomfortable in their starched blouses, and a girl with a
huge  pink  bow  and  black  patent-leather  shoes.  Behind  them  a
mother in a brown  silk dress, a monstrous creature swathed in a
boa, the father, more elegant, carrying a cane. In a little while it
was the turn of the young men of the neighborhood, hair slicked
back  and  red  neckties,  close-tting  jackets  with  embroidered
pocket handkerchiefs, and squaretoed shoes. They were on their
way to the movies in the center of town, and hurried toward the
streetcar, laughing very loud. Then the street grew still again. The
afternoon  diversions  had  begun.  The  neighborhood  belonged  to
cats and shopkeepers. The sky, though clear, was lusterless over
the  cus  trees  lining  the  road.  Across  from  Mersault,  the
tobacconist brought a chair out in front of his door and straddled
it,  leaning  his  arms  on  the  back.  The  streetcars  that  had  been
crowded a little while ago were almost empty. In the little café
Chez Pierrot, the waiter was sweeping sawdust in the empty front
room.  Mersault  turned  his  chair  around,  placed  it  like  the
tobacconist’s, and smoked two cigarettes one after the other.  He

went  back  into  his  room,  broke  o  a  piece  of  chocolate,  and
returned to his balcony to eat it. Soon the sky darkened, then paled
again. But the passing clouds had left a promise of rain  over the
street they dimmed. At ve, streetcars groaned past, jammed with
soccer  fans  from  the  outlying  stadiums  perched  on  the
runningboards  and  hanging  from  the  handrails.  On  the  next
streetcar, he could identify the players themselves by their canvas
bags. They shouted and sang at the top of their lungs that their
teams would never die. Several waved to Mersault. One shouted:
“We did it this time!” “Yes,” was all Mersault answered, nodding.
Then there were more cars. Some had owers wreathed in their
bumpers and looped around their ns. Then the light faded a little
more.  Over  the  roofs  the  sky  reddened,  and  with  evening  the
streets grew lively again. The strollers returned, the tired children
whining  as  they  let  themselves  be  dragged  home.  The
neighborhood  movie  houses  disgorged  a  crowd  into  the  street.
Mersault could tell from the violent gestures of the young men that
they had seen some sort of adventure lm. Those who had been to
movies in the center of town appeared a little later. They were
more serious: for all their laughter and teasing gestures, their eyes
and their movements betrayed a kind of nostalgia for the magical
lives they had just shared. They lingered in the street, coming and
going.  And  on  the  sidewalk  across  from  Mersault,  two  streams
nally formed. One consisted of neighborhood girls, walking arm
in  arm,  bareheaded.  The  young  men  in  the  other  cracked  jokes
which made the girls laugh and look away. Older people went into
the cafés or  formed groups on the sidewalk which the human river
owed around as if they were islands. The streetlamps were on
now, and the electric light made the rst stars look faint in the
night sky. An audience of one, Mersault watched the procession of
people under the lights. The streetlamps made the damp sidewalks
gleam,  and  at  regular  intervals  the  streetcars  would  throw
reections on shiny hair, wet lips, a smile, or a silver bracelet.
Gradually  the  streetcars  became  more  infrequent,  and  the  night
was  already  black  above  the  trees  and  the  lamps  as  the
neighborhood gradually emptied and the rst cat crept across the

street as soon as it was deserted again. Mersault thought about
dinner. His neck ached a little from leaning so long on the back of
his chair. He went downstairs to buy bread and macaroni, made
his dinner and ate it. Then he returned to his balcony. People were
coming  out  again,  the  air  had  cooled.  He  shivered,  closed  his
windows,  and  walked  over  to  the  mirror  above  the  replace.
Except for certain evenings when Marthe came or when he went
out with her, and except for his correspondence with the girls in
Tunis, his entire life lay in the yellowed image the mirror oered
of a room where the lthy oil lamp stood among the bread crusts.
“Another Sunday shot,” Mersault said.

3
When Mersault walked through the streets in the evening, proud as
he  watched  the  lights  and  shadows  icker  across  Marthe’s  face,
everything seemed wonderfully simple, even his own strength and
his courage. He was grateful to her for displaying in public, at his
side, the beauty she oered him day after day like  some delicate
intoxication. An unnoticeable Marthe would have made him suer
as much as a Marthe happy in the desire of other men. He was
glad to walk into the theater with her tonight, a little before the
lm began, when the hall was nearly full. She went in ahead of
him, drawing glances of admiration, her ower-like face smiling,
her  beauty  violent.  Mersault,  holding  his  hat  in  his  hand,  was
overcome by a wonderful sense of ease, a kind of inner awareness
of his own elegance. His expression grew remote and serious. He
exaggerated his ceremonious manner, stepped back to let the usher
pass, lowered Marthe’s seat for her. And he did all this less from
conceit, from ostentation, than because of the gratitude that made
his  heart  suddenly  swell,  lling  with  love  for  all  these  people
around him. If he gave the usher too big a tip, it was because he
did  not  know  how  else  to  pay  for  his  joy,  and  because  he
worshipped,  by  making  this  everyday  gesture,  a  divinity  whose
brilliant  smile  glistened  like  oil  in  his  gaze.  During  the  break
between  lms, strolling in the lobby lined with mirrors, he saw the
face  of  his  own  happiness  reected  there,  populating  the  place
with  elegant  and  vibrant  images—his  own  tall,  dark  gure  and
Marthe smiling in her bright dress. Yes, he liked his face as he saw
it there, his mouth quivering around the cigarette between his lips
and the apparent ardor of his deep-set eyes. But a man’s beauty
represents inner, functional truths: his face shows what he can do.
And  what  is  that  compared  to  the  magnicent  uselessness  of  a

woman’s face? Mersault was aware of this now, delighting in his
vanity and smiling at his secret demons.
Back in the theater, he remembered that when he was alone he
never left his seat between lms, preferring to smoke and to listen
to the records played while the lights were still on. But tonight the
excitement continued, and he felt that every chance of extending
and renewing it was worth taking. Just as she was sitting down,
however,  Marthe  returned  the  greeting  of  a  man  a  few  rows
behind them. And Mersault, nodding in his turn, thought he noticed
a faint smile on the man’s lips. He sat down without noticing the
hand Marthe laid on his shoulder to catch his attention; a moment
earlier  he  would  have  responded  to  it  with  delight,  as  another
proof of that power she acknowledged in him.
“Who’s that?” he asked, waiting for the perfectly natural “who?”
which in fact followed at once.
“You know. That man ...”
“Oh,” Marthe said. And that was all.
“Well?”
“Do you have to know?”
“No,” Mersault said.
He  glanced  behind  him:  the  man  was  staring  at  the  back  of
Marthe’s neck without moving a muscle of his face. He was rather
good-looking, his lips very red and well shaped, but his eyes, which
were set shallowly in his face, had no expression in them. Mersault
felt the blood pounding  in his temples. In his suddenly darkened
vision, the brilliant hues of that ideal world where he had been
living the last few hours were suddenly  soiled. He didn’t need to
hear  what  she  would  say.  He  knew:  the  man  had  slept  with
Marthe. And what racked Mersault like panic was the thought of
what this man might be thinking. He knew what it was, he had
often thought the same thing: “Show o all you want ...” The idea
that this man was now imagining Marthe’s every gesture, even her
way of putting her arm over her eyes at the moment of pleasure,
that he too had once tried to pull her arm away in order to watch
the tumultuous surge of the dark gods in her eyes, made everything
inside  Mersault  collapse,  and  tears  of  rage  welled  up  under  his

closed eyelids while the theater bell announced that the lm was
about to begin. He forgot Marthe, who had been merely the pretext
of his joy and was now the living body of his rage. Mersault kept
his eyes closed a long time, and when he opened them again, a car
was turning over on the screen, one of its wheels still spinning in
complete silence, slower and slower, dragging into its persistent
circle all the shame and humiliation that had been awakened in
Mersault’s  angry  heart.  But  a  craving  for  certainty  made  him
forget his dignity: “Marthe, was he ever your lover?”
“Yes,” she said. “But I want to watch the picture.”
That was the day Mersault began to be attached to Marthe. He
had met her several months before, and he had been astonished by
her beauty, her elegance. Her golden eyes and carefully made-up
lips  in  that  rather  broad,  regular  face  made  her  look  like  some
painted  goddess.  The  natural  stupidity  that  glowed  in  her  eyes
emphasized  her  remote,  impassive  expression.  In  the  past,
whenever  Mersault  had  spent  any  time  with  one  woman,  had
made the rst gestures of commitment, he was conscious of the
disastrous fact that love and desire must be expressed in the same
way, and he would think about the end of the aair before even
taking  her  in  his  arms.  But  Marthe  had  appeared  at  a  moment
when  Mersault  was  ridding  himself  of  everything,  of  himself  as
well. A craving for freedom and independence is generated only in
a man still living on hope. For Mersault, nothing mattered in those
days. And the rst time Marthe went limp in his arms and her
features  blurred  as  they  came  closer—the  lips  that  had  been  as
motionless  as  painted  owers  now  quivering  and  extended—
Mersault saw in her not the future but all the force of his desire
focused upon her and satised by this appearance, this image. The
lips  she  oered  him  seemed  a  message  from  a  world  without
passion  and  swollen  with  desire,  where  his  heart  would  nd
satisfaction. And this seemed a miracle to him. His heart pounded
with an emotion he almost took for love. And when he felt the ripe
and resilient esh under his teeth, it was as though he bit into a
kind of erce liberty, after caressing her a long time with his own
lips. She became his mistress that same day. After some time, their

harmony in lovemaking became perfect. But as he knew her better,
she gradually lost the sense of strangeness, which he would try to
revive as he pressed upon her mouth. So that Marthe, accustomed
to  Mersault’s  reserve  and  even  coldness,  had  never  understood
why, in a crowded streetcar, he had one day asked for her lips.
Bewildered, she had held up her face. And he had kissed her the
way  he  liked  to,  rst  caressing  her  lips  with  his  own  and  then
slowly biting them. “What’s come over you?” she asked him later.
He  had  given  her  the  smile  she  loved,  the  brief  smile  which
answers,  and  he  had  said:  “I  feel  like  misbehaving,”  and  had
lapsed  back  into  silence.  She  did  not  understand  Patrice’s
vocabulary, either. After making love, at that moment when the
heart  drowses  in  the  released  body,  lled  only  with  the  tender
aection he might have felt for a winsome puppy, Mersault would
smile at her and say, “Hello, image.”
Marthe was a secretary. She did not love Mersault, but she was
attached to him insofar as he intrigued her and attered her. Since
the day when Emmanuel, whom Mersault had introduced to her,
had told her: “Mersault’s a good guy, you know. He’s got guts. But
he doesn’t talk—so people don’t always realize what he’s like,” she
regarded  him  with  curiosity.  And  since  his  lovemaking  satised
her, she asked nothing more, adapting herself as best she could to
a  silent  lover  who  made  no  demands  and  took  her  when  she
wanted  to  come.  She  was  only  a  little  uneasy  about  this  man
whose weak points she could not discover.
But that night, as they left the movie theater, she realized that
something could hurt Mersault. She said nothing about it the rest of
the  evening,  and  slept  in  Mersault’s  bed.  He  did  not  touch  her
during the night. But from now on she used her advantage. She had
already told him she had had other lovers; now she managed to
nd the necessary proofs.
The next day, departing from her usual practice, she came to his
room after she had left her oce. She found Mersault asleep and
sat down at the foot of the brass bed without waking him. He was
in  his  shirtsleeves,  which  exposed  the  white  underside  of  his
muscular brown forearms. He was breathing regularly, chest and

belly rising together. Two creases between his eyebrows gave him
a look of strength and stubbornness she knew very well. His hair
curled  around  his  tanned  forehead,  in  which  a  vein  throbbed.
Exposed this way, his arms lying  close to his sides, one leg bent, he
looked  like  a  solitary  and  obstinate  god,  ung  sleeping  into  an
alien world. Staring at his sleep-swollen lips, she desired him, and
just  then  Mersault  half-opened  his  eyes  and  closed  them  again,
saying  without  anger:  “I  don’t  like  being  watched  when  I’m
sleeping.”
Marthe  threw  her  arms  around  his  neck  and  kissed  him.  He
didn’t move. “Oh, darling, another one of your moods ...”
“Don’t call me ‘darling,’ please. I’ve  already asked you not to.”
She  stretched  out  beside  him  and  stared  at  his  prole.  “You
remind me of someone that way, I wonder who it is.”
He pulled up his trousers and turned his back to her. Marthe
frequently noticed Mersault’s gestures in strangers, in lm actors;
he took it as a sign of his inuence over her, but now this habit
which  had  often  attered  him  was  an  irritation.  She  squeezed
herself  against  his  back  and  took  all  the  warmth  of  his  sleep
against  her  body.  Darkness  was  falling  fast,  and  shadows  soon
lled  the  room.  Somewhere  in  the  building  there  were  shouts,
children crying, a cat mewing, the sound of a door slamming. The
streetlamps came on, ooding the balcony. Streetcars went by only
occasionally.  And  then  the  neighborhood  smell  of  anisette  and
roasting meat rose in heavy gusts from the street into the room.
Marthe  felt  sleepy.  “You’re  mad  at  me,  aren’t  you?  It  started
yesterday ... that’s why I came. Aren’t you going to talk to me?”
She shook him.  Mersault didn’t move, his eyes tracing the curve of
light on a shoe under the dressing table: it was already dark in the
room. “You know that man yesterday? Well, I was just kidding. He
was never my lover.”
“No?”
“Well, not really.”
Mersault said nothing. He could see the gestures so clearly, the
smiles  ...  He  clenched  his  teeth.  Then  he  got  up,  opened  the
windows, and sat down again on the bed. Marthe pressed against

him, thrust her hand between two buttons of his shirt and caressed
his nipples. “How many lovers have you had?” he said nally.
“Don’t be like that.”
Mersault said nothing.
“Maybe ten,” she said.
With  Mersault  sleepiness  always  called  for  a  cigarette.  “Do  I
know them?” he asked as he took one out. All he could see now
was a white patch where Marthe’s face was. “It’s the same as when
we make love,” he realized.
“Some of them. Around here.” She rubbed her face against his
shoulder  and  spoke  in  that  little  girl’s  voice  she  used  to  make
Mersault treat her gently.
“Now  listen  to  me,”  he  said,  lighting  a  cigarette.  “Try  to
understand what I’m saying. Promise to tell me their names. And I
want  you  to  promise  to  point  out  the  others—the  ones  I  don’t
know—if we pass them in the street.”
Marthe pulled away. “Oh no!”
A car sounded its horn right under the windows, then again, then
twice  more—long,  erce  blasts.  A  streetcar  bell  sounded
somewhere in the night. On the marble top of the dressing table,
the  alarm  clock  ticked  coldly.  Mersault  spoke  with  deliberation:
“I’m asking you to tell me because I know myself. If I don’t nd
out exactly who they are, each man I meet will make the same
thing  happen—I’ll  wonder,  I’ll  imagine.  That’s  what  it  is,  I’ll
imagine too much. I don’t know if you understand ...”
She understood, amazingly. She told him the names. There was
only one he didn’t recognize. The last she named was a man he
knew,  and  this  was  the  one  he  thought  about,  because  he  was
handsome  and  the  women  ran  after  him.  What  astonished  him
about  lovemaking  was—the  rst  time,  at  least—the  terrible
intimacy the woman accepted and the fact that she could receive a
part of a stranger’s body inside her own. In such intoxication and
abandonment,  in  such  surrender  he  recognized  the  exalting  and
sordid power of love. And it was this intimacy that was the rst
thing he imagined between Marthe and her lover. Just then she sat
up on the edge of his bed and putting her left foot on her right

thigh, took o one shoe, then the other, dropping them next to the
bed so that one was lying on its side, the other standing on its high
heel. Mersault felt his throat tighten. Something was gnawing at
his stomach.
“Is this the way you do it with René?” he said smiling.
Marthe looked up. “Don’t get any funny ideas,” she said. “We
only did it once.”
“Oh.”
“Besides, I didn’t even take my shoes o.”
Mersault stood up. He saw her lying back, all her clothes on, on
a bed like this one, and surrendering everything, unreservedly. He
shouted, “Shut up!” and walked over to the balcony.
“Oh darling!” Marthe said, sitting on the bed, her stocking feet
on the oor.
Mersault controlled himself by watching the streetlamps glitter
on the tracks. He had never felt so close to Marthe. And realizing
that at the same time he was letting her come a little closer to him,
he felt pride making his eyes sting. He walked back to her and
pinched the warm skin of her neck under one ear. He smiled. “ And
that Zagreus—who’s he? He’s the only one I don’t know.”
“Oh him,” Marthe said with a laugh, “I still see him.” Mersault
pinched  harder.  “He  was  the  rst  one,  you  have  to  understand
that.  I  was  just  a  kid.  He  was  older.  Now  he’s  had  both  legs
amputated. He lives all alone. So I go see him sometimes. He’s a
nice man, and educated. He still reads all the time—in those days
he was a student. He’s always making jokes. A character. Besides,
he says the same thing you do. He tells me: ‘Come here, image.’ ”
Mersault was thinking. He let go of Marthe, and she fell back on
the bed, closing her eyes. After a moment he sat down beside her
and  bent  over  her  parted  lips,  seeking  the  signs  of  her  animal
divinity and the way to forget a suering he considered unworthy.
But he did nothing more than kiss her.
As he walked Marthe home, she talked about Zagreus: “I’ve told
him about you. I told him my darling was very handsome and very
strong. Then he said he’d like to meet you. Because—this is what
he said: ‘The sight of a good body helps me breathe.’ ”

“Sounds pretty crazy.”
Marthe wanted to please him, and made up her mind this was
the  moment  to  stage  the  little  scene  of  jealousy  she  had  been
planning, having decided she owed it to him somehow. “Oh, not so
crazy as some of your friends.”
“What friends?” Mersault asked, genuinely startled.
“Those little grinds ...”
The little grinds were  Rose and Claire, students in Tunis whom
Mersault used to know and with  whom  he  maintained  the  only
correspondence in his life. He smiled and laid his hand on the nape
of Marthe’s neck. They walked a long time. Marthe lived near the
parade grounds. Lights shone in all the upper windows of the long
street, although the dark, shuttered shopwindows had a forbidding
look.
“Listen, darling, you don’t happen to be in love with those little
grinds by any chance, do you?”
“No.”
They walked on, Mersault’s hand on Marthe’s neck covered by
the warmth of her hair.
“Do you love me?” Marthe asked suddenly.
Mersault burst out laughing. “Now that’s a serious question.”
“Answer me!”
“People don’t love each other at our age, Marthe—they please
each other, that’s all. Later on, when you’re old and impotent, you
can love someone. At our age, you just think you do. That’s all it
is.”
Marthe seemed sad, but he kissed her. “Goodnight, darling,” she
said. Mersault walked home through the dark streets. He walked
quickly, aware of how the muscles in his thighs played against the
smooth material of his trousers, and he thought of Zagreus and his
amputated  legs.  He  wanted  to  meet  him,  and  decided  to  ask
Marthe to introduce them.
The  rst  time  Mersault  saw  Zagreus,  he  was  annoyed.  Yet
Zagreus had tried to avoid anything that might be embarrassing
about two lovers of the same woman meeting in her presence. To
do  so,  he  had  attempted  to  make  Mersault  his  accomplice  by

calling Marthe a “good girl” and laughing very loud. Mersault had
remained impassive. He told Marthe, as soon as they were alone,
how much he had disliked the encounter.
“I  don’t  like  half-portions.  It  bothers  me.  It  keeps  me  from
thinking. And especially half-portions who brag.”
“Oh  you  and  your  thinking,”  Marthe  answered,  not
understanding. “If I paid any attention to you ...”
But  later,  that  boyish  laugh  of  Zagreus’,  which  had  at  rst
annoyed him caught Mersault’s attention and interest. Moreover,
the obvious jealousy which had provoked Mersault’s rst judgment
had disappeared as soon as he saw Zagreus. Once when Marthe
quite innocently referred to the time she had known Zagreus, he
advised her: “Don’t bother. I can’t be jealous of a man who doesn’t
have his legs any more. If I ever do think about the two of you, I
see him like some kind of big worm on top of you. And it just
makes me laugh. So don’t bother, angel.”
And after that he went back to visit Zagreus by himself. Zagreus
talked  a  great  deal  and  very  fast,  laughed,  then  fell  silent.
Mersault  felt  comfortable  in  the  big  room  where  Zagreus  lived
surrounded  by  books  and  Moroccan  brass  trays,  the  re  casting
reections  on  the  withdrawn  face  of  the  Khmer  Buddha  on  the
desk. He listened to Zagreus. What he noticed about the cripple
was that he thought  before he spoke. Besides, the pent-up passion,
the intense life animating this absurd stump of a man, was enough
to attract Mersault, to produce in him something which, if he had
been a little less guarded, he might have taken for friendship.

4
That Sunday afternoon, after talking and laughing a great deal,
Roland  Zagreus  sat  silent  near  the  re  in  his  big  wheelchair,
wrapped  in  white  blankets.  Mersault  was  leaning  against  a
bookshelf, staring at the sky and the landscape through the white
silk curtains. He had come during a light rain and, not wanting to
arrive  too  early,  had  spent  an  hour  wandering  around  the
countryside.  The  day  was  dark,  and  even  without  hearing  the
wind, Mersault could see the trees and branches writhing silently
in the little valley. The silence was broken by a milk wagon, which
trundled down the street past the villa in a tremendous racket of
metal cans. Almost immediately the rain turned into a downpour,
ooding the windowpanes. All the water like some thick oil on the
panes, the faint hollow noise of the horse’s hoofs—more audible
now  than  the  cart’s  uproar—the  persistent  hiss  of  the  rain,  this
basket case beside the re, and the silence of the room—everything
seemed  to  have  happened  before,  a  dim  melancholy  past  that
ooded Mersault’s heart the way the rain had soaked his shoes and
the  wind  had  pierced  the  thin  material  of  his  trousers.  A  few
moments before, the falling vapor—neither a mist nor a rain—had
washed his face like a light hand and laid bare his dark-circled
eyes. Now he stared at the black clouds that kept pouring out of
the  sky,  no  sooner  blurred  than  replaced.  The  creases  in  his
trousers had vanished, and with them the warmth and condence
of a world made for ordinary men. He moved closer to the re and
to  Zagreus  and  sat  facing  him,  in  the  shadow  of  the  high
mantelpiece and yet within sight of the sky. Zagreus glanced at
Mersault, then looked away and tossed into the re a ball of paper
he had crumpled in his left hand. The gesture, as always ridiculous,
disconcerted Mersault: the sight  of this mutilated body made him
uneasy. Zagreus smiled but said nothing, then suddenly thrust his

face toward Mersault. The ames gleamed on his left cheek only,
but something in his voice and eyes was  lled with warmth. “You
look tired,” he said.
Abashed, Mersault merely answered: “Yes, I don’t know what to
do,” and after a pause straightened up, walked to the window, and
added  as  he  stared  outside:  “I  feel  like  getting  married,  or
committing  suicide,  or  subscribing  to  L ’ l l l u s t r a t i o n .  Something
desperate, you know.”
Zagreus  smiled.  “You’re  a  poor  man,  Mersault.  That  explains
half  of  your  disgust.  And  the  other  half  you  owe  to  your  own
submission to poverty.”
Mersault kept his back turned, staring at the trees in the wind.
Zagreus smoothed the blanket over his legs.
“You know, a man always judges himself by the balance he can
strike between the needs of his body and the demands of his mind.
You’re  judging  yourself  now,  Mersault,  and  you  don’t  like  the
sentence.  You live badly. Like a barbarian.” He turned his head
toward Patrice: “You like driving a car, don’t you?”
“Yes.”
“You like women?”
“When they’re beautiful.”
“That’s what I meant.” Zagreus turned back to the re. After a
moment, he began: “All those things ...” Mersault turned around,
leaning against the window, which yielded slightly to his weight,
and waited for the rest of the sentence. Zagreus remained silent. A
y buzzed against the glass. Mersault turned, caught it under his
hand, then let it go. Zagreus watched him and said, hesitantly: “I
don’t like talking seriously. Because then there’s only one thing to
talk about—the justication you can give for your life. And I don’t
see how I can justify my amputated legs.”
“Neither do I,” Mersault said without turning around.
Zagreus’  young  laugh  suddenly  burst  out.  “Thanks.  You  don’t
leave me any illusions.” He changed his tone: “But you’re right to
be hard. Still, there’s something I’d like to say to you.” And he
broke o again. Mersault came over and sat down, facing him.
“Listen,” Zagreus resumed, “and look at me. I have someone to

help me, to set me on the toilet, and afterwards to wash me and
dry me. Worse, I pay someone for it. Yet I’ll never make a move to
cut short a life I believe in that much ...  I’d accept even worse—
blind, dumb, anything, as long as I feel in my belly that dark re
that is me, me alive. The only thing that would occur to me would
be to thank life for letting me burn on.” Zagreus ung his body
back in the chair, out of breath. There was less of him to see now,
only the whitish reection the blankets left on his chin. Then he
went on: “And you, Mersault, with a body like yours, your one
duty is to live and be happy.”
“Don’t make me laugh,” Mersault said. “With eight hours a day
at  the  oce.  Oh,  it  would  be  dierent  if  I  was  free!”  He  grew
excited as he spoke, and as occasionally happened, hope ooded
him once more, even more powerfully today because of Zagreus’
reassurance. He believed that at last he could conde in someone.
He  resisted  the  impulse  for  a  moment,  began  to  stub  out  a
cigarette,  then  continued  more  calmly:  “A  few  years  ago  I  had
everything before me—people talked to me about my life, about
my future. And I said yes. I even did the things you had to do to
have such things. But even back then, it was all alien to me. To
devote myself to impersonality—that’s what concerned me. Not to
be happy, not to be ‘against.’ I can’t explain it, but you know what
I mean.”
“Yes,” Zagreus said.
“Even now, if I had the time ... I would only have to let myself
go. Everything else that would happen to me would be like rain on
a stone. The stone cools o and that’s ne. Another day, the sun
bakes it. I’ve always thought that’s exactly what happiness would
be.”
Zagreus had folded his hands. In the silence that followed, the
rain seemed to come down twice as hard, and the clouds swelled in
a  vague  mist.  The  room  grew  a  little  darker,  as  if  the  sky  was
pouring its burden of shadow and silence into it. And the cripple
said intensely: “A body always has the ideal it deserves. That ideal
of a stone—if I may say so, you’d have to have a demigod’s body
to sustain it.”

“Right,” Mersault said, a little surprised, “but don’t exaggerate—
I’ve done a lot of sports, that’s all. And I’m capable of going quite
far in pleasure.”
Zagreus reected. “Yes—so much the better for you. To know
your  body’s limits—that’s the true psychology.  But it doesn’t matter
anyway. We don’t have time to be ourselves. We only have time to
be  happy.  But  would  you  mind  dening  what  you  mean  by
impersonality?”
“No,” Mersault said, but that was all.
Zagreus took a sip of tea and set down his full cup. He drank
very little, preferring to urinate only once a day. He willed himself
to reduce the burden of humiliations each day brought him. “You
can’t save a little here, a little there,” he had told Mersault one
day.  “It’s  a  record  like  any  other.”  For  the  rst  time  a  few
raindrops fell down the chimney. The re hissed. The rain beat
harder on the windowpanes. Somewhere a door slammed. On the
road,  automobiles  streaked  by  like  gleaming  rats.  One  of  them
blew its horn, and across the valley the hollow, lugubrious blast
made the wet space of the world even larger, until its very memory
became for Mersault an element of the silence and the  agony of
that sky.
“I’m sorry, Zagreus, but it’s been a long time since I talked about
certain things. So I don’t know any more—or I’m not sure. When I
look at my life  and its secret colors, I feel like bursting into tears.
Like  that  sky.  It’s  rain  and  sun  both,  noon  and  midnight.  You
know, Zagreus, I think of the lips I’ve kissed, and of the wretched
child  I  was,  and  of  the  madness  of  life  and  the  ambition  that
sometimes carries me away.  I’m all those things at once. I’m sure
there are times when you wouldn’t even recognize me. Extreme in
misery, excessive in happiness—I can’t say it.”
“You’re playing several games at the same time?”
“Yes, but not as an amateur,” Mersault said vehemently. “Each
time I think of that ood of pain  and joy in myself, I know—I can’t
tell you how deeply I know that the game I’m playing is the most
serious and exciting one of all.”
Zagreus smiled. “Then you have something to do?”

Mersault said vehemently: “I have my living to earn. My work—
those eight hours a day other people  can stand—my work keeps
me from doing it.” He broke o and lit the cigarette he had held till
now  between  his  ngers.  “And  yet,”  he  said,  the  match  still
burning, “if I was strong enough, and patient enough ...” He blew
out the match and pressed the tip against the back of his left hand.
“...  I  know  what  kind  of  life  I’d  have.  I  wouldn’t  make  an
experiment out of my life: I would  b e  the experiment of my life.
Yes, I know what passion would ll me with all its power. Before, I
was  too  young.  I  got  in  the  way.  Now  I  know  that  acting  and
loving and suering is living, of course, but it’s living only insofar
as you can be transparent and accept your fate, like the unique
reection of a rainbow of joys and passions which is the same for
everyone.”
“Yes,” Zagreus said, “but you can’t live that way and work ...”
“No, because I’m constantly in revolt. That’s what’s wrong.”
Zagreus said nothing. The rain had stopped, but in the sky night
had  replaced  the  clouds,  and  the  darkness  was  now  virtually
complete  in  the  room.  Only  the  re  illuminated  their  gleaming
faces. Zagreus, silent for a long time, stared at Patrice, and all he
said was: “Anyone who loves you is in for a lot of pain ...” and
stopped, surprised when Mersault suddenly stood up.
“Other  people’s  feelings  have  no  hold  over  me,”  Patrice
exclaimed, thrusting his head into the shadows.
“True,” Zagreus said, “I was just remarking on the fact. You’ll be
alone someday, that’s all. Now  sit down and listen to me. What
you’ve  told  me  is  interesting.  One  thing  especially,  because  it
conrms  everything  my  own  experience  of  human  beings  has
taught me. I like you very much, Mersault. Because of your body,
moreover. It’s your body that’s taught you all that. Today I feel as
if I can talk to you frankly.”
Mersault sat down again slowly, and his face turned back to the
already  dimmer  relight  that  was  sinking  closer  to  the  coals.
Suddenly a kind of opening in the darkness appeared in the square
of  the  window  between  the  silk  curtains.  Something  relented
behind the panes. A milky glow entered the room, and Mersault

recognized on the Bodhisattva’s ironic lips and on the cased brass
of  the  trays  the  familiar  and  fugitive  signs  of  the  nights  of
moonlight and starlight he loved so much. It was as if the night
had lost its lining of clouds and shone now in its tranquil luster.
The  cars  went  by  more  slowly.  Deep  in  the  valley,  a  sudden
agitation readied the birds for sleep. Footsteps passed in front of
the house, and in this night that covered the world like milk, every
noise seemed larger, more distinct. Between the reddening re, the
ticking of the clock, and the secret life of the familiar objects which
surrounded  him,  a  fugitive  poetry  was  being  woven  which
prepared Mersault to receive in a dierent mood, in condence
and love, what Zagreus would say. He leaned back in his chair,
and it was in front of the milky sky that he listened to Zagreus’
strange story.
“What  I’m  sure  of,”  he  began,  “is  that  you  can’t  be  happy
without money. That’s all. I don’t like superciality and I don’t like
romanticism. I like to be conscious. And what I’ve noticed is that
there’s a kind of spiritual snobbism in certain ‘superior beings’ who
think that money isn’t necessary for happiness. Which is stupid,
which is false, and to a certain degree cowardly. You see, Mersault,
for a man who is well born, being happy is never complicated. It’s
enough  to  take  up  the  general  fate,  only  not  with  the  will  for
renunciation like so many fake great men, but with the will for
happiness.  Only  it  takes  time  to  be  happy.  A  lot  of  time.
Happiness, too, is a long patience. And in almost every case, we
use  up  our  lives  making  money,  when  we  should  be  using  our
money to gain time. That’s the only problem that’s ever interested
me. Very specic. Very clear.” Zagreus stopped talking and closed
his eyes. Mersault kept on staring at the sky. For a moment the
sounds of the road and the countryside became distinct, and then
Zagreus went on, without hurrying: “Oh, I know perfectly well that
most  rich  men  have  no  sense  of  happiness.  But  that’s  not  the
question. To have money is to have time. That’s my main point.
Time can be bought. Everything can be bought. To be or to become
rich is to have time to be happy, if you deserve it.” He looked at
Patrice. “At twenty-ve, Mersault, I had already realized that any

man with the sense, the will, and the craving for happiness was
entitled to be rich. The craving for happiness seemed to me the
noblest  thing in man’s heart. In my eyes, that justied everything.
A  pure  heart  was  enough  ...”  Still  looking  at  Mersault,  Zagreus
suddenly began to speak more slowly, in a cold harsh tone, as if he
wanted  to  rouse  Mersault  from  his  apparent  distraction.  “At
twenty-ve I began making my fortune. I didn’t let the law get in
my way. I wouldn’t have let anything get in my way. In a few
years, I had done it—you know what I mean, Mersault, nearly two
million. The world was all before me. And with the world, the life I
had  dreamed  of  in  solitude  and  anticipation  ...”  After  a  pause
Zagreus continued in a lower voice: “The life I would have had,
Mersault,  without  the  accident  that  took  o  my  legs  almost
immediately afterwards. I haven’t been able to stop living ... And
now, here I am. You understand—you have to understand that I
didn’t want to live a lesser life, a diminished life. For twenty years
my  money  has  been  here,  beside  me.  I’ve  lived  modestly.  I’ve
scarcely touched the capital.” He passed his hard palms over his
eyelids and said, even more softly: “Life should never be tainted
with a cripple’s kisses.”
At  this  moment  Zagreus  had  opened  the  chest  next  to  the
replace and showed Mersault a tarnished steel safe inside, the key
in the lock. On top of the safe lay a white envelope and a large
black  revolver.  Zagreus  had  answered  Mersault’s  involuntarily
curious stare with a smile. It was very simple. On days when the
tragedy which had robbed him of  his  life was too much for him, he
took out this letter, which he had not dated and which explained
his desire to die. Then he laid the gun on the table, bent down to it
and  pressed  his  forehead  against  it,  rolling  his  temples  over  it,
calming the fever of his cheeks against the cold steel. For a long
time he stayed like that, letting his ngers caress the trigger, lifting
the  safety  catch,  until  the  world  fell  silent  around  him  and  his
whole being, already half-asleep, united with the sensation of the
cold, salty metal from which death could emerge. Realizing then
that it would be enough for him to date his letter and pull the
trigger,  discovering  the  absurd  feasibility  of  death,  he  knew  his

imagination was vivid enough to show him the full horror of what
life’s negation meant for him, and he drowned in his somnolence
all his craving to live, to go on burning in dignity and silence.
Then, waking completely, his mouth full of already bitter saliva, he
would lick the gun barrel, sticking his tongue into it and sucking
out an impossible happiness.
“Of  course  my  life  is  ruined.  But  I  was  right  in  those  days:
everything  for  happiness,  against  the  world  which  surrounds  us
with  its  violence  and  its  stupidity.”  Zagreus  laughed  then  and
added:  “You  see,  Mersault,  all  the  misery  and  cruelty  of  our
civilization  can  be  measured  by  this  one  stupid  axiom:  happy
nations have no history.”
It was very late now. Mersault could not tell what time it was—
his  head  throbbed  with  feverish  excitement.  The  heat  and  the
harshness of the cigarettes he had smoked lled his mouth. Even
the light around him was an accomplice still. For the rst time
since Zagreus had begun his story, he glanced toward him: “I think
I understand.”
Exhausted by his long eort, the cripple was breathing hoarsely.
After a silence he nonetheless said, laboriously: “I’d like to be sure.
Don’t think I’m saying that money makes happiness. I only mean
that for a certain class of beings happiness is possible, provided
they have time, and that having money is a way of being free of
money.”
He had slumped down in his chair, under his blankets. The night
had closed in again, and Mersault could scarcely see Zagreus now.
A  long  silence  followed,  and  Mersault,  wanting  to  re-establish
contact,  to  assure  himself  of  the  other  man’s  presence  in  the
darkness, stood up and said, as though groping: “It’s a beautiful
risk to take.”
“Yes,” Zagreus said, almost in a whisper. “And it’s better to bet
on  this  life  than  on  the  next.  For  me,  of  course,  it’s  another
matter.”
“A wreck,” Mersault thought. “A zero in the world.”
“For twenty years I’ve been unable to have the experience of a
certain  happiness.  This  life  which  devours  me—I  won’t  have

known  it  to  the  full,  and  what  frightens  me  about  death  is  the
certainty  it  will  bring  me  that  my  life  has  been  consummated
without me. I will have lived ... marginally—do  you understand?”
With  no  transition,  a  young  man’s  laugh  emerged  from  the
darkness:  “Which  means,  Mersault,  that  underneath,  and  in  my
condition, I still have hope.”
Mersault took a few steps toward the table.
“Think about it,” Zagreus said, “think about it.”
Mersault merely asked: “Can I turn on the light?”
“Please.”
Zagreus’ nostrils and his round eyes looked paler in the sudden
glare.  He  was  still  breathing  hard.  When  Mersault  held  out  his
hand he replied by shaking his head and laughing too loud. “Don’t
take me too seriously. It always annoys me—the tragic look that
comes into people’s faces when they see my stumps.”
“He’s playing games with me,” Mersault thought.
“Don’t take anything seriously except happiness. Think about it,
Mersault, you have a pure heart. Think about it.” Then he looked
him straight in the eyes and after a pause said: “Besides, you have
two legs, which doesn’t do any harm.” He smiled then and rang a
bell. “Clear out now, it’s time for peepee.”

5
Walking  home  that  Sunday  evening,  Mersault  couldn’t  stop
thinking about Zagreus. But as he walked up the stairs to his room,
he  heard  groans  coming  from  the  barrelmaker  Cardona’s
apartment.  He  knocked.  No  one  answered,  but  the  groans
continued,  and  Mersault  walked  right  in.  The  barrelmaker  was
huddled  on  his  bed,  sobbing  like  a  child.  At  his  feet  was  the
photograph  of  an  old  woman.  “She’s  dead,”  Cardona  gasped.  It
was true, but it had happened a long time ago.
Cardona was deaf, half-dumb, a mean and violent man. Until
recently he had lived with his sister, but his tyranny had at last
exhausted the woman, and she had taken refuge with her children.
And he had remained alone, as helpless as a man can be who must
cook and clean for himself for the rst time in his life. His sister
had described their quarrels to Mersault one day when she had met
him  in  the  street.  Cardona  was  thirty,  short,  rather  handsome.
Since  childhood  he  had  lived  with  his  mother,  the  only  human
being  ever  to  inspire  him  with  fear—superstitious  rather  than
justied, moreover. He had loved her with all his uncouth heart,
which is to say both harshly and eagerly, and the best proof of his
aection was his way of teasing the old woman by mouthing, with
diculty, the worst abuse of priests and the Church. If he had lived
so long with his  mother, it was also because he had never induced
any other woman to care for him. Infrequent pickups in a brothel
authorized him, however, to call himself a man.
The  mother  died.  From  then  on,  he  had  lived  with  his  sister.
Mersault rented them the room they occupied. Each quite solitary,
they struggled through a long, dark, dirty life. They found it hard
to speak to each other, they went for days without a word. But
now she had left. He was too proud to complain, to ask her to
come  back:  he  lived  alone.  Mornings,  he  ate  in  the  restaurant

downstairs,  evenings  up  in  his  room,  bringing  food  from  a
c h a r c u t e r i e . He washed his own sheets, his overalls. But he left his
room utterly lthy. Sometimes, though—soon after the sister had
left him—he would start his Sundays by taking a rag and trying to
clean up the place. But his man’s clumsiness—a saucepan on the
mantelpiece that had once been decorated with vases and gurines
—showed up in the neglect in which everything was left. What he
called “putting things in order” consisted of hiding the disorder,
pushing  dirty  clothes  behind  cushions  or  arranging  the  most
disparate objects on the sideboard. Finally he tired of making the
eort, no longer bothered to make his bed, and slept with his dog
on the fetid blankets. His sister had said to Mersault: “He carries
on in the café, but the woman in the laundry told me she saw him
crying when he had to wash his own sheets.” And it was a fact
that, hardened as he  was, a terror seized this man at certain times
and  forced  him  to  acknowledge  the  extent  of  his  desolation.  Of
course  the  sister  had  lived  with  him  out  of  pity,  she  had  told
Mersault. But Cardona kept her from seeing the man she loved. At
their age, though, it didn’t matter much any more. Her boyfriend
was a married man. He brought her owers he had picked in the
suburban hedgerows, oranges, and tiny bottles of liqueur he had
won at shooting galleries. Not that he was handsome or anything
—but you can’t eat good looks for dinner, and he was so decent.
She valued him, and he valued her—wasn’t that love? She did his
laundry for him and tried to keep things nice. He used to wear a
handkerchief folded in a triangle and knotted around his neck: she
made  his  handkerchiefs  very  white,  and  that  was  one  of  his
pleasures.
But her brother wouldn’t let him come to the house. She had to
see him on the sly. Once she had let him come, and her brother had
caught  them,  and  there  had  been  a  terrible  brawl.  The
handkerchief folded in a triangle had been left behind, in a lthy
corner  of  the  room,  and  she  had  taken  refuge  with  her  son.
Mersault  thought  of  that  handkerchief  as  he  stared  around  the
sordid room.

At the time, people had felt sorry for the lonely barrelmaker. He
had mentioned a possible marriage to Mersault. An older woman,
who  had  doubtless  been  tempted  by  the  prospect  of  young,
vigorous  caresses  ...  She  had  them  before  the  wedding.  After  a
while her suitor abandoned the plan, declaring she was too old for
him.  And  he  was  alone  in  this  little  room.  Gradually  the  lth
encircled  him,  besieged  him,  took  over  his  bed,  then  submerged
everything irretrievably. The place was too ugly, and for a man
who  doesn’t  like  his  own  room,  there  is  a  more  accessible  one,
comfortable,  bright,  and  always  welcoming:  the  café.  In  this
neighborhood, the cafés were particularly lively. They gave o that
herd warmth which is the last refuge against the terrors of solitude
and  its  vague  aspirations.  The  taciturn  creature  took  up  his
residence in them. Mersault saw him in one or another every night.
Thanks to the cafés, he postponed the moment of his return as long
as possible. In them he regained his place among men. But tonight,
no doubt, the cafés had not been enough. And on his way home, he
must have taken out that photograph which wakened the echoes of
a dead past. He rediscovered the woman he had loved and teased
so long. In the hideous room, alone with the futility of his life,
mustering his last forces, he had become conscious of the past that
had once been his happiness. Or so he must have thought, at least,
since at the contact of that past and his wretched present, a spark
of the divine had touched him and he had begun to weep.
Now,  as  whenever  he  found  himself  confronting  a  brutal
manifestation of life, Mersault was powerless, lled with respect
for that animal pain. He sat down on the dirty, rumpled blankets
and laid one  hand on Cardona’s shoulder. In front of him, on the
oilcloth  covering  the  table,  was  an  oil  lamp,  a  bottle  of  wine,
crusts of bread, a piece of cheese, and a tool box. In the corners of
the ceiling, festoons of cobwebs. Mersault, who had never been in
this room since his own mother’s death, measured the distance this
man  had  traveled  by  the  desolation  around  him.  The  window
overlooking the courtyard was closed. The other window was open
only a crack. The oil lamp, in a xture surrounded by a tiny deck
of  china  cards,  cast  its  calm  circle  of  light  on  the  table,  on

Mersault’s  and  Cardona’s  feet,  and  on  a  chair  facing  them.
Meanwhile  Cardona  had  picked  up  the  photograph  and  was
staring  at  it,  kissing  it,  mumbling:  “Poor  M a m a n .”  But  it  was
himself he was pitying. She was buried in the hideous cemetery
Mersault knew well, on the other side of town.
He  wanted  to  leave.  Speaking  slowly  to  make  himself
understood, he said: “You-can’t-stay-here-like-this.”
“No  more  work,”  Cardona  gasped,  and  holding  out  the
photograph, he stammered: “I loved her, I loved her,” and Mersault
translated: “She loved me.” “She’s dead,” and Mersault understood:
“I’m  alone.”  “I  made  her  that  for  her  last  birthday.”  On  the
mantelpiece  was  a  tiny  wooden  barrel  with  brass  hoops  and  a
shiny  spigot.  Mersault  let  go  of  Cardona’s  shoulder,  and  he
collapsed on the dirty pillows. From under the bed came a deep
sigh and a sickening smell. The dog dragged itself out, attening
its  rump,  and  rested  its  head  on  Mersault’s  lap,  its  long  ears
pricked up, its golden eyes staring into his own. Mersault looked at
the little barrel. In the miserable room where there was scarcely
enough air to breathe, with the dog’s warmth under his ngers, he
closed his eyes on the despair that rose within him like a tide for
the rst time in a long while. Today, in the face of abjection and
solitude, his heart said: “No.” And in the great distress that washed
over  him,  Mersault  realized  that  his  rebellion  was  the  only
authentic thing in him, and that everything else was misery and
submission.  The  street  that  had  been  so  animated  under  his
windows the day before still swelled with life. From the gardens
beyond  the  courtyard  rose  a  smell  of  grass.  Mersault  oered
Cardona a cigarette, and both men smoked without speaking. The
last  streetcars  passed  and  with  them  the  still-vivid  memories  of
men and lights. Cardona fell asleep and soon began snoring, his
nose  stued  with  tears.  The  dog,  curling  up  at  Mersault’s  feet,
stirred occasionally and moaned in its dreams. Each time it moved,
its  smell  reached  Mersault,  who  was  leaning  against  the  wall,
trying to choke down the rebellion in his heart. The lamp smoked,
charred, and nally went out with a stink of oil. Mersault dozed o
and awakened with his eyes xed on the bottle of wine. Making a

tremendous eort, he stood up, walked over to the rear window
and  stood  there:  out  of  the  night’s  heart  sounds  and  silences
mounted toward him. At the  limits of this sleeping world, a long
blast from a ship summoned men to depart, to begin again.
The  next  morning,  Mersault  killed  Zagreus,  came  home,  and
slept all afternoon. He awakened in a fever. That evening, still in
bed, he sent for the neighborhood doctor, who told him he had
grippe. A man from his oce who had come to nd out what was
the matter took Mersault’s resignation to Monsieur Langlois. A few
days later, everything was settled: an article in the newspaper, an
investigation. There was every motive for Zagreus’ action. Marthe
came to see Mersault and said with a sigh: “Sometimes there are
days when you’d like to change places with him. But sometimes it
takes more courage to live than to shoot yourself.” A week later,
Mersault boarded a ship for Marseilles. He told everyone he was
going to France for a rest. From Lyons, Marthe received a letter of
farewell  from  which  only  her  pride  suered.  In  the  same  letter
Mersault said he had been oered an exceptional job in central
Europe. Marthe wrote him at a general-delivery address about how
much she was suering. Her letter never reached Mersault, who
had a violent attack of fever the day after he reached Lyons, and
took the rst train for Prague. As it happened, Marthe told him
that, after several days in the morgue, Zagreus had been buried
and that it had taken a lot of pillows to wedge his body into the
con.

P A R T   T W O
C o n s c i o u s   D e a t h

1
“I’d like a room,”  the man said in German.
The clerk was sitting in front of a board covered with keys and
was separated from the lobby by a broad table. He stared at the
man who had just come in, a gray raincoat over his shoulders, and
who  spoke  with  his  head  turned  away.  “Certainly,  sir.  For  one
night?”
“No, I don’t know.”
“We have rooms at eighteen, twenty-ve, and thirty crowns.”
Mersault looked through the glass door of the hotel out into the
little Prague street, his hands in his pockets, his hair rumpled. Not
far away, he could hear the streetcars screeching down the Avenue
Wenceslas.
“Which room would you like, sir?”
“It doesn’t matter,” Mersault said, still staring through the glass
door. The clerk took a key o the rack and handed it to Mersault.
“Room number twelve,” he said.
Mersault seemed to wake up. “How much is this room?”
“Thirty crowns.”
“That’s too much. Give me a room for eighteen.”
Without  a  word,  the  man  took  another  key  o  the  rack  and
indicated the brass star attached to it: “Room number thirty-four.”
Sitting in his room, Mersault took o his jacket, loosened his tie,
and mechanically rolled up his shirtsleeves. He walked over to the
mirror above the sink, meeting a drawn face slightly tanned where
it was not darkened by several days’ growth of beard. His hair fell
in  a  tangle  over  his  forehead,  down  to  the  two  deep  creases
between his eyebrows, which gave him a grave, tender expression,
he  realized.  Only  then  did  he  think  of  looking  around  this
miserable  room  which  was  all  the  comfort  he  had  and  beyond
which he envisioned nothing at all. On a sickening carpet—huge

yellow owers against a gray background—a whole geography of
lth suggested a grimy universe of wretchedness. Behind the huge
radiator,  clots  of  dust;  the  regulator  was  broken,  and  the  brass
contact  points  were  exposed.  Over  the  sagging  bed  dangled  a
yspecked wire, at its end a sticky lightbulb. Mersault inspected
the sheets, which were clean. He took his toilet things out of the
overnight bag and arranged them one by one on the sink. Then he
started to wash his hands, but turned o the tap and walked over
to open the uncurtained window. It overlooked a courtyard with a
washing trough and a series of tiny windows in the walls. Laundry
was drying on a cord stretched between two of them. Mersault lay
down on the bed and fell asleep at once. He wakened with a start,
sweating, his clothes rumpled, and walked aimlessly around the
room. Then he lit a cigarette, sat down on the bed, and stared at
the wrinkles in  his trousers. The sour taste of sleep mingled with
the cigarette smoke. He stared at the room again, scratching his
ribs through his shirt. He was ooded by a dreadful pleasure at the
prospect of so much desolation and solitude. To be so far away
from everything, even from his fever, to suer so distinctly here
what was absurd and miserable in even the tidiest lives showed
him  the  shameful  and  secret  countenance  of  a  kind  of  freedom
born of the suspect, the shady. Around him the accid hours lapped
like a stagnant pond—time had gone slack.
Someone knocked violently, and Mersault, startled, realized that
he had been awakened by the same knocking. He opened the door
to nd a little old man with red hair bent double under Mersault’s
two  suitcases,  which  looked  enormous  in  his  hands.  He  was
choking with rage, and his wide-spaced teeth released a stream of
saliva as well as insults and recriminations. Mersault remembered
the broken handle, which made the larger suitcase so dicult to
carry. He wanted to apologize, but had no idea how to say he had
never  thought  the  porter  would  be  so  old.  The  tiny  creature
interrupted him: “That’s fourteen crowns.”
“For  one  day’s  storage?”  Mersault  asked,  surprised.  Then  he
understood,  from  the  old  man’s  laborious  explanations,  that  the
porter had taken a taxi. But Mersault dared not say that he himself

could also have taken a taxi in that case, and he paid out of sheer
reluctance  to  argue.  Once  the  door  was  shut,  Mersault  felt
inexplicable sobs swelling his chest. A nearby clock chimed four
times. He had slept two hours. He realized he was separated from
the street only by the house opposite his window, and he felt the
dim, mysterious current of life so close to him. It would be better to
go outside. Mersault washed his hands very carefully. He sat down
on  the  bed  again  to  clean  his  nails,  and  worked  the  le
methodically. Down in the courtyard two or three buzzers rang out
so  emphatically  that  Mersault  went  back  to  the  window.  He
noticed that an arched passageway led through the house to the
street. It was as if all the voices of the street, all the unknown life
on the other side of that house, the sounds of men who have an
address, a family, arguments with an uncle, preferences at dinner,
chronic diseases, the swarm of beings each of whom has his own
personality, forever divided from the monstrous heart of humanity
by individual beats, ltered now through the passageway and rose
through the courtyard to explode like bubbles in Mersault’s room.
Discovering how porous he was, how attentive to each sign the
world made, Mersault recognized the deep aw that opened his
being to life. He lit another cigarette and hurriedly dressed. As he
buttoned his jacket, the smoke stung his eyes. He turned back to
the sink, put cold water on his eyes, and decided to comb his hair.
But his comb had vanished. He was unable to smooth the sleep-
rumpled curls with his ngers. He went downstairs  as he was, his
hair  sticking  up  behind  and  hanging  over  his  forehead.  He  felt
diminished even further. Once out in the street, he walked around
the hotel to reach the little passageway he had noticed. It opened
onto the square of the old town hall, and in the heavy evening that
sank over Prague, the Gothic steeples of the town hall and of the
old Tyn church were silhouetted, black against the dim sky. Crowds
of people were walking under the arcades lining the old streets.
Each time a woman passed him, Mersault waited for the glance
that would permit him to consider himself still capable of playing
the delicate and tender game of life. But healthy people have a
natural skill in avoiding feverish eyes. Unshaven, his hair rumpled,

in his eyes the expression of some restless animal, his trousers as
wrinkled  as  his  shirt  collar,  Mersault  had  lost  that  wonderful
condence bestowed by a well-cut suit or the steering wheel of a
car. The light turned coppery, and the day still lingered on the gold
of  the  baroque  domes  at  the  far  end  of  the  square.  He  walked
toward one of them, went into the church, and, overcome by the
ancient smell, sat down on a bench. The vaults above him were
quite dark, but the gilded capitals shed a mysterious golden liquid
which owed down the grooves of the columns to the puy faces of
angels and grinning saints. Peace, yes, there was peace here, but
so bitter that Mersault hurried to the threshold and stood on the
steps,  inhaling  the  evening’s  cooler  air,  into  which  he  would
plummet. In another moment, he saw the rst star appear, pure
and unadorned, between the steeples of Tyn.
He began to look for a cheap restaurant, making his way into
darker, less crowded streets. Though it had not rained during the
day,  the  ground  was  damp,  and  Mersault  had  to  pick  his  way
among black puddles glimmering between the infrequent paving
stones. A light rain started to fall. The busy streets could not be far
away,  for  he  could  hear  the  newspaper  vendors  hawking  the
Narodni Politika . Mersault was walking in circles now, and suddenly
stopped. A strange odor reached him out of the darkness. Pungent,
sour, it awakened all his associations with suering. He tasted it
on his tongue, deep in his nose; even his eyes, somehow, tasted it.
It was far away, then it was at the next streetcorner, between the
now-opaque  sky  and  the  sticky  pavement  it  was  there,  the  evil
spell of the nights of Prague. He advanced to meet it, and as he did
so it became more real, lling him entirely, stinging his eyes until
the  tears  came,  leaving  him  helpless.  Turning  a  corner,  he
understood:  an  old  woman  was  selling  cucumbers  soaked  in
vinegar, and it was their fragrance which had assaulted Mersault.
A  passer-by  stopped,  bought  a  cucumber  which  the  old  woman
wrapped in a piece of paper. He took a few steps, unwrapped his
purchase in front of Mersault and, as he bit into the cucumber, its
broken,  sopping  esh  released  the  odor  even  more  powerfully.
Mersault  leaned against a post, nauseated, and for a long moment

inhaled all the alien solitude the world could oer him. Then he
walked  away  and  without  even  thinking  what  he  was  doing
entered  a  restaurant  where  an  accordion  was  playing.  He  went
down several steps, stopped at the foot of the stairs, and found
himself in a dim cellar lled with red lights. He must have looked
peculiar,  for  the  musician  played  more  softly,  the  conversations
stopped, and all the diners looked in his direction. In one corner,
some whores were eating together, their mouths shiny with grease.
Other  customers  were  drinking  the  brown,  sweetish  Czech  beer.
Many  were  smoking  without  having  ordered  anything  at  all.
Mersault went over to a rather long table at which only one man
was seated. Tall and slender with yellow hair, he was sprawled in
his chair with his hands in his pockets and pursed his chapped lips
round a matchstick already swollen with saliva, sucking it noisily
or  sliding  it  from  one  corner  of  his  mouth  to  the  other.  When
Mersault  sat  down,  the  man  barely  moved,  wedged  his  back
against  the  wall,  shifted  the  match  in  Mersault’s  direction  and
squinted faintly. At that moment Mersault noticed a red star in his
buttonhole.
Mersault  ate  the  little  he  had  ordered  rapidly.  He  was  not
hungry.  The  accordionist  was  playing  louder  now,  and  staring
xedly at the newcomer. Twice Mersault stared back deantly and
tried to meet the man’s gaze. But fever had weakened him.  The
man  was  still  staring.  Suddenly  one  of  the  whores  burst  out
laughing, the man with the red star sucked noisily on his match
and  produced  a  little  bubble  of  saliva,  and  the  musician,  still
staring at Mersault, broke o the lively dance tune he had been
playing and began a slow melody heavy with the dust of centuries.
At this moment the door opened and a new customer walked in.
Mersault  did  not  see,  but  through  the  open  door  the  smell  of
vinegar and cucumbers pressed in upon him, immediately lling
the  dark  cellar,  mingling  with  the  mysterious  melody  of  the
accordion, swelling the bubble of saliva on the man’s matchstick,
making the conversations suddenly more meaningful, as if out of
the night that lay upon Prague all the signicance of a miserable
suering  ancient  world  had  taken  refuge  in  the  warmth  of  this

room, among these people. Mersault, who was eating some kind of
over-sweetened compote, suddenly at the end of his endurance, felt
the aw he carried within himself yield, exposing him still more
completely to pain and fever. He stood up abruptly, called to the
waiter,  and  understanding  nothing  of  his  explanations  overpaid
the check, realizing that the musician’s gaze was once again xed
upon him. He walked to the door, passing the accordionist, and
saw that he was still staring at the place at the table Mersault had
just left. Then he realized that the man was blind, walked up the
steps,  and,  opening  the  door,  was  entirely  engulfed  by  the
omnipresent  odor as he walked through the little streets into the
depths of the night.
Stars  glittered  over  the  houses.  He  must  have  been  near  the
river; he could detect its mued powerful voice. In front of a little
gate in a thick wall covered with Hebrew characters, he realized
that he was in the ghetto. Over the wall stretched the branches of a
sweet-smelling  willow.  Through  the  gate  he  could  make  out  big
brown  stones  lying  among  the  weeds:  it  was  the  old  Jewish
cemetery of Prague. A moment later Mersault realized he had been
running and was now in the square of the old town hall. Near his
hotel he had to lean against a wall and vomit, retching painfully.
With  all  the  lucidity  extreme  weakness  aords,  he  managed  to
reach his room without making any mistakes, went to bed, and fell
asleep at once.
The next day he was awakened by the newspaper vendors. The
day  was  still  overcast,  but  the  sun  glowed  behind  the  clouds.
Though still a little weak, Mersault felt better. But he thought of
the long day which lay ahead of him. Living this way, in his own
presence, time took on its most extreme dimensions, and each hour
seemed to contain a world. The important thing was to avoid crises
like  the  one  yesterday.  It  would  be  best  to  do  his  sightseeing
methodically. He sat at the table in his pajamas and worked out a
systematic  schedule  which  would  occupy  each  of  his  days  for  a
week.  Monasteries  and  baroque  churches,  museums  and  the  old
parts of the city,  nothing was omitted. Then he washed, realized he
had forgotten to buy a comb, and went downstairs as he had the

day before, unkempt and taciturn, past the clerk whose bristling
hair,  bewildered  expression,  and  jacket  with  the  second  button
missing he noticed now, in broad daylight. As he left the hotel he
was brought to a halt by a childish, sentimental accordion tune.
The blind man of the night before, squatting on his heels at the
corner of the old square, was playing with the same blank and
smiling expression, as though liberated from himself and entirely
contained within the motion of a life which exceeded him. Mersault
turned the corner and again recognized the smell of cucumbers.
And with the smell, his suering.
That day was the same as those which followed. Mersault got up
late,  visited  monasteries  and  churches,  sought  refuge  in  their
fragrance of crypts and incense, and then, back in the daylight,
confronted  his  secret  fears  at  every  corner,  where  a  cucumber
vendor was invariably posted. It was through this odor that he saw
the  museums  and  discovered  the  mystery  and  the  profusion  of
baroque genius which lled Prague with its gold magnicence. The
altars, which glowed softly in the darkness, seemed borrowed from
the coppery sky, the misty sunlight so frequent over the city. The
glistening scrolls and spirals, the elaborate setting that looked as if
it were cut out of gold paper, so touching in its resemblance to the
crèches  made  for  children  at  Christmas,  the  grandiose  and
grotesque  baroque  perspectives  aected  Mersault  as  a  kind  of
infantile,  feverish,  and  overblown  romanticism  by  which  men
protect themselves against their own demons.  The god worshipped
here was the god man fears and honors, not the god who laughs
with man before the warm frolic of sea and sun. Emerging from
the faint fragrance of dust and extinction which reigned under the
dim  vaults,  Mersault  felt  he  had  no  country.  Every  evening  he
visited the cloister of the Czech monks, on the west side of the city.
In the cloister garden the hours uttered away with the doves, the
bells chimed softly over the grass, but it was still his fever which
spoke to Mersault. Nonetheless, the time passed. But then came the
hour when the churches and monuments closed and the restaurants
had not yet opened. That was the dangerous time. Mersault walked
along the Vltava’s banks, dotted with owerbeds and bandstands,

as the day came to an end. Little boats worked their way up the
river from lock to lock. Mersault kept pace with them, left behind
the deafening noise and rushing water of a sluice gate, gradually
regained the peace and quiet of the evening, then walked on to
meet a murmur which swelled to a terrible roar. At the new lock,
he watched the bright little dinghies vainly trying to pass over the
dam without capsizing until one of them passed the danger point
and shouts rang out above the sound of the water. The rushing
river  with its burden of shouts and tunes, the fragrance of gardens,
full  of  the  coppery  glow  of  the  setting  sun  and  the  twisted,
grotesque  shadows  of  the  statues  on  the  Charles  Bridge,  made
Mersault bitterly conscious of his desolation: a solitude in which
love had no part. Coming to a standstill as the fragrance of leaves
and water reached him, he felt a catch in his throat and imagined
tears which did not come. Tears would be for a friend, or for open
arms. But tears gave way to the world without tenderness in which
he was immersed. Some evenings, always at the same times, he
crossed  the  Charles  Bridge  and  strolled  through  the  Hradčany
district above the river, a deserted and silent neighborhood, though
only a few steps from the busiest streets in the city. He wandered
among these huge palaces, across enormous paved courtyards, past
ironwork gates, around the cathedral. His footsteps echoed in the
silence between high walls. A dim noise from the city reached him
here. There was no cucumber vendor in this district, but something
oppressive  in  the  silence,  in  the  grandeur  of  the  place,  so  that
Mersault always ended by walking back toward the odor or the
melody which henceforth constituted his only country. He ate his
meals in the restaurant he had discovered, for at least it remained
familiar. He had his place beside the man with the red star, who
came  only  in  the  evenings,  drank  a  beer,  and  chewed  on  his
matchstick. At dinner, too, the blind man played his accordion, and
Mersault ate quickly,  paid his check, and returned to his hotel and
the unfailing sleep of a feverish child.
Every day he thought of leaving and every day, sinking a little
deeper into desolation, his longing for happiness had a little less
hold over him. He had been in Prague four days now, and he had

not  yet  bought  the  comb  whose  absence  he  discovered  each
morning. Yet he had the vague sense of something missing, and
this was what he irresolutely waited for. One evening, he walked
toward  his  restaurant  down  the  little  street  where  he  had  rst
smelled the cucumbers. Already he anticipated that odor, when just
before he reached the restaurant, on the sidewalk opposite him,
something  made  him  stop,  then  come  closer.  A  man  was  lying
there, arms folded, head fallen on the  left  cheek.  Three  or  four
people  were  standing  against  the  wall,  apparently  waiting  for
something, though very calm. One was smoking, the others were
speaking in low voices. But one man in shirtsleeves, his jacket over
his arm, hat pushed back on his head, was performing  a kind of
wild dance around the body, his gestures emphatic and disturbing.
Overhead, the faint light of a distant streetlamp mingled with the
glow  from the nearby restaurant. The man tirelessly dancing, the
body with its folded arms, the calm spectators, the ironic contrast
and   the   inexplicable   silence—here   at   last,   combining
contemplation  and  innocence,  among  the  rather  oppressive
interplay  of  light  and  shadow,  was  a  moment  of  equilibrium
beyond which it  seemed to Mersault that  everything would collapse
into madness. He came closer: the dead man’s head was lying in a
pool of blood. The head was turned so that it rested on the wound.
In this remote corner of Prague, between the faint light on the
moist  pavement,  the  long  wet  hiss  of  passing  cars  a  few  steps
away, the distant screech of occasional streetcars, death seemed
insipid  yet  insistent  too,  and  it  was  death’s  summons,  its  damp
breath, that Mersault sensed at the very moment he began walking
away rapidly, without turning back. Suddenly the odor, which he
had forgotten, was all around him: he went into the restaurant and
sat  down  at  his  table.  The  man  was  there,  but  without  his
matchstick.  It  seemed  to  Mersault  that  there  was  something
distraught in his eyes. He dismissed the stupid notion that occurred
to him. But everything was whirling in his mind. Before ordering
anything he jumped up and ran to his hotel, went to his room, and
threw himself on the bed. Something sharp was throbbing in his
temples.  His  heart  empty,  his  belly  tight,  Mersault’s  rebellion

exploded.  Images  of  his  life  rushed  before  his  eyes.  Something
inside  him  clamored  for  the  gestures  of  women,  for  arms  that
opened, and for warm lips. From the depth of the painful nights of
Prague,  amid  smells  of  vinegar  and  sentimental  tunes,  the
anguished  countenance  of  the  old  baroque  world  which  had
accompanied  his  fever  mounted  toward  him.  Breathing  with
diculty, seeing nothing, moving mechanically, he sat up on his
bed. The drawer of the night table was open, lined  with an English
newspaper in which he read a whole article. Then he stretched out
on the bed again. The man’s head had been lying on the wound,
and  three  or  four  ngers  would  have  t  inside  that  wound.
Mersault stared at his hands and his ngers, and childish desires
rose in his heart. An intense and secret fervor swelled within him,
and it was a nostalgia for cities lled with sunlight and women,
with the green evenings that close all wounds. Tears burst from his
eyes. Inside him widened a great lake  of solitude and silence above
which ran the sad song of his deliverance.

2
In the train taking him north, Mersault stared at his hands. The
train’s  speed  turned  the  lowering  sky  into  an  onrush  of  heavy
clouds.  Mersault  was  alone  in  the  overheated  compartment—he
had left suddenly in the middle of the night, and with the dark
morning hours ahead of him, he let the mild landscape of Bohemia
rush by, the impending rain between the tall silky poplars and the
distant factory chimneys lling him with an impulse to burst into
tears. Then he looked at the white plaque with its three sentences:
Nicht  hinauslehnen,  E  pericoloso  sporgersi,  II  est  dangereux  de  se
pencher au-dehors .  He  looked  again  at  his  hands,  which  lay  like
live, wild animals on his knees: the left one long and supple, the
right thicker, muscular. He knew them, recognized them, yet they
were distinct from himself, as though capable of actions in which
his will had no part. One came to rest against his forehead now,
pressing against the fever which throbbed in his temples. The other
slid down his jacket and took out of its pocket a cigarette that he
immediately  discarded  as  soon  as  he  became  aware  of  an
overpowering  desire  to  vomit.  His  hands  returned  to  his  knees,
palms cupped, where they oered Mersault the emblem of his life,
indierent once more and oered to anyone who would  take it.
He  traveled  for  two  days.  But  now  it  was  not  an  instinct  of
escape  which  drove  him  on.  The  very  monotony  of  the  journey
satised  him.  The  train  which  was  jolting  him  halfway  across
Europe  suspended  him  between  two  worlds—it  had  taken  him
abroad, and would deposit him somewhere, draw him out of a life
the very memory of which he wanted to erase and lead him to the
threshold of a new world where desire would be king. Not for a
single moment was Mersault bored. He sat in his corner, rarely
disturbed by anyone, stared at his hands, then at the countryside,
and reected. He deliberately extended his trip as far as Breslau,

merely rousing himself at the border to change tickets. He wanted
to stay where he was, contemplating his freedom. He was tired and
did not feel well enough to move; he hoarded every last fragment
of  his  strength,  his  hopes,  kneaded  them  together  until  he  had
refashioned himself and his fate as well. He loved these long nights
when the train rushed along the gleaming rails, roaring through
the village stations where only a clock was illuminated, the sudden
stops among the clustered lights of city stations where there was
no time to discover where he was before the train was already
swallowed up, a golden warmth cast into the compartments and
then gone. Hammers pounded on the wheels, the engine exhaled
its cloud of steam, and the robot gesture of the switchman lowering
his red disc hurled Mersault into the train’s wild course, only his
lucidity,  his  anxiety  awake.  The  crossword  puzzle  of  lights  and
shadows went on in the compartment, a black and gold motley:
Dresden, Bautzen, Gërlitz, Lugknitz. The long lonely night ahead of
him, with all the time in the world to decide on the actions of a
future life, the patient struggle with the thoughts eluding him on a
station  siding,  recaptured  and  pursued  again,  the  consequences
reappearing  and  escaping  once  more  before  the  dance  of  wires
glistening under the rain and the lights. Mersault groped for the
word, the sentence that would formulate the hope in his heart, that
would  resolve  his  anxiety.  In  his  weakened  state,  he  needed
formulas.  The  night  and  then  the  day  passed  in  this  obstinate
struggle  with  the  word,  the  image  which  from  now  on  would
constitute  the  whole  tonality  of  his  mind,  the  sympathetic  or
miserable dream of his future. He closed his eyes. It takes time to
live. Like any work of art, life needs to be thought about. Mersault
thought about his life and exercised his bewildered consciousness
and his longing for happiness in a train compartment which was
like one of those cells where a man learns to know what he is by
what is more than himself.
On the morning of the second day, in the middle of a eld, the
train  slowed  down.  Breslau  was  still  hours  away,  and  the  day
broke over the vast Silesian plain, a treeless sea of mud under an
overcast sky sagging with rainclouds. As far as the eye could see

and at regular intervals, huge black birds with glistening wings
ew in ocks a few yards above the  ground, incapable of rising
any higher under a rain-swollen sky heavy as a tombstone. They
circled  in  a  slow,  ponderous  ight,  and  sometimes  one  of  them
would leave the ock, skim the ground, almost inseparable from it,
and ap in the same lethargic ight, until it was far enough away
to be silhouetted on the horizon, a black dot. Mersault wiped the
steam o the glass and stared greedily through the long streaks his
ngers  left  on  the  pane.  Between  the  desolate  earth  and  the
colorless sky appeared  an image of the ungrateful world in which,
for the rst time, he came to himself at last. On this earth, restored
to the despair of innocence, a traveler lost in a primitive world, he
regained contact, and with his st pressed to his chest, his face
attened against the glass, he calculated his hunger for himself and
for the certainty of the splendors dormant within him. He wanted
to crush himself into that mud, to re-enter the earth by immersing
himself in that clay, to stand on that limitless plain covered with
dirt, stretching his arms to the sooty sponge of the sky, as though
confronting  the  superb  and  despairing  symbol  of  life  itself,  to
arm his solidarity with the world at its worst, to declare himself
life’s accomplice even in its thanklessness and its lth. Then the
great impulse that had sustained him collapsed for the rst time
since he left Prague. Mersault pressed his tears and his lips against
the cold pane. Again the glass blurred, the landscape disappeared.
A few hours later he arrived in Breslau. From a distance the city
looked like a forest of factory chimneys and church steeples. At
close range, it was made of brick and black stone; men in visored
caps walked slowly through the streets. Mersault followed them,
spent the morning in a workmen’s café. A boy was playing the
harmonica: tune of a sentimental stupidity which eased the soul.
Mersault decided to travel south again, after buying a comb. The
next day he was in Vienna. He slept a part of the day and the
whole next night. When he awakened, his fever was completely
gone. He stued himself on soft-boiled eggs and thick cream for
breakfast, and feeling a little squeamish walked out into a morning
speckled  with  sunshine  and  rain.  Vienna  was  a  refreshing  city:

there was nothing to visit. St. Stephen’s Cathedral was too big, and
bored him. He preferred the cafés around it, and in the evening a
little  dancehall  near  the  banks  of  the  canal.  During  the  day  he
strolled along the Ring, in the luxury of the shopwindows and the
elegant  women.  He  enjoyed  this  frivolous  and  expensive  decor
which  divides  man  from  himself  in  the  least  natural  city  in  the
world. But the women were pretty, the owers bright and sturdy in
the gardens, and over the Ring at twilight, in the brilliant carefree
crowd,  Mersault  stared  at  the  futile  caracole  of  stone  horses
against the red sky. It was then that he remembered his friends
Rose and Claire. For the rst time since Lyons, he wrote a letter. It
was the overow of his silence that he put down on paper:
Dear Children ,
I’m writing from Vienna. I don’t know what you’re doing, but speaking
for myself I’m traveling for a living. I’ve seen a lot of beautiful things
with  a  heavy  heart.  Here  in  Vienna  beauty  has  been  replaced  by
civilization. It’s a relief. I’m not looking at churches or ruins. I take
walks  in  the  Ring.  And  in  the  evening,  over  the  theaters  and  the
sumptuous palaces, the blind steeplechase of stone horses in the sunset
lls me with a strange mixture of bitterness and delight. Mornings I eat
soft-boiled eggs and thick cream. I get up late, the hotel people shower
attention on me. I’m very impressed with the style of the maîtres d’hotel
and  stued  with  good  food  (oh,  the  cream  here).  There  are  lots  of
shows and the women are good-looking. The only thing missing is the
sun.
What are you up to? Tell me about yourselves and describe the sun
to a miserable wretch who has no roots anywhere and who remains
your faithful
Patrice Mersault
That  evening,  having  written  his  letter,  he  went  back  to  the
dancehall. He had arranged to spend the evening with Helen, one
of the hostesses who knew a little French and understood his poor

German. Leaving the dancehall at two in the morning he walked
her home, made love eciently, and wakened the next morning
against Helen’s back, disinterestedly admiring her long hips and
broad shoulders. He got up without waking her, slipped the  money
into her shoe. As he was about to open the door, she called to him:
“But darling, you’ve made a mistake.” He returned to the bed. And
he had made a mistake. Unfamiliar with Austrian currency, he had
left  a  ve-hundred  shilling  note  instead  of  a  hundred  shillings.
“No,” he said smiling, “it’s for you—you were wonderful.” Helen’s
freckled face broke into a grin under her rumpled blond hair; she
jumped up on the bed and kissed him on both cheeks. That kiss,
doubtless  the  rst  she  had  given  him  spontaneously,  kindled  a
spark of emotion in Mersault. He made her lie down, tucked her in,
walked  to  the  door  again  and  looked  back  with  a  smile.
“Goodbye,” he said. She opened her eyes wide above the sheet that
was pulled up to her nose and let him vanish without a word.
A  few  days  later,  Mersault  received  an  answer  postmarked
Algiers:
Dear Patrice ,
We’re in Algiers. Your children would be very glad to see you again. If
you have nothing to do in the world, why don’t you come to Algiers—
we  have  room  for  you  in  the  House.  We’re  all  happy  here.  We’re
ashamed of it, of course, but only for appearance’s sake. And because
of popular prejudice. If happiness appeals to you, come and try it here.
It’s better than  re-enlisting. We bend our brows to your paternal kisses ,
Rose, Claire, Catherine
P.S. Catherine protests against the word paternal.  Catherine  is living
with us. If you approve, she can be your third daughter.
He decided to return to Algiers by way of Genoa. As other men
need to be alone before making their crucial decisions, Mersault,
poisoned  by  solitude  and  alienation,  needed  to  withdraw  into

friendship and condence, to enjoy an apparent security before
choosing his life.
In  the  train  heading  across  northern  Italy  toward  Genoa,  he
listened to the thousand voices that lured him on, the siren songs of
happiness.  By  the  time  he  reached  the  rst  cypresses,  springing
straight up from the naked soil, he had yielded. He still felt weak,
feverish.  But  something  in  him  had  relented.  Soon,  as  the  sun
advanced through the day and the sea drew closer, under a broad
sky  pouring  light  and  air  over  the  shivering  olive  trees,  the
exultation  which  stirred  the  world  joined  the  enthusiasms  of  his
own  heart.  The  noise  of  the  train,  the  chatter  in  the  crowded
compartment, everything that laughed and sang around him kept
time  to  a  kind  of  inner  dance  which  projected  him,  sitting
motionless hour after hour, to the ends of the earth and at last
released him, jubilant and speechless, into the deafening bustle of
Genoa, the brilliant harbor echoing the brilliant sky, where desire
and  indolence  struggled  against  each  other  until  dark.  He  was
thirsty, hungry for love, eager for pleasure. The gods who burned
within him cast him into the sea, on a tiny beach at one end of the
harbor, where the water  tasted of salt and tar and he swam until
he forgot his own body. Then he wandered through the narrow,
redolent streets of the old part of the city, letting the colors claw at
his  eyes  and  the  sky  devour  itself  above  the  houses,  the  cats
sleeping among the summer’s lth attened by the burden of the
sun. He walked along a road overlooking the entire city, and the
ickering  fragrant  sea  rose  toward  him  in  one  long,  irresistible
swell. Closing his eyes, Mersault gripped the warm stone he sat on,
opening them again to stare at this city where sheer excess of life
aunted its exultant bad taste. At noon he would sit on the ramp
leading down to the harbor and watch the women walking up from
the  oces  on  the  docks.  In  sandals  and  bright  summer  dresses,
breasts  bobbing,  they  left  Mersault’s  tongue  dry  and  his  heart
pounding  with  desire,  a  desire  in  which  he  recognized  both  a
release  and  a  justication.  Evenings,  he  would  see  the  same
women in the streets and follow them, the ardent animal coiled in
his loins stirring with a erce delight. For two days he smoldered

in  this  inhuman  exultation.  On  the  third  day  he  left  Genoa  for
Algiers.
All during the crossing, staring at the water and the light on the
water, rst in the morning, then in the middle of the day, and then
in the evening, he matched his heart against the slow pulse of the
sky, and returned to himself. He scorned the vulgarity of certain
cures. Stretched out on the deck, he realized that there could be no
question  of  sleeping  but  that  he  must  stay  awake,  must  remain
conscious despite friends, despite the comfort of body and soul. He
had to create his happiness and his justication. And doubtless the
task would be easier for him now. At the strange peace that lled
him as he watched the evening suddenly freshening upon the sea,
the rst star slowly hardening in the sky where the light died out
green to be reborn yellow, he realized that after this great tumult
and this fury, what was dark and wrong within him was gone now,
yielding to the clear water, transparent now, of a soul restored to
kindness, to resolution. He understood. How long he had craved a
woman’s  love!  And  he  was  not  made  for  love.  All  his  life—the
oce  on  the  docks,  his  room  and  his  nights  of  sleep  there,  the
restaurant he went to, his mistress—he had pursued singlemindedly
a happiness which in his heart he believed was impossible. In this
he was no dierent from everyone else. He had played at wanting
to be happy. Never had he sought happiness with a conscious and
deliberate desire.  Never until the day ... And from that moment on,
because  of  a  single  act  calculated  in  utter  lucidity,  his  life  had
changed and happiness seemed possible. Doubtless he had given
birth to this new being in suering—but what was that suering
compared to the degrading farce he had performed till now? He
saw,  for  instance,  that  what  had  attached  him  to  Marthe  was
vanity, not love. Even that miracle of the lips she oered him was
nothing  more  than  the  delighted  astonishment  of  a  power
acknowledged and awakened by the conquest. The meaning of his
aair  with  Marthe  consisted  of  the  replacement  of  that  initial
astonishment by a certainty, the triumph of vanity over modesty.
What  he  had  loved  in  Marthe  were  those  evenings  when  they
would walk into the movie theater and men’s eyes turned toward

her, that moment when he oered her to the world. What he loved
in her was his power and his ambition to live. Even his desire, the
deepest  craving  of  his  esh,  probably  derived  from  this  initial
astonishment  at  possessing  a  lovely  body,  at  mastering  and
humiliating it. Now he knew he was not made for such love, but
for  the  innocent  and  terrible  love  of  the  dark  god  he  would
henceforth serve.
As  often  happens,  what  was  best  in  his  life  had  crystallized
around what was worst. Claire and her friends, Zagreus and his
will to happiness had all crystallized around Marthe. He knew now
that it was his own will to happiness which must make the next
move. But if it was to do so, he realized that he must come to terms
with time, that to have time was at once the most magnicent and
the most dangerous of experiments. Idleness is fatal only to the
mediocre. Most men cannot even prove they are not mediocre. He
had won that right. But the proof remained to be shown, the risk  to
be run. Only one thing had changed. He felt free of his past, and of
what he had lost. He wanted nothing now but this  contraction and
this enclosure inside himself, this lucid and patient fervor in the
face  of  the  world.  As  with  warm  dough  that’s  squeezed  and
kneaded, all he wanted was to hold his life between his hands: the
way he felt during those two long nights on the train when he
would talk to himself, prepare himself to live. To lick his life like
barley sugar, to shape it, sharpen it, love it at last—that was his
whole passion. This presence of himself to himself—henceforth his
eort would be to maintain it in the face of everything in his life,
even  at  the  cost  of  a  solitude  he  knew  now  was  so  dicult  to
endure. He would not submit. All his violence would help him now,
and at the point to which it raised him, his love would join him,
like a furious passion to live.
The sea wrinkled slowly against the ship’s sides. The sky lled
with stars. And Mersault, in silence, felt in himself extreme and
violent powers to love, to marvel at this life with its countenance
of sunlight and tears, this life in its salt and hot stone—it seemed
that by caressing this life, all his powers of love and despair would
unite.  That  was  his  poverty,  that  was  his  sole  wealth.  As  if  by

writing zero, he was starting over but with a consciousness of his
powers and a lucid intoxication which urged him on in the face of
his fate.
And then Algiers—the slow arrival in the morning, the dazzling
cascade of the Casbah above the sea, the hills and the sky, the
bay’s outstretched arms, the houses among the trees and the smell,
already  upon him, of the docks. Then Mersault realized that not
once since Vienna had he thought of Zagreus as the man he had
killed with his own hands. He recognized in himself that power to
forget which only children have, and geniuses, and the innocent.
Innocent, overwhelmed by joy, he understood at last that he was
made for happiness.

3
Patrice and Catherine are having their breakfast on the terrace, in
the sun. Catherine is in her bathing suit, the Boy, as Mersault’s
friends call him, the Boy is in his shorts, a napkin around his neck.
They are eating salted tomatoes, potato salad, honey, and huge
amounts of fruit. They keep the peaches on ice, and lick the tiny
drops which have congealed on the velvety skins. They also make
grape juice, which they drink with their faces tipped toward the
sun in order to get a tan—at least the Boy does, for he knows a
suntan becomes him. “Taste the sun,” Patrice said, holding out his
arm to Catherine. She licked his arm. “Yes,” she said, “now you.”
He  tasted  too,  then  stretched  and  stroked  his  ribs.  Catherine
sprawled on her stomach and pulled her bathing suit down to her
hips. “I’m not indecent, am I?”
“No,” the Boy said, not looking.
The sun streamed down, lingering over his face. The moist pores
absorbed this re which sheathed his body and put him to sleep.
Catherine drowned in the sun, sighed and moaned: “Oh, it’s good.”
“Yes,” the Boy said.
The house perched on a hilltop with a view of the bay. It was
known in the neighborhood as the House of the Three Students. A
steep path led up to it, beginning in olive trees and ending in olive
trees. Between, a kind of landing followed a gray  wall covered
with obscene gures and political slogans to encourage the winded
visitor.  Then  more  olive  trees,  blue  patches  of  sky  between  the
branches, and the smell of the gum trees bordering reddish elds in
which  purple-yellow  and  orange  cloths  were  spread  out  to  dry.
After a great deal of sweating and panting, the visitor pushed open
a  little  blue  gate,  avoiding  the  bougainvillea  tendrils,  and  then
climbed a stairway steep as a ladder but drenched in a blue shade
that already slaked his thirst. Rose, Claire, Catherine, and the Boy

called the place the House above the World. Open to the view on
all  sides,  it  was  a  kind  of  balloon-gondola  suspended  in  the
brilliant sky over the motley dance of the world. From the perfect
curve of the bay far below, a nameless energy gathered up the
weeds,  the  grass,  and  the  sun,  swept  on  the  pines  and  the
cypresses, the dusty olive trees and the eucalyptus to the very walls
of  the  house.  Depending  on  the  season,  white  dog  roses  and
mimosa  bloomed  at  the  heart  of  this  oering,  or  the  kind  of
honeysuckle that spreads its fragrance over the walls on summer
nights. White sheets and red roofs, the sea smiling under a sky
pinned without a wrinkle from one edge of the horizon to the other
—the House above the World trained its huge bay windows on a
carnival of colors and lights, day and night. But in the distance, a
line of high purple mountains joined the bay and its extreme slope
and contained this intoxication within its far contour. Here no one
complained  of the steep path or of exhaustion. Everyone had his
joy to conquer, every day.
Living above the world, each discovering his own weight, seeing
his face brighten and darken with the day, the night, each of the
four inhabitants of the house was aware of a presence that was at
once  a  judge  and  a  justication  among  them.  The  world,  here,
became a personage, counted among those from whom advice is
gladly taken, those in whom equilibrium has not killed love. They
called the world to witness:
“The  world  and  I,”  Patrice  would  say  about  nothing  in
particular, “we disapprove of you.”
Catherine,  for  whom  being  naked  meant  ridding  herself  of
inhibitions, took advantage of the Boy’s absences to undress on the
terrace. And after staying out to watch the sky’s colors change, she
announced at dinner with a kind of sensual pride: “I was naked in
front of the world.”
“Yes,”  Patrice  said  scornfully,  “women  naturally  prefer  their
ideas to their sensations.” Then Catherine protested: she loathed
being  an  intellectual.  And  Rose  and  Claire  in  chorus:  “Shut  up,
Catherine, you’re wrong.”

For it was understood that Catherine was always wrong, being
the  one  the  others  were  fond  of  in  the  same  way.  She  had  a
sluggish, toast-colored, deliberate body and an animal instinct for
what is essential. No one could decipher better than Catherine the
secret language of trees, of the sea, of the wind.
“That child,” Claire would say, eating incessantly, “is a force of
nature.”
Then they would all go outside to lie in the sun, and no one
would  speak.  Man  diminishes  man’s  powers.  The  world  leaves
them  intact.  Rose,  Claire,  Catherine,  and  Patrice  lived,  at  the
windows of their house, on images and appearances, consented to
a  kind  of  game  they  played  with  each  other,  receiving  with
laughter, friendship, and aection alike, but returning to the dance
of  sea  and  sky,  rediscovered  the  secret  color  of  their  fate  and
nally confronted the deepest part of themselves. Sometimes the
cats came to join their masters. Gula would creep out, perpetually
oended,  a  black  question  mark  with  green  eyes,  slender  and
delicate,  suddenly  seized  by  a  t  of  madness  and  pouncing  on
shadows. “It’s a matter of glands,” Rose said, and then she would
laugh,  surrendering  to  her  laugh,  her  eyes  squinting  behind  the
round sunglasses under her curly hair, until Gula leaped into her
lap (a special privilege), and then her ngers would wander over
the glistening fur and Rose subsided, relaxed, becoming a cat with
tender eyes, calming the animal with her mild and fraternal hands.
For  cats  were  Rose’s  escape  into  the  world,  as  nakedness  was
Catherine’s.  Claire  preferred  Cali,  the  other  cat,  as  gentle  and
stupid as his dirty white fur, who let himself be teased for hours at
a time. And Claire, her Florentine face intent, would feel her soul
swell within her. Silent and withdrawn, she was given to sudden
outbursts,  and  had  a  splendid  appetite.  Noticing  that  she  was
gaining weight, Patrice scolded her: “You’re disgusting. A lovely
creature is not entitled to grow ugly.”
But  Rose  intervened:  “Please  stop  tormenting  the  child.  Eat,
Claire darling.”
And the day turned from the rising sun to the setting sun around
the hills and over the sea, inside the delicate light. They laughed,

teased each other, made plans. Everyone smiled at appearances
and pretended to submit to them. Patrice proceeded from the face
of the world to the grave and smiling faces of the young women.
Sometimes  he  was  amazed  by  this  universe  they  had  created
around him. Friendship and trust, sun and white houses, scarcely
heeded  nuances,  here  felicities  were  born  intact,  and  he  could
measure their precise resonance. The House above the World, they
said  among  themselves,  was  not  a  house  of  pleasure,  it  was  a
house of happiness. Patrice knew it was true when night fell and
they all accepted, with the last breeze on their faces, the human
and dangerous temptation to be utterly unique.
Today, after the sunbath, Catherine had gone to her oce. “My
dear Patrice,” Rose announced, suddenly appearing, “I have some
good news for you.”
The Boy was conscientiously lounging on a couch in the terrace
room, a detective story in his hands. “My dear Rose, I’m all ears.”
“Today is your turn in the kitchen.”
“Splendid,” Patrice said, without moving.
Rose stued into her student’s satchel not only the sweet peppers
for her lunch but also volume three of Lavisse’s boring  H i s t o r y , and
left. Patrice, who would be cooking lentils, loafed around the big
ocher  room  until  eleven,  walking  between  the  couches  and  the
shelves decorated with green, yellow, and red masks, touching the
beige-and-orange draperies; then he quickly boiled the lentils, put
some oil in the pot, an onion to brown, a tomato, a  b o u q u e t   g a r n i ,
fussed  over  the  stove  and  cursed  Gula  and  Cali  for  announcing
their  hunger,  despite  the  fact  that  Rose  had  explained  to  them
yesterday, “Now you animals know it’s too hot in the summer to be
hungry.”
Catherine arrived at a quarter to twelve, stripped o her light
dress and open sandals and insisted on a shower and a nap in the
sun—she would be the last at the table. And Rose would admonish
her:  “Catherine,  you’re  intolerable.”  The  water  hissed  in  the
bathroom,  and  Claire  appeared,  breathless  from  the  climb.
“Lentils? I know the best way of ...”

“I  know  too:  you  take  fresh  cream  ...  We’ve  all  learned  our
lesson, dear Claire.” It is a fact that Claire’s recipes always begin
with fresh, thick cream.
“The Boy is absolutely right,” said Rose, who had just arrived.
“Yes,” the Boy agreed. “Let’s sit down.”
Meals are served in the kitchen, which looks like a prop room:
there is even a pad to write down  Rose’s good lines. Claire says:
“We may be chic, but we’re simple too,” and eats her sausage with
her ngers. Catherine comes to the table duly late, drunk with the
sun, and plaintive, her eyes pale with sleep. There is not enough
vitriol  in  her  soul  to  do  justice  to  her  oce—eight  hours  she
subtracts from the world and her life to give to a typewriter. The
girls understand, thinking of what their own lives would be with
those eight hours amputated. Patrice says nothing.
“Yes,” Rose says, made uneasy by any show of feelings. “Well,
it’s your own business. Besides, you talk about that oce of yours
every day. We’ll forbid you to speak.”
“But ...” Catherine sighs.
“Put it to a vote. One, two, three, you’re outvoted.”
“You see,” Claire says, as the lentils are brought on, too dry, and
everyone eats in silence. When Claire does the cooking and tastes
her food at the table, she always adds with a satised expression:
“My, that’s just delicious!” Patrice, who has his dignity, prefers to
say nothing, until everyone bursts out laughing. This is certainly
not Catherine’s day, for she lectures them all about reducing her
oce hours and asks someone to go with her to complain.
“No,” Rose says, “after all, you’re the one who works.”
Exasperated, the “force of nature” goes outside  and lies in the
sun.  But  soon  everyone  joins  her  there.  And  absently  caressing
Catherine’s hair, Claire decrees that what this “child” needs is a
man. For it is common practice in the House above the World to
settle  Catherine’s  fate,  to  attribute  certain  needs  to  her,  and  to
establish their extent and variety. Of course she points out from
time  to  time  that  she’s  old  enough,  etc.,  but  no  one  pays  any
attention. “Poor thing,” Rose says, “she needs a lover.”

Then everyone surrenders to the sun. Catherine, who never holds
a  grudge,  tells  the  gossip  about  her  oce:  how  Mademoiselle
Perez,  the  tall  blonde  who  got  married  recently,  had  asked
everyone in the oce for information in order to be prepared for
the  ordeal,  and  what  horrifying  descriptions  the  salesmen  had
given her, and with what relief, back from her honeymoon, she
had smilingly declared: “It wasn’t so bad as all that.” “She’s thirty
years old,” Catherine adds, pityingly.
And  Rose,  objecting  to  these  o-color  stories:  “All  right,
Catherine,” she says, “we aren’t just girls here.”
At this time of day the mail plane passes over the city, bearing
the glory of its glittering metal over land and through the heavens.
It enters into the movement of the harbor, incorporates itself into
the course of the world, and, suddenly abandoning its frivolities,
sheers  o  and  dives  down  to  the  sea,  landing  in  a  tremendous
explosion of blue and white  water. Gula and Cali lie on their sides,
their  tiny  adder-mouths  showing  the  pink  of  their  palates,  their
bodies throbbing with lustful and obscene dreams. The sky releases
its burden of sun and color. Eyes closed, Catherine takes the long
fall that carries her deep into herself, down where some animal
stirs gently, breathing like a god.
The next Sunday, guests have been invited. It is Claire’s turn in
the kitchen. Hence Rose has peeled the vegetables, set the table;
Claire  will  put  the  vegetables  in  the  pots  and  watch  over  the
cooking  reading  in  her  room,  occasionally  emerging  to  glance
under  the  lids.  Since  Mina,  the  Arab  girl,  has  not  come  this
morning, having lost her father for the third time this year, Rose
has also cleaned the house. The rst guest arrives: Eliane, whom
Mersault calls the Idealist. “Why?” Eliane asks. “Because when you
hear something true that upsets you; you say, ‘That’s true, but it’s
not good.’ ” Eliane has a good heart, and she thinks she looks like
T h e   M a n   w i t h   a   G l o v e , though no one else does. But her room is
lined with reproductions of  T h e   M a n   w i t h   a   G l o v e . Eliane is studying
something or other, and the rst time she came to the House above
the  World,  she  announced  that  she  was  enchanted  by  the
inhabitants’ “lack of inhibitions.” In time, she has found this less

convenient. A lack of inhibition means telling her that her stories
are a bore, or declaring—quite amiably—as soon as the rst words
are out of her mouth: “Eliane, you’re an idiot.”
When Eliane comes into the kitchen with Noel, the second guest
and  a  sculptor  by  profession,  she  stumbles  over  Catherine,  who
never does anything in a normal position. Now she’s lying on her
back, eating grapes with one hand and stirring with the other a
mayonnaise  that  is  still  thin.  Rose,  in  a  huge  blue  apron,  is
admiring Gula’s perspicacity—the cat has jumped up onto the shelf
to eat the dessert. “No doubt about it,” Rose says blissfully, “that
creature has a mind of her own.”
“Yes,” Catherine says, “she’s outdone herself today,” adding that
in the morning Gula, with more of a mind than ever, had broken
the little green lamp and a vase as well.
Eliane and Noel, doubtless too winded to express their disgust,
decide to take a seat no one has dreamed of oering them. Claire
arrives,  friendly  and  languorous,  shakes  hands  and  tastes  the
bouillabaisse simmering on the stove. She decides they can start.
But today Patrice is late. Then he appears and explains in great
detail to Eliane that he is in a good mood because the girls in the
street are so pretty. The hot season is just beginning, but already
the rm bodies are beginning to be revealed by the light dresses—
hence Patrice, as he testies, is left in a devastated state, mouth
dry, temples throbbing, loins hot. This insistence on detail silences
Eliane. At table, a general consternation follows the rst spoonfuls
of  bouillabaisse.  Claire  announces  playfully:  “I’m  afraid  the
bouillabaisse tastes of burned onion.”
“Oh no,” Noel answers politely.
Then, to test those manners, Rose asks him to purchase for the
household  a  certain  number  of  useful  items  such  as  a  hot-water
heater, Persian carpets, and a refrigerator. When Noel replies by
encouraging Rose to pray for him to win the lottery, Rose becomes
quite realistic: “We might as well pray for ourselves.”
The sun is hot and heavy now, which makes the iced wine all the
more  precious,  and  the  fruit  welcome.  With  the  coee,  Eliane
bravely changes the subject to love. If she were in love, she would

get married. Catherine tells her that it’s more urgent when in love
to  make  love,  and  that  materialistic  point  of  view  convulses
Eliane.  Rose,  the  pragmatist,  would  approve  “if  unfortunately
experience did not show that marriage dissolves love.”
But  Eliane  and  Catherine  force  their  opinions  into  opposition
and become unfair, as anyone with spirit feels obliged to do. Noel,
who thinks in shapes and in clay, believes in Woman, in children,
and in the patriarchal truth of a concrete and sensuous life. Then
Rose, exasperated beyond endurance by the outcry raised by Eliane
and Catherine, pretends to understand, suddenly, the reasons for
Noel’s frequent visits.
“I want to thank you now,” she says, “though I nd it dicult to
tell you how much this discovery overwhelms me. I’ll speak to my
father tomorrow about ‘our’ project, and you yourself may apply
to him in a few days.”
“But ...” Noel says, for Noel doesn’t quite follow.
“Oh,” Rose says, with tremendous energy, “I know. I understand
without your having to speak a word: you’re the kind of man who
can hold his tongue and let other people guess what he’s thinking.
But I’m glad you’ve declared yourself at last, for the persistence of
your  attentions  was  beginning  to  sully  the  purity  of  my
reputation.”
Noel,  vaguely  amused,  and  also  vaguely  alarmed,  declares
himself delighted to nd his aspirations crowned with success.
“Not to mention,” Patrice says, before lighting a cigarette, “that
you’ll have to act fast. Rose’s condition obliges you to take certain
steps promptly.”
“What?”
“Oh heavens,” Claire says, “it’s only her second month.”
“Besides,” Rose adds tenderly and persuasively, “you’ve reached
the age when you enjoy nding your own face in another man’s
child.”
Noel frowns, and Claire says good-naturedly: “It’s only a joke.
Just play along with it, Noel, and let’s go inside.”
At  which  point  the  discussion  of  principles  comes  to  an  end.
Nonetheless,  Rose,  who  does  her  good  deeds  in  secret,  speaks

aectionately  to  Eliane.  In  the  big  room,  Patrice  sits  at  the
window, Claire leans against the table, and Catherine is lying on
the oor. The others are on the couch. There is a heavy mist  over
the city and the harbor, but the tugboats go about their work, and
their deep hoots rise to the house on gusts of tar and sh, the world
of  black  and  red  hulls,  of  rusty  anchors  and  chains  sticky  with
seaweed wakening down below. As always, the strong, fraternal
summons of a life of manly eort tempts everyone. Eliane says to
Rose sadly: “Then you’re just like me.”
“No,” Rose answers, “I’m merely trying to be happy—as happy
as possible.”
“And  love  isn’t  the  only  way,”  Patrice  says,  without  turning
around.  He  is  very  fond  of  Eliane,  and  afraid  he  has  hurt  her
feelings  just  now.  But  he  understands  Rose  and  her  thirst  for
happiness.
“A mediocre ideal,” Eliane declares.
“I don’t know if it’s mediocre, but it’s a healthy one. And that ...”
Patrice breaks o. Rose closes her eyes. Gula has jumped into her
lap,  and  by  slowly  caressing  the  cat’s  skull  and  back,  Rose
anticipates that secret marriage in which the squinting cat and the
motionless woman will see the same universe out of the same half-
closed  eyes.  Everyone  muses,  between  the  long  calls  of  the
tugboats. Rose lets Gula’s purring rise within her, starting from the
coiled beast in the hollow of her body. The heat presses on her eyes
and  immerses her in a silence inhabited by the throbbing of her
own blood. The cats sleep for days at a time and make love from
the rst star until dawn. Their pleasures are erce, and their sleep
impenetrable. And they know that the  body has a soul in which the
soul has no part. “Yes,” Rose says, opening her eyes, “to be as
happy as possible.”
Mersault was thinking about Lucienne Raynal. When he had said
that  the  women  in  the  streets  were  pretty,  he  meant  that  one
woman  in  particular  was  pretty.  He  had  met  her  at  a  friend’s
house.  A  week  before  they  had  gone  out  together,  and  having
nothing to do, had strolled along the harbor boulevards, all one
ne hot morning. Lucienne had not opened her mouth, and as he

walked her home Mersault was startled to nd himself squeezing
her hand a long time and smiling at her. She was quite tall and
was wearing no hat—only a white linen dress and sandals. On the
boulevards they had walked into a slight breeze, and Lucienne set
her feet at on the warm cobbles, bracing herself with each step
against the wind. As she did so, her dress became pasted against
her body, outlining her smooth, curving belly. With her blond hair
pulled back, her small straight nose, and the splendid thrust of her
breasts,  she  represented  and  even  sanctioned  a  kind  of  secret
agreement which linked her to the earth and organized the world
around her movements. As her bag swayed from her right wrist
and a silver bracelet tinkled against its clasp, she raised her left
hand over her head to protect herself from the sun; the tip of her
right foot was still on the earth but was about to take o—and at
that  moment  she  seemed  to  Patrice  to  wed  her  gestures  to  the
world.
It was then that he experienced the mysterious harmony which
matched his gestures with Lucienne’s ... They walked well together,
and it was no eort for him to keep in step with her. Doubtless this
harmony was facilitated by Lucienne’s at shoes. But all the same,
there was something in their respective strides, which were similar
in both length and exibility. Mersault noticed Lucienne’s silence
and the closed expression of her face; he decided she was probably
not  very  intelligent,  and  that  pleased  him.  There  is  something
divine  in  mindless  beauty,  and  Mersault  was  particularly
responsive to it. All of this made him linger over Lucienne’s hand
when he said goodbye, and made him see her again, inviting her to
take long walks at the same silent pace, oering their tanned faces
to  the  sun  or  the  stars,  swimming  together  and  matching  their
gestures  and  their  strides  without  exchanging  anything  but  the
presence  of  their  bodies.  And  then  last  night,  Mersault  had
discovered  again  a  familiar  and  overwhelming  miracle  on
Lucienne’s lips. Until then what moved him had been her way of
clinging to his clothes, of following him, of taking his arm—her
abandonment  and  her  trust  that  touched  him  as  a  man.  Her
silence, too, by which she put all of herself into each momentary

gesture and emphasized her resemblance to the cats, a resemblance
to  which  she  already  owed  the  gravity  characterizing  all  her
actions. Yesterday, after dinner, they had strolled together on the
docks.  They  had  stopped  against  the  ramp  leading  up  to  the
boulevard,  and  Lucienne  had  pressed  against  Mersault.  In  the
darkness, he felt under his ngers the cool prominent cheekbones
and the warm lips which opened under his pressure. Then there
was something like a great cry within him, gratuitous yet ardent.
From  the  starry  night  and  the  city  that  was  like  a  spilled  sky,
swollen with human lights under the warm, deep breeze that rose
from  the  harbor,  he  drew  the  thirst  of  this  warm  spring,  the
limitless longing to seize from these vibrant lips all the meaning of
that inhuman and dormant world, like a silence enclosed in her
mouth. He bent over her, and it was as if he had rested his lips on
a bird. Lucienne moaned. He nibbled her lips, and sucked in that
warmth which transported him as if he had embraced the world in
his arms. And she clung to him like a drowning girl, rising again
and again from the depth into which she had sunk, drew back and
then oered him her lips again, falling once more into the cold
abyss that enfolded her like a divine oblivion.
... But Eliane was leaving now. A long afternoon of silence and
reection lay ahead of Mersault in his room. At dinner, no one
spoke. But by mutual consent they went out onto the terrace. The
days  always  ended  by  melting  into  the  days:  from  the  morning
above the harbor, glistening with sun and mist, to the mildness of
the evening above the harbor. Day broke over the sea and the sun
set behind the hills, for the sky showed only the one road,  passing
from the sea to the hills. The world says only one thing, it wakens,
then it wearies. But there always comes a time when it vanquishes
by mere repetition and gains the reward of its own perseverance.
Thus  the  days  of  the  House  above  the  World,  woven  of  that
luxuriant fabric of laughter and simple acts, ended on the terrace
under the star-studded night. Rose and Claire and Patrice stretched
out on the deckchairs, Catherine sat on the parapet.
In  the  sky,  night  showed  them  its  shining  face,  radiant  and
secret. Lights passed far below in the harbor, and the screech of

trains occasionally reached them. The stars swelled, then shrank,
vanished and were reborn, drawing evanescent gures, creating
new ones moment by moment. In the silence, the night recovered
its density, its esh. Filled with twinkling stars, it left in their eyes
the play of lights that tears can bring. And each of them, plunging
into  the  depths  of  the  sky,  found  that  extreme  point  where
everything  coincides,  the  secret  and  tender  meditation  which
makes up the solitude of one’s life.
Catherine, suddenly choked with love, could only sigh. Patrice,
who felt that his voice would crack, nonetheless asked: “Don’t you
feel cold?”
“No,” Rose said. “Besides, it’s so beautiful.”
Claire stood up, put her hands on the parapet and held her face
up  to  the  sky.  Facing  everything  noble  and  elementary  in  the
world, she united her life with her longing for life, identied her
hopes with  the movement of the stars. Suddenly turning around,
she said to Patrice: “On good days, if you trust life, life has to
answer you.”
“Yes,” Patrice said, without looking at her. A star fell. Behind it a
distant beacon broadened in the night that was deeper now. Some
men were climbing up the path in silence. He could hear the sound
of their footsteps, their heavy breathing. Then the smell of owers
reached him.
The world always says the same thing. And in that patient truth
which  proceeds  from  star  to  star  is  established  a  freedom  that
releases us from ourselves and from others, as in that other patient
truth which proceeds from death to death. Patrice, Catherine, Rose,
and  Claire  then  grew  aware  of  the  happiness  born  of  their
abandonment  to  the  world.  If  this  night  was  in  some  sense  the
gure  of  their  fate,  they  marveled  that  it  should  be  at  once  so
carnal and so secret, that upon its countenance mingled both tears
and the sun. And with pain and joy, their hearts learned to hear
that double lesson which leads to a happy death.
It is late now. Already midnight. On the brow of this night which
is like the repose and the reection of the world, a dim surge and
murmur  of  stars  heralds  the  coming  dawn.  A  tremulous  light

descends  from  the  sky.  Patrice  looks  at  his  friends:  Catherine
sitting on the parapet, her head tipped back; Rose huddled on the
deckchair, her hands resting on Gula; Claire standing sti against
the  parapet,  her  high,  round  forehead  a  white  patch  in  the
darkness.  Young  creatures  capable  of  happiness,  who  exchange
their youth and  keep their secrets. He stands beside Catherine and
stares over her glistening shoulder into the bowl of the sky. Rose
comes over  to the parapet, and all four are facing the World now.
It is as if the suddenly cooler dew of the night were rinsing the
signs of solitude from them, delivering them from themselves, and
by  that  tremulous  and  fugitive  baptism  restoring  them  to  the
world. At this moment, when the night overows with stars, their
gestures are xed against the great mute face of the sky. Patrice
raises an arm toward the night, sweeping sheaves of stars in his
gesture, the sea of the heavens stirred by his arm and all Algiers at
his feet, around them like a dark, glittering cape of jewels and
shells.

4
Early  in  the  morning,  the  fog  lights  of  Mersault’s  car  were
gleaming  along  the  coast  road.  Leaving  Algiers,  he  passed  milk
carts,  and  the  warm  smell  of  the  horses  made  him  even  more
aware  of  the  morning’s  freshness.  It  was  still  dark.  A  last  star
dissolved slowly in the sky, and on the pale road he could hear
only the motor’s contented purr and occasionally, in the distance,
the sound of hooves, the clatter of milk cans, until, out of the dark,
his  lights  ashed  on  the  shining  iron  of  the  horseshoes.  Then
everything vanished in the sound of speed. He was driving faster
now, and the night swiftly veered to day.
Out  of  the  darkness  still  retained  between  the  hills,  the  car
climbed an empty road overlooking the sea, where the morning
declared  itself.  Mersault  stepped  on  the  gas.  The  tiny  sucking
sound of the wheels grew louder on the dewy pavement. At each of
the many turns, Mersault’s brakes made the tires squeal, and as the
road  straightened,  the  sound  of  the  motor  gaining  speed
momentarily drowned out the soft voices of the sea rising from the
beaches below. Only an airplane permits man a more apparent
solitude  than  the  kind  he  discovers  in  an  automobile.  Utterly
condent of his own presence, satised with the precision of his
gestures, Mersault could at the same time return to himself and to
what concerned  him. The day lay open, now, at the end of the
road. The sun rose over the sea, awakening the elds on either side
of the road, still deserted a moment before, lling them with the
red uttering of birds and insects. Sometimes a farmer would cross
one of these elds, and Mersault, rushing past, retained no more
than the image of a gure with a sack bending over the moist,
clinging soil. Again and again the car brought him to the edge of
slopes overlooking the sea; they grew steeper and their outline,
barely  suggested  in  the  light  of  dawn,  grew  more  distinct  now,

suddenly  revealing  prospects  of  olive  trees,  pines,  and
whitewashed cottages. Then another turn hurled the car toward the
sea,  which  tipped  up  toward  Mersault  like  an  oering  glowing
with  salt  and  sleep.  Then  the  car  hissed  on  the  pavement  and
turned back toward other hillsides and the unchanging sea.
A month before, Mersault had announced his departure to the
House above the World. He would travel again, then settle down
somewhere  around  Algiers.  Several  weeks  later  he  was  back,
convinced  that  travel  now  meant  an  alien  way  of  life  to  him:
wandering seemed no more than the happiness of an anxious man.
And deep inside himself he felt a dim exhaustion. He was eager to
carry  out  his  plan  of  buying  a  little  house  somewhere  in  the
Chenoua, between the sea and the mountains, a few kilometers
from  the  ruins  of  Tipasa.  When  he  arrived  in  Algiers,  he  had
envisioned the setting of his life. He  had made a large investment
in German pharmaceuticals, paid a broker to manage his holdings
for him, and thereby justied his absences from Algiers and the
independent life he was leading. The investment, moreover, was
more or less protable, and he made up for his occasional losses,
oering without remorse this tribute to his profound freedom. The
world is always satised, it turns out, with a countenance it can
understand. Indolence and cowardice do the rest. Independence is
earned  by  a  few  words  of  cheap  condence.  Mersault  then
concerned himself with Lucienne’s fate.
She had no family, lived alone, worked as a secretary for a coal
company, ate little but fruit, and did Swedish exercises. Mersault
lent  her  books  which  she  returned  without  a  word.  To  his
questions, she replied: “Yes, I liked it,” or else: “It was a little sad.”
The day he decided to leave Algiers, he suggested that she live with
him  but  continue  to  keep  her  apartment  in  Algiers  without
working, joining him when he sent for her. He proposed this with
enough conviction for Lucienne to nd nothing humiliating in the
oer,  and  in  fact  there  was  nothing  humiliating  in  it.  Lucienne
often  realized  through  her  body  what  her  mind  could  not
understand; she agreed. Mersault added: “If you want, I can marry
you. But I don’t see the point.”

“Whatever you prefer,” Lucienne said. A week later he married
her and made ready to leave the city. Meanwhile Lucienne bought
an orange canoe to skim over the blue sea.
Mersault twisted the wheel to avoid a venturesome hen. He was
thinking of the conversation he had had with Catherine, the day he
had left the House above the World—he had spent the night alone
in a hotel.
It was early in the afternoon, and because it had rained that
morning,  the  whole  bay  was  like  a  wet  pane  of  glass,  the  sky
utterly blank above it. The cape at the opposite end of the bay
stood out wonderfully clear, and lay, gilded by a sunbeam, like a
huge summer snake upon the sea. Patrice had nished packing and
now, his arms leaning on the sill, he stared greedily at this new
birth of the world.
“But if you’re happy here, why are you leaving?”  Catherine had
asked.
“There’s the risk of being loved, little Catherine, and that would
keep me from being happy.” Coiled on the couch, her head down,
Catherine stared at Patrice. Without turning around he said: “A lot
of men complicate their lives and invent problems  for themselves.
In my case, it’s quite simple. Look ...” He spoke facing the world,
and Catherine felt forgotten. She looked at Patrice’s long ngers
on the sill, studied his way of resting his weight on one hip, and
without  even  seeing  his  eyes  she  knew  how  absorbed  his  gaze
would be.
“ What I ...” but she broke o, still staring at Patrice.
Small  sails  began  riding  out  to  sea,  taking  advantage  of  the
calm. They approached the channel, lled it with uttering wings,
and suddenly sped  outward, leaving a wake of air and water that
widened  in  long  foamy  trails.  From  where  she  sat,  Catherine
watched them make their way out to sea, rising around Patrice like
a ight of  white birds. He seemed to feel the weight of her silence
and her stare, turned around, took her hands and brought them
close  to  his  own  body.  “Never  give  up,  Catherine.  You  have  so
much inside you, and the noblest sense of happiness of all. Don’t

just wait for a man to come along. That’s the mistake so many
women make. Find your happiness in yourself.”
“I’m not complaining, Mersault,” Catherine said softly, putting
one hand on Patrice’s  shoulder. “The only thing that matters now
is that you take good care of yourself.” He realized then how easily
his certainty could be shaken. His heart was  strangely hard.
“You  shouldn’t  have  said  that  just  now.”  He  picked  up  his
suitcase and went down the steep stairs, then down the path from
the olive trees to the olive trees. There was nothing ahead of him
now except the Chenoua, a forest of ruins and wormwood, a love
without hope or despair, and the memory of a life of vinegar  and
owers. He turned around. Up above, Catherine was watching him
leave, motionless.
In  a  little  less  than  two  hours,  Mersault  was  in  sight  of  the
Chenoua. The night’s last violet shadows still lingered on the slopes
that plunged into the sea, while the peak glowed in the red and
yellow  sunlight.  There  was  a  kind  of  vigorous  and  massive
assertion  of  the  earth  here,  thrusting  up  from  the  Sahel  and
silhouetted on the horizon, ending in this enormous bestial back
that  plummeted  straight  down  into  the  sea.  The  house  Mersault
had  bought  stood  on  the  last  slopes,  a  hundred  yards  from  the
water already turning golden in the heat. There was only one story
above the ground oor, and only one room in it, but this room was
enormous and overlooked the front garden and the sea through a
splendid  bay  window  opening  onto  a  terrace  as  well.  Mersault
hurried up to it: the sea was already forming scarves of mist, and
its blue darkened while the warm red of the terrace tiles glistened
in the morning dew. The whitewashed parapet had already been
conquered by the rst tendrils of a triumphant rambler rose. The
rm white esh of the open petals, sharp against the sea, was both
voluptuous and satiating. Downstairs, one room faced the foothills
of  the  Chenoua,  covered  with  fruit  trees,  the  other  two  opened
onto  the  garden  and  the  sea  beyond.  In  the  garden,  two  pines
thrust their bare trunks high into the sky, the tips alone covered
with a green and yellow pelt. From the house he could see only the
space  bracketed  between  these  two  trees,  the  curve  of  beach

between the trunks. A little steamboat was moving out to sea now,
and Mersault watched its entire trajectory from one pine to the
other.
Here was where he would live. Doubtless because the beauty of
the place touched his heart—why else  had he bought this house?
But the release he hoped to nd here dismayed him, this solitude he
had sought so deliberately seemed even more disturbing, now that
he knew its setting. The village was not far away, a few hundred
yards. He walked out of the house. A little path sloped down from
the road toward the sea. Following it, he noticed for the rst time
that  he  could  glimpse,  across  the  bay,  the  slender  peninsula  of
Tipasa. At its very end were silhouetted the golden columns of the
temple and around them the fallen ruins among the wormwood
bushes  forming,  at  this  distance,  a  blue-gray  plumage.  On  June
evenings, Mersault reected, the wind would bring the fragrance
of those sun-gorged shrubs across the water toward the Chenoua.
He  had  to  set  up  his  house,  organize  his  life.  The  rst  days
passed  quickly.  He  whitewashed  the  walls,  bought  hangings  in
Algiers, began to install electricity, and as he went about his work,
interrupted by the meals he took at the village café and by his dips
in the sea, he forgot why he had come here and lost himself in his
body’s  fatigue,  loins  aching  and  legs  sti,  fretting  over  the
shortage of paint or the defective installation of a light xture in
the  hallway.  He  slept  at  the  hotel  and  gradually  became
acquainted with the village: the boys who came to play pool and
ping-pong  on  Sunday  afternoons  (they  would  use  the  table  all
afternoon, taking only one drink, to the owner’s great annoyance);
the girls who strolled in the evening along the road  overlooking
the  sea  (they  walked  arm  in  arm,  and  there  was  a  caressing,
singsong note in their voices); Perez, the sherman who supplied
the hotel with sh and had only one arm. Here, too, he met the
village doctor, Bernard. But the day the house was entirely ready,
Mersault  moved  all  his  things  into  it  and  gradually  recovered
himself.  It  was  evening.  He  was  in  the  big  room  upstairs,  and
behind the window two worlds fought for the space between the
two pines. In one, almost transparent, the stars multiplied. In the

other,  denser  and  darker,  a  secret  palpitation  of  the  water
betrayed the sea.
So far, he had lived sociably enough, chatting with the workmen
who helped him in the house or with the owner of the café. But
now he realized that he had no one to meet tonight, nor tomorrow,
nor ever, and that he was facing his longed-for solitude at last.
From the moment he no longer had to see anyone, the next day
seemed terribly imminent. Yet he convinced himself that this was
what he had wanted: nothing before him but himself for a long
time—until the end. He decided to stay where he was, smoking and
thinking late into the night, but by ten he was sleepy and went to
bed. The next day he awakened very late, around ten, made his
breakfast  and  ate  it  before  washing  or  shaving.  He  felt  a  little
tired. He had not shaved and his hair was uncombed. But after he
had eaten, instead of going into the bathroom he wandered from
room  to  room,  leafed  through  a  magazine,  and  nally  was
delighted  to nd a light switch that had not been attached, and set
to  work.  Someone  knocked:  the  boy  from  the  café  bringing  his
lunch, as he had arranged the day before. He sat down at his table
just as he was, ate without appetite before the food had a chance
to cool, and began to smoke, lying on the couch in the downstairs
room. When he awakened, annoyed at having fallen asleep, it was
four o’clock. He bathed then, shaved carefully, dressed and wrote
two letters, one to Lucienne, the other to the three girls. It was
already very late, and growing dark. Nonetheless he walked to the
village to mail his letters and returned without having met anyone.
He went upstairs and out onto the terrace: the sea and the night
were  conversing  on  the  beach  and  above  the  ruins.  Mersault
reected. The memory of this wasted day embittered him. Tonight,
at least, he would work, do something, read or go out and walk
through  the  night.  The  garden  gate  creaked:  his  dinner  was
coming. He was hungry, ate happily, then felt unable to leave the
house. He decided to read late in bed. But after the rst pages his
eyes closed, and the next morning he woke up late.
In the days that followed, Mersault tried to struggle against this
encroachment. As the days passed, lled by the creak of the gate

and  countless  cigarettes,  he  was  disconcerted  by  the  variance
between the gesture which had brought him to this life and this life
itself. One evening he wrote Lucienne to come, deciding to break
this solitude from which he had expected so much. After the letter
was sent, he  was  lled  with  a  secret  shame,  but  once  Lucienne
arrived  the  shame  dissolved  in  a  kind  of  mindless  eager  joy  to
rediscover a familiar being and the easy life her presence signied.
He made a fuss over her, and Lucienne seemed almost surprised by
his  solicitude,  when  she  wasn’t  preoccupied  with  her  carefully
pressed white linen dresses.
He  took  walks  now,  but  with  Lucienne.  He  recovered  his
complicity with the world, but by resting his hand on Lucienne’s
shoulder. Taking refuge in humanity, he escaped his secret dread.
Within two days, however, Lucienne bored him. And this was the
moment she chose to ask him to let her live there. They were at
dinner, and Mersault had simply refused, not raising his eyes from
his plate.
After a pause, Lucienne had added in a neutral tone of voice:
“You don’t love me.”
Mersault  looked  up.  Her  eyes  were  full  of  tears.  He  relented:
“But I never said I did, my child.”
“I know,” Lucienne said, “and that’s why.”
Mersault  stood  up  and  walked  to  the  window.  Between  the
pines, the stars throbbed in the night sky. And never had Patrice
felt, along with his dread, so much disgust as at this moment for
the  days  they  had  just  passed  together.  “You’re  a  lovely  girl,
Lucienne. I can’t see any further than that. It’s all I  ask of you. It
has to be enough for the two of us.”
“I  know,”  Lucienne  said.  She  was  sitting  with  her  back  to
Patrice, scoring the tablecloth with the tip of her knife. He walked
over to her and rested a hand on the nape of her neck.
“Believe  me,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  great  suering,  great
regret, great memory ... Everything is forgotten, even a great love.
That’s what’s sad about life, and also what’s wonderful about it.
There is only a way of looking at things, a way that comes to you
every once in a while. That’s why it’s good to have had love in

your life after all, to have had an unhappy passion—it gives you
an alibi for the vague despairs we all suer from.” After a pause,
he added: “I don’t know if you understand what I mean.”
“I  think  I  understand.”  She  suddenly  turned  her  head  toward
Mersault. “You’re not happy.”
“I  will  be,”  Mersault  said  violently.  “I  have  to  be.  With  this
night, this sea, and this esh under my ngers.” He had turned
back toward the window and tightened his hand over the nape of
Lucienne’s neck. She said nothing.
Then, without looking at him, “At least you feel friendly toward
me, don’t you?”
Patrice knelt beside her and gently bit her shoulder. “Friendly,
yes, the way I feel friendly toward the night. You are the pleasure
of my eyes, and you don’t know what a place such joy can have in
my heart.”
She left the next day. And the day after that Mersault was unable
to stand himself, and drove to Algiers. He went rst to the House
above the World. His friends promised to come to see him at the
end of the month. Then he decided to visit his old neighborhood.
His apartment had been rented to a man who ran a café. He
inquired  after  the  barrelmaker,  but  no  one  knew  anything—
someone thought he had gone to Paris to look for work. Mersault
walked through the streets. At the restaurant, Celeste had aged—
but not much; René was still there, with his tuberculosis and his
solemn expression. They were all glad to see Patrice again, and he
felt moved by this encounter.
“Hey, Mersault,” Celeste told him, “you haven’t changed. Still
the same!”
“Yes,” Mersault said. He marveled at the strange blindness by
which  men,  though  they  are  so  alert  to  what  changes  in
themselves, impose on their friends an image chosen for them once
and for all. He was being judged by what he had been. Just as dogs
don’t  change  character,  men  are  dogs  for  one  another.  And
precisely  to  the  degree  that  Celeste,  René,  and  the  others  had
known him, he had become as alien and remote to them as an
uninhabited planet. Yet he left them with aectionate farewells.

And just outside the restaurant he ran into Marthe. As soon as he
saw her he realized that he had almost forgotten her and that at
the same time he had wanted to meet her. She still had her painted
goddess’s  face.  He  desired  her  vaguely  but  without  conviction.
They walked together.
“Oh, Patrice,” she said, “I’m so glad! What’s become of you?”
“Nothing, as you can see. I’m living in the country.”
“Wonderful. I’ve always dreamed of living in the  country.” And
after a silence: “You know, I’m not angry at you or anything.”
“Yes,”  Mersault  said,  laughing,  “you’ve  managed  to  console
yourself.”
Then  Marthe  spoke  in  a  tone  of  voice  he  did  not  recognize.
“Don’t be nasty, Patrice. I knew it would end like this some day.
You were a funny guy. And I was nothing but a little girl. That’s
what you always used to say ... Of course when it happened I was
furious. But nally I told myself, ‘He’s unhappy.’ And you know,
it’s funny, I don’t know how to say it, but that was the rst time
that what we ... that what happened between us made me feel sad
and happy at the same time.”
Surprised,  Mersault  stared  at  her.  He  suddenly  realized  that
Marthe had always been very decent with him. She had accepted
him as he was and had spared him a great deal of loneliness. He
had been unfair: while his imagination and vanity had given her
too  much  importance,  his  pride  had  given  her  too  little.  He
discovered the cruel paradox by which we always deceive ourselves
twice about the people we love—rst to their advantage, then to
their  disadvantage.  Today  he  understood  that  Marthe  had  been
genuine with him—that she had been what she was, and that he
owed her a good deal. It was beginning to rain—just enough to
reect the lights of the street; through the shining drops he saw
Marthe’s  suddenly  serious  face  and  felt  overcome  by  a  burst  of
gratitude  he  could  not  express—in  the  old  days  he  might  have
taken it for a kind of love. But he could nd only sti words: “You
know, Marthe, I’m very fond of you. Even now, if there’s anything
I could do ...”
She smiled: “No. I’m young still. And I don’t do without ...”

He nodded. What a distance there was between them, and yet
what complicity! He left her in front of her own house. She had
opened her umbrella, saying, “I hope we’ll see each other again.”
“Yes,” Mersault said. She gave him a sad little smile. “Oh, that’s
your  little  girl’s  face.”  She  had  stepped  into  the  doorway  and
closed her umbrella. Patrice held out his hand and smiled in his
turn. “Till next time, image.” She hugged him quickly, kissed him
on both cheeks, and ran upstairs. Mersault, standing in the rain,
still felt Marthe’s cold nose and warm lips on his cheeks. And that
sudden, disinterested kiss had all the purity of the one given him
by the freckled little whore in Vienna.
Then  he  went  to  nd  Lucienne,  slept  at  her  apartment,  and
asked her to walk with him on the boulevards. It was almost noon
when they came downstairs. Orange boats were drying in the sun
like  fruit  cut  in  quarters.  The  double  ock  of  pigeons  and  their
shadows swooped down to the docks and up again in a long, slow
curve.  The  sun  was  brilliant  and  the  air  grew  stiing.  Mersault
watched the red-and-black steamer slowly gain the channel, put on
speed,  and  gradually  veer  toward  the  streak  of  light  glistening
where  the  sky  met  the  sea.  For  the  onlookers,  there  is  a  bitter
sweetness in every departure. “They’re lucky,” Lucienne said.
“Yes.”  He  was  thinking  “No”—or  at  least  that  he  didn’t  envy
them their luck. For him, too, starting over, departures, a new life
had a certain luster, but he knew that only the impotent and the
lazy attach happiness to such things. Happiness implied a choice,
and within that choice a concerted will, a lucid desire. He could
hear Zagreus: “Not the will to renounce, but the will to happiness.”
He had his arm around Lucienne, and her warm breast rested in his
hand.
That same evening, as he drove back to the Chenoua, Mersault
felt an enormous silence in himself as he faced the swelling waves
and the steep hillsides. By making the gesture of a fresh start, by
becoming aware of his past, he had dened what he wanted and
what  he  did  not  want  to  be.  Those  wasted  days  he  had  been
ashamed of seemed dangerous but necessary now. He might have

foundered then and missed his one chance, his one justication.
But after all, he had to  adapt himself to everything.
Rounding one curve after the next, Mersault steeped himself in
this humiliating yet priceless truth: the conditions of the singular
happiness he sought were getting up early every morning, taking a
regular swim—a conscious hygiene. He drove very fast, resolved to
take advantage of his discovery in order to establish himself in a
routine  which  would  henceforth  require  no  further  eort,  to
harmonize his own breathing with the deepest rhythm of time, of
life itself.
The next morning he got up early and walked down to the sea.
The  sky  was  already  brilliant,  and  the  morning  full  of  rustling
wings  and  crying  birds.  But  the  sun  was  only  touching  the
horizon’s curve, and when Mersault stepped into the still-lusterless
water, he seemed to be swimming in an indeterminate darkness
until, as the sun climbed higher, he thrust his arms into streaks of
icy red and gold. Then he swam back to land and walked up to his
house. His body felt alert and ready for whatever the day might
bring.  Every  morning,  now,  he  came  downstairs  just  before
sunrise,  and  this  rst  action  controlled  the  rest  of  his  day.
Moreover,  these  swims  exhausted  him,  but  at  the  same  time,
because of the fatigue and the energy they aorded, they gave his
entire day a avor of abandonment and joyful lassitude. Yet the
hours still seemed long to him—he had not yet detached time from
a carcass of habits which still littered the past. He had nothing to
do,  and  his  time  stretched  out,  measureless,  before  him.  Each
minute recovered its miraculous value, but he did not yet recognize
it for what it was. Just as the days of a journey seem interminable
whereas in an oce the trajectory from Monday occurs in a ash,
so Mersault, stripped of all his props, still tried to locate them in a
life which had nothing but itself to consider. Sometimes he picked
up  his  watch  and  stared  as  the  minute  hand  shifted  from  one
number to the next, marveling that ve minutes should seem so
interminable. Doubtless that watch opened the way—a painful and
tormenting way—which leads to the supreme art of doing nothing.
He learned to walk; sometimes in the afternoon he would walk

along the beach as far as the ruins of Tipasa; then he would lie
down among the wormwood bushes, and with his hands on the
warm stone would open his eyes and his heart to the intolerable
grandeur  of  that  seething  sky.  He  matched  the  pounding  of  his
blood  with  the  violent  pulsation  of  the  sun  at  two  o’clock,  and
deep in the erce fragrance, deafened by the invisible insects, he
watched the sky turn from white to deep-blue, then pale to green,
pouring down its sweetness upon the still-warm ruins. He would
walk home early then, and go to bed. In this passage from sun to
sun,  his  days  were  organized  according  to  a  rhythm  whose
deliberation and strangeness became as necessary to him as had
been his oce, his restaurant, and his sleep in his mother’s room.
In both cases, he was virtually unconscious of it. But now, in his
hours of lucidity, he felt that time was his own, that in the brief
interval  which  nds  the  sea  red  and  leaves  it  green,  something
eternal was represented for him in each second. Beyond the curve
of the days he glimpsed neither superhuman happiness nor eternity
—happiness was human, eternity ordinary. What mattered was to
humble himself, to organize  his heart to match the rhythm of the
days  instead  of  submitting  their  rhythm  to  the  curve  of  human
hopes.
Just as there is a moment when the artist must stop, when the
sculpture must be left as it is, the painting untouched—just as a
determination  n o t   t o   k n o w   serves  the  maker  more  than  all  the
resources  of  clairvoyance—so  there  must  be  a  minimum  of
ignorance in order to perfect a life in happiness. Those who lack
such a thing must set about acquiring it: unintelligence must be
earned.
On  Sundays,  Mersault  played  pool  with  Perez.  The  old
sherman, one arm a stump cut o above the elbow, played pool
in a peculiar fashion, pung out his chest and leaning his stump
on  the  cue.  When  they  went  out  shing  in  the  morning,  Perez
rowed with the same skill, and Mersault admired the way he would
stand in the boat pushing one oar with his chest, the other with his
good  hand.  The  two  men  got  along  well.  After  the  morning’s
shing,  Perez  cooked  cuttlesh  in  a  hot  sauce,  stewing  them  in

their own ink, and soaking up the black juice left in the pan with
pieces of bread. As they sat in the sherman’s kitchen over the
sooty stove, Perez never spoke, and Mersault was grateful to him
for  this  gift  of  silence.  Sometimes,  after  his  morning  swim,  he
would see the old man putting his boat in the sea, and he would
join him. “Shall I come with you, Perez?”
“Get in.”
They  put  the  oars  in  the  locks  and  rowed  together,  Mersault
being careful not to catch his feet in the trawling hooks. Then they
would sh, and Mersault would watch the lines, gleaming to the
water’s  surface,  black  and  wavering  underneath.  The  sun  broke
into a thousand fragments on the sea, and Mersault breathed the
heavy stiing smell that rose from it like fumes. Sometimes Perez
pulled in a little sh he would throw back, saying: “Go home to
your mother.” At eleven they rowed home and Mersault, his hands
glistening with scales and his face swollen with sun, waited in his
cool, dark house while Perez prepared a pan of sh they would eat
together in the evening. Day after day, Mersault let himself sink
into  his  life  as  if  he  were  sliding  into  water.  And  just  as  the
swimmer advances by the complicity of his arms and the water
which bears him up, helps him on, it was enough to make a few
essential gestures—to rest one hand on a tree-trunk, to take a run
on the beach—in order to keep himself intact and conscious. Thus
he  became  one  with  a  life  in  its  pure  state,  he  rediscovered  a
paradise  given  only  to  the  most  private  or  the  most  intelligent
animals. At the point where the mind denies the mind, he touched
his truth and with it his extreme glory, his extreme love.
Thanks to Bernard, he also mingled with the life of the village.
He  had  been  obliged  to  send  for  Bernard  to  treat  some  minor
indisposition, and since then they had seen each other repeatedly,
with  pleasure.  Bernard  was  a  silent  man,  but  he  had  a  kind  of
bitter wit that cast a gleam in his horn-rimmed glasses. He had
practiced  medicine  a  long  time  in  Indochina,  and  at  forty  had
retired to his corner of Algeria, where for several years he had led
a tranquil life with his wife, an almost mute Indochinese who wore
Western clothes and arranged her hair in a bun. Bernard’s  capacity

for  indulgence  enabled  him  to  adapt  himself  to  any  milieu.  He
liked the whole village, and was liked in return. He took Mersault
on  his  rounds.  Mersault  already  knew  the  owner  of  the  café,  a
former  tenor  who  would  sing  behind  his  bar  and  between  two
beats of  T o s c a  threaten his wife with a beating. Patrice was asked
to serve with Bernard on the holiday committee, and on July 14
they  walked  through  the  streets  in  tricolor  armbands  or  argued
with  the  other  committee  members  sitting  around  a  zinc  table
sticky  with  aperitifs  as  to  whether  the  bandstand  should  be
decorated with ferns or palms. There was even an attempt to lure
him into an electoral contest, but Mersault had had time to know
the mayor, who had “presided over the destiny of his commune”
(as he said) for the last decade, and this semi-permanent position
inclined him to regard himself as Napoleon Bonaparte. A wealthy
grapegrower, he had had a Greek-style house built for himself, and
proudly showed it to Mersault. It consisted of a ground oor and a
second  oor  around  a  courtyard,  but  the  mayor  had  spared  no
expense and installed an elevator, which he insisted that Mersault
and  Bernard  ride  in.  And  Bernard  commented  placidly:  “Very
smooth.”  The  visit  had  inspired  Mersault  with  a  profound
admiration for the mayor, and he and Bernard wielded all their
inuence to keep him in the oce he deserved on so many counts.
In  springtime,  the  little  village  with  its  close-set  red  roofs
between the mountain and the sea overowed with owers—roses,
hyacinths, bougainvilleas—and hummed with insects. Afternoons,
Mersault would walk out onto his terrace and watch the village
dozing  under  the  torrent  of  light.  Local  history  consisted  of  a
rivalry between Morales and Bingues, two rich Spanish landowners
whom a series of speculations had transformed into millionaires, in
the grip of a terrible rivalry. When one bought a car, he chose the
most  expensive  make;  but  the  other,  who  would  buy  the  same
make, would add silver door handles. Morales was a genius at such
tactics. He was known in the village as the King of Spain, for on
each occasion he triumphed over Bingues, who lacked imagination.
During the war, when Bingues pledged several hundred thousand
francs  for  a  national  bond  drive,  Morales  had  declared:  “I’ll  do

better than that, I’ll give my son.” And he had made his son, who
was too young to be mobilized, volunteer. In 1925, Bingues had
driven out from Algiers in a magnicent racing Bugatti; two weeks
later, Morales had built himself a hangar  and bought a plane. The
plane was still sleeping in its hangar, and was shown to visitors on
Sundays.  Bingues  called  Morales  “that  barefoot  beggar,”  and
Morales referred to Bingues as “that lime kiln.”
Bernard  took  Mersault  to  visit  Morales,  who  welcomed  them
warmly to his huge farm, humming with wasps and fragrant with
grapes. Wearing espadrilles and shirtsleeves because he could not
endure a jacket and shoes, Morales showed them the airplane, the
son’s medal framed in the living room, and explained the necessity
of keeping foreigners out of Algeria (he was naturalized, “but that
Bingues,  for  instance  ...”),  then  led  them  to  inspect  his  latest
acquisition.  They  walked  through  an  enormous  vineyard  in  the
middle of which was a cleared space where a kind of Louis XV
salon had been set up, each piece made of the most precious woods
and  fabrics.  Thus  Morales  could  receive  visitors  on  his  grounds.
When Mersault courteously asked what happened when it rained,
Morales shifted his cigar and without even blinking answered: “I
replace  it.”  On  his  way  home,  Mersault  spent  the  time  arguing
with Bernard over the dierence between the  n o u v e a u   r i c h e  and the
poet. Morales, according to Bernard, was a poet. Mersault declared
he  would  have  made  a  splendid  Roman  emperor  during  the
decline.
Some time later, Lucienne came to the Chenoua for a few days,
then left. One Sunday morning, Claire,  Rose, and Catherine paid
Mersault a visit, as  they had promised. But Patrice was already
very  far  from  the  state  of  mind  that  had  driven  him  to  Algiers
during the rst days of his retreat. He was glad to see them again,
nevertheless, and brought Bernard to meet them at the stop where
the  big  yellow  bus  let  them  o.  It  was  a  magnicent  day,  the
village  full  of  the  ne  red  carts  of  itinerant  butchers,  owers
everywhere,  and  the  villagers  dressed  in  bright  colors.  At
Catherine’s  request  they  took  a  table  at  the  café,  and  the  girls
marveled at all this brilliant life, divining the sea’s presence behind

the wall they leaned against. As they were leaving, an astonishing
burst of music exploded in a nearby street: the toreador song from
C a r m e n ,  but  performed  with  an  exuberance  that  prevented  the
instruments from keeping in tune or time. “The gymnastic society,”
Bernard explained. Then some twenty strange musicians appeared,
each pung on a dierent kind of wind instrument. They marched
toward  the  café,  and  behind  them,  his  hat  worn  over  a
handkerchief on the back of his head, fanning himself with a cheap
fan, appeared Morales. He had hired these musicians in the city
because, as he explained, “With this depression, life around here is
too sad.” He sat down at a table and grouped the musicians around
him, where they nished their rendition. The café was crowded.
Then Morales stood up and announced with tremendous dignity,
making  a  sweeping  movement  toward  the  audience:  “At  my
request, the orchestra will play ‘Toreador’ again.”
As they left, the girls were choking with laughter, but once they
reached Mersault’s house and the cool shade of the rooms, which
emphasized  the  dazzling  whiteness  of  the  sun-drenched  garden
walls, they discovered a silent harmony that Catherine expressed
by the desire to take a sunbath on the terrace. Mersault walked
Bernard home. This was the second time the doctor had glimpsed
something of Mersault’s life; they had never conded in each other,
Mersault  conscious  that  Bernard  was  not  a  happy  man,  and
Bernard  rather  baed  by  Mersault’s  way  of  life.  They  parted
without  a  word.  Mersault  and  the  girls  decided  to  make  an
excursion the following day, starting very early. The Chenoua was
high and dicult to climb—ahead of them lay a splendid day of
sunlight and fatigue.
At  dawn  they  climbed  the  rst  steep  slopes.  Rose  and  Claire
walked  ahead,  Patrice  and  Catherine  following.  No  one  spoke.
Gradually they rose above the sea, still pale in the morning mist.
Patrice felt he belonged to the mountain, with its pelt of saron
blossoms, his eager but weakening body a part of the icy springs,
the shadows, and the sunlight. They entered into the concentrated
eort of climbing, the morning air sharp in their lungs, determined
to conquer the slope. Rose and Claire, exhausted, began to slow

down. Catherine and Patrice walked on, and soon lost sight of the
other two.
“Are you all right?” Patrice asked.
“Yes, it’s beautiful.”
The sun rose in the sky, and with it a hum of  insects swelled in
the growing warmth. Soon Patrice took o his shirt and walked on
bare-chested.  Sweat  ran  down  his  shoulders  where  the  skin  had
peeled with sunburn. They took a little path that seemed to follow
the  mountainside.  The  grass  was  wetter  here;  soon  a  sound  of
springs greeted them, and in a hollow they almost stumbled over
the sudden gush of coolness and shade. They sprinkled each other,
drank  a  little,  and  Catherine  stretched  out  on  the  grass  while
Patrice, his hair black with water and curling over his forehead,
stared blinking over the landscape that was covered with ruins,
gleaming roads, and splinters of sunlight. Then he sat down beside
Catherine.
“While we’re alone, Mersault, tell me—are you happy now?”
“Look,” Mersault said. The road trembled in the sun, and the air
was lled with a thousand colored specks. He smiled and rubbed
his arms.
“Yes, but ... Well, I wanted to ask you—of course you don’t have
to answer if you don’t want to ...” She hesitated: “Do you love your
wife?”
Mersault smiled: “That’s not essential.” He gripped Catherine’s
shoulder and shook his head, sprinkling water into her face. “You
make the mistake of thinking you have to choose, that you have to
do what you want, that there are conditions for happiness. What
matters—all that matters, really—is the will to happiness, a kind
of  enormous,  ever-present  consciousness.  The  rest—women,  art,
success—is  nothing  but  excuses.  A  canvas  waiting  for  our
embroideries.”
“Yes,” Catherine said, her eyes lled with sunlight.
“What matters to me is a certain quality of happiness. I can only
nd  it  in  a  certain  struggle  with  its  opposite—a  stubborn  and
violent  struggle.  Am  I  happy?  Catherine!  You  know  the  famous
formula—‘If I had my life to live over again’—well, I would live it

over again just the way it has been. Of course you can’t know what
that means.”
“No.”
“And I don’t know how to tell you. If I’m happy, it’s because of
my bad conscience. I had to get away and reach this solitude where
I could face—in myself, I mean—what had to be faced, what was
sun and what was tears ... Yes, I’m happy, in human terms.”
Rose and Claire arrived. They shouldered their knapsacks. The
path still followed the mountainside, keeping them in a zone of
dense  vegetation,  prickly  pears,  olive  trees,  and  jujubes.  They
passed  Arabs  on  donkeys.  Then  they  climbed  again.  The  sun
pounded now on each stone in the path. At noon, crushed by the
heat,  drunk  on  fragrance  and  fatigue,  they  ung  down  their
knapsacks and gave up reaching the top. The slopes were sheer
and full of sharp ints. A wizened oak sheltered them in its circle
of shade. They took provisions out of the knapsacks and ate. The
whole  mountain  quivered  under  the  light.  The  cicadas  were
deafening as the heat assailed them under their oak. Patrice threw
himself  on  the  ground  and  pressed  his  chest  against  the  stones,
inhaling the scorched aroma. Under his belly he could feel the faint
throbs of the mountain that seemed to be in labor. This regular
pulse  and  the  unremitting  song  of  the  insects  between  the  hot
stones nally put him to sleep.
When  he  awakened  he  was  covered  with  sweat,  and  every
muscle ached. It must have been three in the afternoon. The girls
had vanished, but soon he heard their laughter and shouts. It was
cooler now, time to go back down. At this moment, as they were
about to start, Mersault fainted for the rst time. When he came
to, he saw the cobalt sea between three anxious faces. They walked
on more slowly. On the last slopes, Mersault asked for a rest. The
sea was turning green along with the sky, and the horizon began
to blur. On the foothills that stretched from the Chenoua around
the little bay, the cypresses blackened slowly. No one spoke, until
Claire said: “You look tired.”
“I’m not surprised. Are you?”

“It’s none of my business, but I don’t think this place is good for
you. It’s too near the sea—too damp. Why don’t you go live in
France—in the mountains?”
“This place isn’t good for me, Claire, but I’m happy here. I feel
in harmony with it.”
“Well, then you could be in harmony—longer.”
“No one is happy relatively—for a longer or  shorter time. You’re
happy or you’re not. That’s all. And death has nothing to do with it
—death is an accident of happiness, in that case.” No one spoke.
After  a  long  pause,  Rose  said:  “I’m  not  convinced.”  They
returned slowly as night was falling.
Catherine decided to send for Bernard. Mersault was in his room;
beyond the shifting shadow of the windowpanes he could see the
white  patch  of  the  parapet,  the  sea  like  a  strip  of  dark  linen
undulating  in  the  transparent  air,  and  beyond  it  the  night  sky,
paler  but  starless.  He  felt  weak,  and  his  weakness  made  him
mysteriously lighter, gayer, and his mind grew more lucid. When
Bernard knocked, Mersault sensed he would tell him everything.
Not that his secret was a burden; it was not that kind of secret. If
he had kept it till now, it was because in certain circles a man
keeps  his  thoughts  to  himself,  knowing  they  will  oend  the
prejudices and stupidity of others. But today, after his exhaustion,
there was a sudden longing in his body to conde. It was the way
an artist, after carefully molding and caressing his work, at last
feels the need to show it, to communicate with men—Mersault had
the feeling he was going to speak now. And without being certain
he would do so, he waited impatiently for Bernard.
From downstairs, two bursts of laughter made him smile. And at
that moment Bernard came into the room. “Well?”
“Well, here I am,” Mersault said. Bernard listened to his chest,
but he could tell nothing—he wanted  to have an X ray taken, if
Mersault could manage to get to Algiers. “Later,” Mersault replied.
Bernard said nothing and sat down on the windowsill. “I don’t
like  being  sick  myself,”  he  said.  “I  know  what  it  is.  Nothing  is
uglier or more degrading than sickness.”

Mersault  was  unconcerned.  He  got  up  from  his  chair,  oered
Bernard a cigarette, lit his own, and said with a laugh: “Can I ask
you a question, Bernard?”
“Of course.”
“You never swim, you’re never on the beach—why did you pick
this place to live in?”
“Oh, I don’t know exactly. It was a long time ago.” After a pause
he added: “Besides, I’ve always acted out of rancor. It’s  better now.
Before, I wanted to be happy, to do what had to be done, to settle
down  somewhere  I  really  wanted  to  be,  for  instance.  But
sentimental anticipation is always wrong. We have to live the way
it’s easiest for us to live— not forcing ourselves. I suppose it sounds
a little cynical, but it’s also the point of view you have to take to
survive. In Indochina I ran all over the place. Here—here I just
ruminate. That’s all.”
“Yes,”  Mersault  said,  still  smoking,  deep  in  his  armchair  and
staring  at  the  ceiling.  “But  I’m  not  sure  that  all  sentimental
anticipation,  as  you  call  it,  is  wrong.  Only  unreasonable
sometimes. In any case, the only experiences that interest me are
precisely the ones where everything turns out to be the way you
hoped it would.”
Bernard smiled. “Yes, a ready-made destiny.”
“A  man’s  destiny,”  Mersault  said  without  moving,  “is  always
passionately  interesting,  if  he  achieves  it  passionately.  And  for
some men, a passionate destiny is always a ready-made destiny.”
“Yes,” Bernard said. And he stood up deliberately and stared out
at  the  night  for  a  moment,  his  back  to  Mersault.  He  went  on
without  looking  at  him:  “You’re  the  only  man  besides  myself
around  here  who  lives  alone.  I  don’t  mean  your  wife  and  your
friends downstairs. I know those are episodes. Still, even so, you
seem to love life more than I do.” He turned around. “Because for
me, loving life is not going for a swim. It’s living in intoxication,
intensity.  Women,  adventures,  other  countries  ...  It’s  action,
making  something  happen.  A  burning,  marvelous  life.  What  I
mean is—I want you to understand me—” He seemed ashamed of

his excitement. “I love life too much to be satised  with nature.”
Bernard put away his stethoscope and closed his bag.
Mersault  said:  “Actually,  you’re  an  idealist.”  And  he  had  the
sense that everything was enclosed in that moment which shifts
from birth to death, that everything was judged and consecrated
then.
“That’s because, you see,” Bernard said with a kind of sadness,
“the opposite of an idealist is too often a man without love.”
“Don’t believe it,” Mersault said, holding out his hand.
Bernard held his hand a long time. “To think the  way you do,”
he  said  smiling,  “you  have  to  be  a  man  who  lives  either  on  a
tremendous despair,  or on a tremendous hope.”
“On both, perhaps.”
“Oh, I wasn’t asking!”
“I know,” Mersault said seriously. But when Bernard was at the
door, Mersault, impelled by a sudden need, called him back.
“Yes?” the doctor said, turning around.
“Are you capable of feeling contempt for a man?”
“I think so.”
“On what conditions?”
The doctor reected. “It’s quite simple, I think. In cases when he
was motivated by expediency or a desire for money.”
“That  i s  simple,” Mersault said. “Goodnight, Bernard.”
“Goodnight.”
Alone,  Mersault  reected.  At  the  point  he  had  now  reached,
another man’s contempt left him indierent. But he recognized in
Bernard  profound  resonances  that  brought  the  two  of  them
together.  It  seemed  intolerable  that  a  part  of  himself  should
condemn the rest. Had he acted out of expediency? He had become
aware of the essential and immoral truth that money is one of the
surest  and  swiftest  means  of  acquiring  one’s  dignity.  He  had
managed  to  dispel  the  bitterness  which  besets  any  decent  soul
aware of the vile iniquities of the birth and growth of a splendid
fate.  This  sordid  and  revolting  curse,  whereby  the  poor  end  in
poverty the life they have begun in poverty, he had rejected by
using money as a weapon, opposing hatred with hatred. And out

of this beast-to-beast combat, the angel sometimes emerged, intact,
wings and halo and all, in the warm breath of the sea. It would be
as it had been: he had  said nothing to Bernard, and his creation
would henceforth remain secret.
The girls left around ve o’clock in the afternoon of the next
day. As they got into the bus, Catherine turned back: “ Goodbye,
sea,” she said.
A moment later, three laughing faces were staring at Mersault
out of the rear window, and the yellow bus vanished like a huge
golden insect into the sun. Though clear, the sky was a little heavy.
Mersault,  standing  alone  in  the  road,  felt  a  deep  sense  of
deliverance tinged with melancholy. Only today did his solitude
become real, for only today did he feel bound to it. And to have
accepted that solitude, to know that henceforth he was the master
of  all  his  days  to  come,  lled  him  with  the  melancholy  that  is
attached to all greatness.
Instead of taking the highway, he returned through the carob
trees and the olives, following a little path that wound around the
foothills  and  came  out  behind  his  house.  He  squashed  several
olives, and noticed that the path was speckled with these black
ovals. At the summer’s end, the carobs drench all Algeria with the
smell of love, and in the evening or after the rain, it is as if the
entire earth were resting, after giving itself to the sun, its womb
drenched with a sperm smelling of bitter almonds. All day, their
odor had poured down from the huge trees, heavy and oppressive.
On this little path at twilight, in the released exhalations of earth,
the fragrance grew light, scarcely apparent to Patrice’s nostrils—
like  a  mistress  you  walk  with  in  the  street  after  a  long  stiing
afternoon, and who looks at you, shoulder to shoulder, among the
lights and the crowd.
Amid that smell of love and squashed, fragrant fruit, Mersault
realized  then  that  the  season  was  ending.  A  long  winter  would
begin. But he was ready for it, he would wait. From this path he
could not see the sea, but he could glimpse on the mountaintop
certain  reddish  mists  which  heralded  the  dark.  On  the  ground,
patches  of  sunshine  paled  among  the  shadows  of  the  foliage.

Mersault  snied  the  bitter  fragrance  which  consecrated  his
wedding to the earth this afternoon. The evening falling on the
world, on the path between the olives and the gum trees, on the
vines and the red soil, near the sea which whispered softly, this
evening  owed  into  him  like  a  tide.  So  many  evenings  had
promised him happiness that to experience this one as happiness
itself  made  him  realize  how  far  he  had  come,  from  hope  to
conquest.  In  the  innocence  of  his  heart,  Mersault  accepted  this
green sky and this love-soaked earth with the same thrill of passion
and desire as when he had killed Zagreus in the innocence of his
heart.

5
In January, the almond trees bloomed. In March, the pear, peach,
and apple trees were covered with blossoms. The next month, the
streams gradually swelled, then returned to a normal ow. Early in
May, the hay was cut, and the oats and barley at the month’s end.
Already  the  apricots  were  ripening.  In  June,  the  early  pears
appeared with the major crops. The streams began to dry up, and
the heat grew more intense. But the earth’s blood, shrinking here
on the coast, made the cotton bloom farther inland and sweetened
the rst grapes. A great hot wind arose, parching the land and
spreading  brush-res  everywhere.  And  then,  suddenly,  the  year
changed direction: hurriedly, the grape harvests were brought to
an end. The downpours of September and October drenched the
land. No sooner was the summer’s work done than the rst sowing
began, while the streams and springs suddenly swelled to torrents
with the rain. At the year’s end, the wheat was already sprouting
in some elds; on others plowing had only just been nished. A
little later, the almond trees were once again white against the ice-
blue sky. The new year had begun in the earth, in the sky. Tobacco
was planted, vines cultivated and fertilized, trees grafted. In the
same  month,  the  medlars  ripened.  Again,  the  haymaking,  the
harvesting,  the  summer  plowing.  Halfway  through the year, the
ripe fruits, juicy and sticky, were served on every table: between
one  threshing  and  the  next,  the  men  ate  the  gs,  peaches,  and
pears  greedily.  During  the  next  grape  harvest,  the  sky  grew
overcast.  Out  of  the  north,  silent  ocks  of  black  starlings  and
thrushes passed over—for them the olives were already ripe. Soon
after they had own away, the olives were gathered. The wheat
sprouted  a  second  time  from  the  viscous  soil.  Huge  clouds,  also
from the north, passed over the sea, then the land, brushing the
water with foam and leaving it smooth and icy under a crystal sky.

For several days there were distant, silent ashes in the sky. The
rst cold spells set in.
During this period, Mersault took to his bed for the rst time.
Bouts of pleurisy conned him to his room for a month. When he
got up, the foothills of the Chenoua were covered with owering
trees, all the way to the sea’s edge. Never had spring touched him
so deeply. The rst night of his convalescence, he walked across
the elds for a long time—as far as the hill where the ruins of
Tipasa slept. In a silence violated only by the silky sounds of the
sky, the night lay like milk upon the world. Mersault walked along
the cli, sharing the night’s deep concentration. Below him the sea
whispered gently. It was covered with velvety moonlight, smooth
and undulating, like the pelt of some animal. At this hour of night,
his life seemed so remote to him, he was so solitary and indierent
to everything and to himself  as well, that Mersault felt he had at
last attained what he was seeking, that the peace which lled him
now was born of that patient self-abandonment he had pursued
and achieved with the help of this warm world so willing to deny
him without anger. He walked lightly, and the sound of his own
footsteps seemed alien to him, familiar too, no doubt, but familiar
the way the rustling of animals in the mastic bushes was familiar,
or the breaking waves, or the rhythm of the night itself in the sky
overhead. And he could feel  his own body too, but with the same
external consciousness as the warm breath of this spring night and
the smell of salt and decay that rose from the beach. His actions in
the world, his thirst for happiness, Zagreus’ terrible wound baring
brain and bone, the sweet, uncommitted hours in the House above
the World, his wife, his hopes, and his gods—all this lay before
him, but no more than one story chosen among so many others
without any valid reason, at once alien and secretly familiar, a
favorite book which atters and justies the heart at its core, but a
book someone else has written. For the rst time, Mersault was
aware  of  no  other  reality  in  himself  than  that  of  a  passion  for
adventure, a desire for power, a warm and an intelligent instinct
for a relationship with the world—without anger, without hatred,
without  regret.  Sitting  on  a  rock  he  let  his  ngers  explore  its

crannies as he watched the sea swell in silence under the moon. He
thought of Lucienne’s face he had caressed,  and of the warmth of
her lips. The moon poured its long, straying smiles like oil on the
water’s smooth surface—the sea would be warm as a mouth, and
as soft, ready to yield beneath a man’s weight. Motionless now,
Mersault felt how close happiness is to tears, caught up in that
silent exultation which weaves together the hopes and despairs of
human  life.  Conscious  yet  alienated,  devoured  by  passion  yet
disinterested,  Mersault  realized  that  his  life  and  his  fate  were
completed  here  and  that  henceforth  all  his  eorts  would  be  to
submit to this happiness and to confront its terrible truth.
Now he must sink into the warm sea, lose himself in order to
nd  himself  again,  swim  in  that  warm  moonlight  in  order  to
silence what remained of the past, to bring to birth the deep song
of his happiness. He undressed, clambered down a few rocks, and
entered the sea. It was as warm as a body, another body that ran
down  his  arms  and  clung  to  his  legs  with  an  ineable  yet
omnipresent  embrace.  Mersault  swam  steadily  now,  feeling  the
muscles of his back shift with each stroke. Whenever he raised an
arm, he cast sheaves of silver drops upon the sea, sowing under
this mute and vivid sky the splendid harvest of happiness; then his
arm  thrust  back  into  the  water,  and  like  a  vigorous  plowshare
tilled the waves, dividing them in order to gain a new support, a
rmer hope. Behind him, his feet churned the water into seething
foam, producing a strangely distinct hissing noise in the night’s
silence  and  solitude.  Conscious  of  this  cadence,  this  vigor,  an
exultation seized Mersault; he swam faster and soon realized he
was far from land, alone in the heart of the night, of the world.
Suddenly  he  thought  of  the  depths  which  lay  beneath  him  and
stopped moving. Everything that was below attracted him like an
unknown world, the extension of this darkness which restored him
to himself, the salty center of a life still unexplored. A temptation
ashed  through  his  mind,  but  he  immediately  rejected  it  in  the
great joy of his body—he swam harder, farther. Gloriously tired, he
turned back toward the shore. At that moment he suddenly entered
an  icy  current  and  was  forced  to  stop  swimming,  his  teeth

chattered, his movements lost their harmony. This surprise of the
sea left him bewildered; the chill penetrated his limbs and seared
him like the love of some god of clear and impassioned exultation
whose embrace left him powerless. Laboriously he returned to the
beach, where he dressed facing the sky and the sea, shivering and
laughing with happiness.
On his way home, he began to feel faint. From the path sloping
up  toward  his  house,  he  could  make  out  the  rocky  promontory
across the bay, the smooth shafts of the columns among the ruins.
Then suddenly the landscape tilted and he found himself leaning
against a rock, half-supported by a mastic bush, the fragrance of
its crushed leaves strong in his nostrils. He dragged himself back to
the house. His body, which had just now carried him to the  limits of
joy, plunged him into a suering that gripped his bowels, making
him close his eyes. He decided tea would help, but he used a dirty
pan to boil the water in, and the tea was so greasy it made him
retch.  He  drank  it,  though,  before  he  went  to  bed.  As  he  was
pulling o his shoes he noticed how pink his nails were, long and
curving over the ngertips of his bloodless hands. His nails had
never been like that, and they gave his hands a twisted, unhealthy
look. His chest felt as though it were caught in a vise. He coughed
and  spat  several  times—only  phlegm,  though  the  taste  of  blood
lingered on his tongue. In bed, his body was seized by long spasms
of shivering. He could feel the chill rising from every extremity of
his body, meeting in his shoulders like a conuence of icy streams,
while his teeth chattered and the sheets felt as if they had been
soaked. The house seemed enormous, the usual noises swelled to
innity,  as  if  they  encountered  no  wall  to  put  an  end  to  their
echoes. He heard the sea, the pebbles rolling under the receding
wave, the night throbbing behind his windows, the dogs howling
on distant farms. He was hot now, threw back the blankets, then
cold  again,  and  drew  them  up.  As  he  wavered  between  one
suering  and  another,  between  somnolence  and  anxiety,  he
suddenly realized he was sick, and anguish overwhelmed him at
the  thought  that  he  might  die  in  this  unconsciousness,  without
being able to see clearly. The village steeple chimed, but he could

not keep count of the strokes.  He did not want to die like a sick
man. He did not want his sickness to be what it is so often, an
attenuation, a transition to death. What he really wanted was the
encounter between his life—a life lled with blood and health—
and death. He stood, dragged a chair over to the window and sat
down in it, huddling in his blankets. Through the thin curtains, in
the places where the material did not fall in folds, he saw the stars.
He breathed heavily for a long time, and gripped the arms of his
chair  to  control  his  trembling  hands.  He  would  reconquer  his
lucidity if he could. “It could be done,” he was thinking. And he
was thinking, too, that the gas was still on in the kitchen. “It could
be  done,”  he  thought  again.  Lucidity  too  was  a  long  patience.
Everything could be won, earned, acquired. He struck his st on
the arm of the chair. A man is not born strong, weak, or decisive.
He  becomes  strong,  he  becomes  lucid.  Fate  is  not  in  man  but
around him. Then he realized he was crying. A strange weakness, a
kind  of  cowardice  born  of  his  sickness  gave  way  to  tears,  to
childishness. His hands were cold, his heart lled with an immense
disgust.  He  thought  of  his  nails,  and  under  his  collarbone  he
pressed tumors that seemed enormous. Outside, all that beauty was
spread upon the face of the world. He did not want to abandon his
thirst for life, his jealousy of life. He thought of those evenings
above Algiers, when the sound of sirens rises in the green sky and
men  leave  their  factories.  The  fragrance  of  wormwood,  the
wildowers among the ruins, and the solitude of the cypresses in
the Sahel generated an image of life where beauty and happiness
took  on  an  aspect  without  the  need  of  hope,  a  countenance  in
which Patrice found  a kind of fugitive eternity. That was what he
did  not  want  to  leave—he  did  not  want  that  image  to  persist
without him. Filled with rebellion and pity, he saw Zagreus’ face
turned toward the window. Then he coughed for a long time. It
was hard to breathe. He was smothering under his blankets. He
was cold. He was hot. He was burning with a great confusing rage,
his sts clenched, his blood throbbing heavily under his skull; eyes
blank, he waited for the new spasm that would plunge him back
into  the  blind  fever.  The  chill  came,  restoring  him  to  a  moist,

sealed world in which he silenced the animal rebellion, eyes closed,
jealous  of  his  thirst  and  his  hunger.  But  before,  losing
consciousness, he had time to see the night turn pale behind the
curtains and to hear, with the dawn and the world’s awakening, a
kind of tremendous chord of tenderness and hope which without
doubt  dissolved  his  fear  of  death,  though  at  the  same  time  it
assured him he would nd a reason for dying in what had been his
whole reason for living.
When he awakened, the morning had already begun, and all the
birds  and  insects  were  singing  in  the  warmth  of  the  sun.  He
remembered Lucienne was  coming today. Exhausted, he crawled
back to his bed. His mouth tasted of fever, and he could feel the
onset of that fragility which makes every eort arduous and other
people so irritating in the eyes of the sick. He sent for Bernard,
who came at once, quiet and businesslike as always. He listened to
Mersault’s chest, then took o his glasses and wiped the lenses.
“Bad,”  was  all  he  would  say.  He  gave  Mersault  two  injections.
During the second, Mersault fainted, though ordinarily  he was not
squeamish. When he came to, Bernard was holding his wrist in one
hand and his watch in the other, watching the jerky advance of the
second  hand.  “That  lasted  fteen  minutes,”  Bernard  said.  “Your
heart’s failing. The next time, you might not come out of it.”
Mersault closed his eyes. He was exhausted, his lips white and
dry, his breathing a hoarse whistle. “Bernard,” he said.
“Yes.”
“I don’t want to die in a coma. I want to see what’s happening—
do you understand me?”
“Yes,” Bernard said, and gave him several ampules. “If you feel
weak, break this open and swallow it. It’s adrenalin.” As he was
leaving,  Bernard  met  Lucienne  on  her  way  in.  “As  charming  as
ever.”
“Is Patrice sick?”
“Yes.”
“Is it serious?”
“No, he’s all right,” Bernard said. And just before  he was out the
door:  “One  piece  of  advice,  though—try  to  leave  him  alone  as

much as you can.”
“Oh,” Lucienne said, “then it can’t be anything.”
All day long, Mersault coughed and choked. Twice he felt the
cold, stubborn chill which would draw him into another coma, and
twice the adrenalin rescued him from that dark immersion. And all
day long his dim eyes stared at the magnicent landscape. Around
four, a large red rowboat appeared on the sea, gradually growing
larger,  glistening  with  sunlight,  brine,  and  sh  scales.  Perez,
standing, rowed on steadily. Mersault closed his eyes and smiled
for the rst time since the day before, though he did not unclench
his  teeth.  Lucienne,  who  had  been  fussing  around  the  room,
vaguely  uneasy,  threw  herself  on  the  bed  and  kissed  him.  “Sit
down,” Mersault said, “ you can stay.”
“Don’t talk, you’ll tire yourself out.”
Bernard  came,  gave  injections,  left.  Huge  red  clouds  moved
slowly across the sky.
“When I was a child,” Mersault said laboriously, leaning back on
the pillow, his eyes xed on the sky, “my mother told me that was
the souls of the dead going to paradise. I was amazed they had red
souls.  Now  I  know  it  means  a  storm  is  coming.  But  it’s  still
amazing.”
Night was beginning to fall. Images came. Enormous fantastic
animals  which  nodded  over  desert  landscapes.  Mersault  gently
swept  them  away,  despite  his  fever.  He  let  only  Zagreus’  face
appear, a sign of blood brotherhood. He who had inicted death
was going to die. And then, as for Zagreus, the lucid gaze he cast
upon his life was a man’s gaze. Until now he had lived. Now he
could  talk  of  his  life.  Of  that  great  ravaging  energy  which  had
borne  him  on,  of  that  fugitive  and  generating  poetry  of  life,
nothing  was  left  now  but  the  transparent  truth  which  is  the
opposite of poetry. Of all the men he had carried inside himself, as
every man does at the beginning of this life, of all those various
rootless,  mingling  beings,  he  had  created  his  life  with
consciousness,  with  courage.  That  was  his  whole  happiness  in
living and dying. He realized now that to be afraid of this death he
was staring at with animal terror meant to be afraid of life. Fear of

dying justied a limitless attachment to what is alive in man. And
all those who had not made the gestures necessary to live their
lives,  all  those  who  feared  and  exalted  impotence—they  were
afraid of death because of the sanction it gave to a life in which
they  had  not  been  involved.  They  had  not  lived  enough,  never
having  lived  at  all.  And  death  was  a  kind  of  gesture,  forever
withholding  water  from  the  traveler  vainly  seeking  to  slake  his
thirst. But for the others, it was the fatal and tender gesture that
erases and denies, smiling at gratitude as at rebellion. He spent a
day and a night sitting on his bed, his arms on the night table and
his head on his arms. He could not breathe lying down. Lucienne
sat  beside  him  and  watched  him  without  speaking  a  word.
Sometimes Mersault looked at her. He realized that after he was
gone, the rst man who put his arms around her would make her
soften, submit. She would be oered—her body, her breasts—as she
had  been  oered  to  him,  and  the  world  would  continue  in  the
warmth of her parted lips. Sometimes he raised his head and stared
out the window. He had not shaved, his red-rimmed, hollow eyes
had lost their dark luster, and his pale, sunken cheeks under the
bluish stubble transformed him completely.
His gaze came to rest on the panes. He sighed and turned toward
Lucienne.  Then  he  smiled.  And  in  his  face  that  was  collapsing,
even vanishing, the hard, lucid smile wakened a new strength, a
cheerful gravity.
“Better?” Lucienne asked in a whisper.
“Yes.” Then he returned to darkness between his arms. At the
limit of his strength and his resistance, he joined Roland Zagreus
for  the  rst  time,  whose  smile  had  so  exasperated  him  in  the
beginning.  His  short,  gasping  breath  left  a  moist  cloud  on  the
marble of the night table. And in that sickly warmth rising toward
him from the stone, he felt even more distinctly the icy tips of his
ngers  and  toes.  Even  that  revealed  life,  though,  and  in  this
journey from cold to warm, he discovered the exultation which had
seized Zagreus, thanking life “for allowing him to go on burning.”
He was overcome by a violent  and fraternal love for this man from
whom he had felt so distant, and he realized that by killing him he

had  consummated  a  union  which  bound  them  together  forever.
That heavy approach of tears, a mingled taste of life and death,
was shared by them both, he realized now. And in Zagreus’ very
immobility confronting death he encountered the secret image of
his  own  life.  Fever  helped  him  here,  and  with  it  an  exultant
certainty of sustaining consciousness to the end, of dying with his
eyes open. Zagreus too had had his eyes open that day, and tears
had fallen from them. But that was the last weakness of a man
who had not had his share of life. Patrice was not afraid of such
weakness. In the pounding of his feverish blood, though it failed to
reach  the  limits  of  his  body,  he  understood  that  such  weakness
would not be his. For he had played his part, fashioned his role,
perfected man’s one duty, which is only to be happy. Not for long,
no doubt. He had destroyed the obstacle, and this inner brother he
had engendered in himself—what did it matter if he existed for two
or for twenty years? Happiness was the fact that he had existed.
The  blanket  slipped  from  Mersault’s  shoulders,  and  when
Lucienne stood up to cover him, he shuddered at her touch. Since
the day he had sneezed in the little square near Zagreus’ villa to
this moment, his body had served him faithfully, had opened him
to  the  world.  But  at  the  same  time,  it  lived  a  life  of  its  own,
detached from the man it represented. For  these few years it had
passed  through  a  slow  decomposition;  now  it  had  completed  its
trajectory, and was ready to leave Mersault, to restore him to the
world. In that sudden shudder of which Mersault was conscious, his
body indicated once more a complicity which had already won so
many  joys  for  them  both.  Solely  for  this  reason,  Mersault  took
pleasure in that shudder. Conscious, he must be conscious, he must
be conscious without deception, without  cowardice—alone, face to
face—at  grips  with  his  body—eyes  open  upon  death.  It  was  a
man’s business. Not love, not a landscape, nothing but an innite
waste of solitude and happiness in which Mersault was playing his
last cards. He felt his breathing weaken. He gasped for air, and in
that  movement  his  ruined  lungs  wheezed.  His  wrists  were  cold
now,  and  there  was  no  feeling  in  his  hands  at  all.  Day  was
breaking.

The new day was cool, lled with the sound of birds. The sun
rose quickly, and in a single leap was above the horizon. The earth
was covered with gold, with warmth. In the morning, sky and sea
were spattered with dancing patches of blue and yellow light. A
light breeze had risen, and through the window a breath of salt air
cooled Mersault’s hands. At noon the wind dropped, the day split
open  like  ripe  fruit  and  trickled  down  the  face  of  the  world,  a
warm and choking juice in a sudden concert of cicadas. The sea
was covered with this golden juice, a sheet of oil upon the water,
and gave  back to the sun-crushed earth a warm, softening breath
which released odors of wormwood, rosemary, and hot stone. From
his  bed,  Mersault  received  that  impact,  that  oering,  and  he
opened his eyes on the huge, curved, glistening sea irradiated with
the smiles of his gods. Suddenly he realized he was sitting on his
bed,  and  that  Lucienne’s  face  was  very  close  to  his.  Slowly,  as
though it came from his stomach, there rose inside him a stone
which approached his throat. He breathed faster and faster, higher
and  higher.  He  looked  at  Lucienne.  He  smiled  without  wincing,
and this smile too came from inside himself. He threw himself back
on  the  bed,  and  felt  the  slow  ascent  within  him.  He  looked  at
Lucienne’s swollen lips and, behind her, the smile of the earth. He
looked at them with the same eyes, the same desire.
“In a minute, in a second,” he thought. The ascent stopped. And
stone among the stones, he returned in the joy of his heart to the
truth of the motionless worlds.

Afterword

A Happy Death  draws on memories of Belcourt, the workingmen’s
district where Camus spent his childhood, as well as of his job at  
the  maritime  commission,  his  travels  in  central  Europe  in  the
summer  of  1936,  in  Italy  in  1936  and  1937,  his  sanatorium
experiences, and his life in the Fichu house, or the “House above
the  World,”  where  he  lived  in  November  1936.  One  reads  also
episodes in his love life—his two years of marriage with Simone
Hié  and  the  break  with  her,  after  a  stormy  scene  in  Salzburg.
Another female gure, dicult to identify, plays an important role
in  the  book.  Several  more  specic  questions  remain  that
biographical research may someday answer: Who was Lucienne?
Roland Zagreus? Doctor Bernard? etc. For the time being, it seems
more useful to sketch a literary genesis than to establish a point-
by-point correspondence between a novel and a life.
The  rst  specic  mention,  in  the  Notebooks ,  of  what  was  to
become  A Happy Death  is a plan of “ Part II ” that could only have
come  after  the  trip  to  central  Europe.  The  last  sketches  for  the
novel  date  from  1938.  The  name  Mersault  occurs  as  late  as
January 1939, but by then Camus was concerned with  The Stranger.
Thus  A Happy Death  was conceived and composed between 1936
and 1938. It is contemporary with the rst version of  L’Envers et
l’endroit  and the nal one of  Noces , and follows the rst draft of
Caligula.
To understand the composition of the novel, it is best to consider
the nal version rst.  A Happy Death  is divided into two parts, each
consisting  of  ve  chapters:  “Natural  Death,”  then  “Conscious
Death.” But the rst part consists of only 49 typed pages, scarcely
more than a third of the entire 140.
The core of “Natural Death” is the murder of Roland  Zagreus.
Mersault, the hero, kills him in the rst chapter, takes his money,
and  falls  ill  on  his  return  home.  The  subsequent  chapters  are
ashbacks:  to  Mersault’s  ordinary  life  ( Chapter 2 ),  his  relations
with  Marthe  and  his  sexual  jealousy  ( Chapter  3 ),  his  long
conversation with Zagreus ( Chapter 4 ), and nally the encounter

with  the  barrelmaker  Cardona,  whose  pathetic  story  is  told  in
Chapter  5 .  To  summarize:  an  ordinary  oce  worker,  Patrice
Mersault, the neighbor of a barrelmaker whose life is even more
wretched than his own and the lover of a girl whose rst lover was
the  invalid  Roland  Zagreus,  makes  the  latter’s  acquaintance
through  this  girl,  learns  from  a  conversation  with  him  how  he
made  his  fortune,  and  taking  advantage  of  this  condence,
murders him; he then leaves the country, his health uncertain but
his wallet full.
The ve chapters of “Conscious Death” present Mersault’s stay in
Prague ( Chapter 1 ), the rest of his journey and his return, through
Genoa,  to  Algiers  ( Chapter  2 ),  his  life  in  the  House  above  the
World ( Chapter 3 ), his departure for the Chenoua, where he moves
into  a  house  overlooking  the  sea  ( Chapter  4 ),  and  nally  his
pleurisy and death ( Chapter 5 ). To summarize: in Prague, Mersault
feels  happiness  escaping  him;  he  regains  his  sense  of  it  as  he
returns to the sun. Back in Algiers, he makes two experiments in
happiness: rst, by living with three girls in the House above the
World; then in an ascetic solitude in the Chenoua, mitigated by
visits  from  his  wife  Lucienne  or  from  the  three  friends.  He  has
conquered  happiness,  and  retains  it  in  death  itself,  evoking
Zagreus.
This resumé of the novel suggests its chief theme: how to die a
happy man? In other words, how to live as one so that death itself
is happy? The rst part of the novel is the “wrong side”— l’envers —
of  this  problem  of  a  happy  life  and  death,  for  the  hero  lacks
money, time, and emotional mastery; the second part of the novel,
endowing  him  with  nancial  independence,  an  organization  of
time,  and  peace  of  heart,  is  the  “right  side”— l’endroit.   This,  in
summary, is the content and meaning of  A Happy Death  in its nal
version.
The division into two parts was a belated one. All the sketches for
the  book’s  composition  until  1938  indicate  three  parts,  and  the
revisions concern only the arrangement of the chapters. Thus it is

not surprising to encounter the dissymmetry (49 pages against 91)
which appears in the nal plan. The three-part division, as one
sketch called “rearrangement” testies, was more balanced: each
part would have had approximately the same number of pages.
The  nal  version  indicates  a  strong  contrast,  which  does  not
occur in the earlier sketches. Yet contrast, alternation, seems from
the  start  to  be  the  aesthetic  motif  of  the  novel,  as  of  Camus’s
philosophy. In a note proposing to tell “six stories”:
story of the brilliant game. Luxury.
story of the workingmen’s neighborhood. Death of the mother.
story of the House above the World.
story of sexual jealousy.
story of the man condemned to death.
story of the pursuit of the sun
Camus  reveals,  by  the  very  order  of  his  list,  this  concern  with
alternation.  The  six  stories  can  be  paired.  Until  August  1937,
however, he tried to match the contrast of polarity with a contrast
of tenses: certain chapters are written in the present, others in the
past. He even tried, in a detailed plan of “ Part I ,” to relate the
tenses  according  to  a  rigorous  system,  but  later  abandoned  this
formalism,  which was not sustained by an internal necessity. Yet a
vestige of it persists in the French text as published: the chapter
devoted to the House above the World, an evocation of a pure and
continuous happiness, is written in the present, as in the initial
sketch.
These six stories form the raw material of what was gradually to
become a novel. We can retrace the novel’s genesis from them—
from their metamorphosis and their arrangement.
The rst sketches stress the story of the House above the World,
which occupies, with that of jealousy, “ Part II .” Here is the rst
plan in the  Notebooks:
Part II:

A. present tense
B. past tense
Chapter A1 The House above the World. Description.
Chapter B1 Recollections. Liaison with Lucienne.
Chapter A2 House above the World. His youth.
Chapter B2 Lucienne describes her indelities.
Chapter A3 House above the World. Invitation.
Chapter B4 Sexual jealousy. Salzburg. Prague.
Chapter A4 House above the World. Sun.
Chapter B5 Getaway (letter). Algiers. Catches cold, falls sick.
Chapter A5 Starry night. Catherine.
Thus the rst part is devoted, as can be seen by a plan sketched
after August 1937, to the brilliant game-workingmen’s neighborhod
pairing: what the “brilliant game” is will be shown, later on, by
The  Myth  of  Sisyphus   in  the  trinity  Don  Juanism,  pretense,
conquest; this game is contrasted with the vicissitudes of life in the
“workingmen’s neighborhood.” Then appears a double antagonism
indicated by a sketch dated August 1937:
Part I. His life hitherto.
Part II. Flight.
Part III. Abandonment of compromises and truth in nature.
“Life  hitherto”  signies  poverty,  eight  hours  of  work  a  day,
banality of social relations—in other words, a false mode of being.
“The  game,”  about  which  the  Notebooks   are  extremely  laconic,
must  designate  a  kind  of  dandyism,  an  advance  on  an
impoverished  life,  a  delight  in  personal  pleasure,  but  still  false.
This antagonism, in the nal version of  A Happy Death , loses its
importance,  diluted  in  dialogues  and  summarized  in  Mersault’s
advancement. On the other hand, the conquest of authenticity, by

an impulse of ight into solitude and nature, appears in the rst
sketches and remains the novel’s end in every sense.
But  A Happy Death  does not appear to end, in the rst sketches,
with the hero’s death: “craving for death and the sun” we read in
one outline; this is only a craving. In another, death is confronted
(?), but located at the end of the rst part: “Last chapter: pursuit of
the sun and death (suicide-natural death).” One notable feature:
death and the sun are related. Once a sun, a sensuous image, is
replaced  by  happiness,  a  moral  myth,  a  decisive  step  will  have
been  taken  toward  the  nal  conception.  We  can  date  this  step
August 1937 with the note: “Novel: the man who has realized that
in  order  to  live  he  must  be  rich,  who  gives  himself  up  to  this
conquest of money, succeeds, lives and dies a happy man.” For the
rst time, in the  Notebooks , we encounter a virtual summary of  A
Happy Death , and it is here that we rst nd the word “novel.”
The main thread of this novel is henceforth clear: it will be an
inverted  illustration  of  the  proverb:  Money  does  not  make
happiness. Happiness, through money, becomes the chief theme, as
clearly appears at the beginning of the note of November 17, 1937:
Will to happiness.
Part III. Achievement of happiness.
But at this moment the character of Zagreus, who is as yet only the
“invalid,”  supervenes,  in  order  to  enlighten  Mersault  as  to  the
problem of the relationships between money and time and to show
him  the  truth  of  another  proverbial  statement—Time  is  money,
equally  true,  in  the  reverse:  Money  is  time—which  will  form  a
fundamental principle in his art of living, as is testied in the last
paragraph of the November 17 note:
“For a man who is ‘well born,’ to be happy is to partake of
the common lot not with the will to renunciation, but with
the will to happiness. In order to be happy, time is necessary
—a great deal of time. Happiness too is a long patience. And
time is the need for money which robs us of it. Time can be

bought. Everything can be bought. To be rich is to have time
to be happy when one is worthy of being so.”
Thus the various materials of the novel are regrouped according
to the pairing time lost and time won. Time lost is that of poverty,
work,  everyday  life:  the  chapter  devoted  to  Mersault’s  life  is
entitled “Killing Time,” a title which would also suit the aair with
Marthe and the trip in central Europe; the murder of Zagreus will
end this wretched odyssey of time lost. Time won will be the time
spent in the House above the World and in ight into nature. At
this point, on a manuscript page, appears an outline in three parts
whose initial chapter, each time, is devoted to time. The rst part
consists  of  seven  chapters,  from  “Killing  Time,”  which  include
Mersault’s  life  from  the  Algerian  adventures  to  the  return  from
Prague (i.e.,  this page – this page  of the nal version): “First from
‘killing  time,’  ”  Camus  writes,  “to  ‘he  felt  he  was  made  for
happiness.’ ”  This last phrase occurs in virtually the same form on
this page  of the nal version: “he understood at last that he was
made for happiness.”
The  rst  chapter  of  the  second  part  is  then  entitled  “Gaining
Time”—it  concerns  the  House  above  the  World—and  the  rst
chapter of the third part, “Time.” If we think of Proust, we see the
novel proceeding from time lost, that of work, to time gained or
won, that of idleness in the “budding grove” of the House above
the  World,  to  time  regained,  which  is  harmony  with  nature  in
solitude  and  death,  summarized  by  a  succinct  note  on  the
manuscript of the last page: “Time.” “First does a lot of things and
then abandons everything. Does nothing at all. Follows time and
above all the seasons (diary!).” Time, having become the standard
of happiness, the principal theme, gives the novel its frame and its
rhythm. The present/past alternation of the rst sketches was not
inductive. Now, from the pulverized time of the rst part to the
atemporal process of the third, the current is to pass through and
connect the atonal descriptions to the lyrical accents.
Thus we come to the novel’s nal form, its contraction into two
parts,  which  can  be  explained  by  two  reasons:  rst,  Camus’s

embarrassment regarding the erotic or emotional episodes. He had
to restrict them. In the outline mentioned above, the second part,
after “Gaining Time,” announced “Encounter with Lucienne,” then
“Catherine’s  departure.”  Camus  either  could  not  or  would  not
organize enough material under these headings. Subsequently the
Zagreus episode became important enough to form the core of a
system. The ight into central Europe, which was originally linked
to sexual jealousy, was transferred to this system.
But Camus clung to his three-part division. Whence still another
outline, the last before the nal contraction:
Part I. 1: The workingmen’s neighborhood; 2: Patrice Mersault;
3: Patrice and Marthe; 4: (erased) P. and his friends (?); 5:
Patrice and Zagreus.
Part II. 1: Murder of Zagreus; 2: ight into anxiety; 3: return to
happiness.
Part  III.  1:  The  women  and  the  sun;  2:  secret  and  ardent
happiness at Tipasa; 3: the happy death.
The  denitive  title  has  been  found,  but  applied  to  the  last
chapter. The Zagreus episode has not yet found its proper place. It
remains to transfer the murder rst to the end and then to the
beginning of the rst part. Then the second part, reduced to the
journey and the return, is too thin—it is integrated into the last
part, and a common title, “Conscious Death,” sanctions the fusion,
evoking a parallel title: “Natural Death.” On the other hand, the
chapters  that  were  given  titles—“The  House  above  the  World,”
then “The Women and the Sun”—now follow without them, in the
unusual  use  of  the  present  indicative  following  the  return  from
Prague.  Thus  was  rewritten  (“rewrite  Novel,”  Camus  enjoined
himself in June 1938), completed, or at least reworked,  A Happy
Death.
Why wasn’t it published? We shall hold to only the purely literary
reasons here. According to M. Castex’s study of  The Stranger , the

latter supplanted  A Happy Death  in Camus’s intentions, and we can
see,  during  August  1937—the  critical  period  of  that  novel’s
gestation—the  surreptitious  appearance  of  the  theme  of  The
Stranger.  M. Castex quotes this text:
A man who has looked for life where it is ordinarily found
(marriage, job, etc.) and who suddenly realizes, reading a
fashion magazine, how alien he has been to life (life as it is
considered  in  fashion  magazines)  ...  which  gives  the  rst
formulation  of  the  theme,  although  it  refers  to  A  Happy
Death.
This  hypothesis  is  correct.  We  may  conrm  it  by
examining the novelistic value of  A Happy Death.  Apparently
Camus felt, as he was creating it, the latent defect of his rst
novel and another ctional possibility.
A work “both clumsily composed and remarkably written,”
Roger  Quilliot  notes.  It  cannot  be  better  put.  The  stylistic
virtues are astonishing, but not those of a novelist. Camus
vainly  tries  to  organize  and  unify  his  disparate  materials.
What  relation  is  there  between  the  ctional  murder  of
Zagreus  and  the  chronicle  of  the  actual  trip  to  Prague?
between  the  portrait  of  the  wretched  Cardona  and  the
evocation of the House above the World? The disparity in
tone aggravates that of the episodes, without our being able
to excuse it by a deliberate recourse to contrast: the pathetic,
the  playful,  the  vulgar,  the  curtly  descriptive,  the  warmly
sensual,  the  sun-drenched  lyrical  alternate  without  any
accommodation  to  one  another.  The  episodes  are  too
numerous  and  on  occasion  overlap.  Thus,  after  Mersault’s
mother’s  death,  we  are  made  to  suer  that  of  Cardona’s
mother. The women’s parts, especially, are badly handled:
the  trio  of  “grinds”  is  unbalanced  by  Catherine,  who
originally—according  to  the  rst  sketches—had  an  aair
with Mersault, but Lucienne could have availed herself of the
same advantage. The outlines call for an aair sometimes
with one, sometimes with the other. We also encounter the

name of a certain Lucile. Marthe, as seen from a correction,
will  replace  her  and  assume  a  part  of  the  roles  of  both
Lucienne and Catherine. She will be the link of time lost,
Catherine  that  of  time  regained.  Certainly  Camus  is  not
comfortable with his women! They obstruct the nymphosis of
his novel and aord a literary illustration of the proverb:
“Grasp all, lose all.” In the nal version, we feel Camus’s
eort to establish their respective attributes,  to follow their
wake or to prepare their entrance. The result is mediocre.
Had  he  worked  still  harder,  might  he  have  succeeded
better?  A Happy Death , as a novel, is doomed in its principle.
“The quality of a novel,” as M. Coulet has recently remarked
on the genre, “depends on the tension in which are united
exact observation and the correction or investigation of the
real by the imaginary.” No novel escapes this rule. But in  A
Happy Death  the elements of observation,  i.e. , the fragments
of  autobiography,  remain  disjointed:  memories  of  the
workingmen’s neighborhood, of the sanatorium, of the House
above the World, of the trip to central Europe, of the female
gures are not, in the chemical sense, treated in order to
unite in “a whole, a closed and unied world” like Proust’s,
which  The Rebel  exemplies. They would form a whole only
if  reworked  by  the  creative  imagination.  And  the  creative
imagination, in  A Happy Death , functions only on the level of
style.  The  invention  of  episodes  or  characters  is
impoverished indeed: neither the murder of Zagreus, inspired
by  Man’s Fate   or  Crime  and  Punishment ,  nor  the  character
himself  attains  ctional  authenticity.  In  this  impossible
novel, only the autobiographical scenes are valid, which are
analogous to the vein of “L’Envers et l’Endroit” (“The Wrong
Side  and  The  Right  Side”)  and  not  formally  distinct  from
“L’Ironie” (“Irony”) or “La Mort dans l’âme” (“Death in the
Soul”)  or  the  lyrical  evocations  related  to  those  of  Noces
( Nuptials ). The best elements in the novel are not novelistic.
Did Camus feel this so clearly? He never says as much. But
it is more than likely that his artistic subconscious at least

warned  him  of  the  danger  and  attracted  him,  without  his
realizing it, in a more protable direction. To borrow from
Gide a suggestive comparison from the naturalist’s domain,
within the chrysalis of  A Happy Death  was forming  the larva
of  The  Stranger.  A  Happy  Death   accomplished  its  deceptive
nymphosis, its author took pains to rewrite it, to rework all
its parts, but  The Stranger , like a kind of inspired parasite,
derived  all  the  benet  of  this  labor,  which,  ultimately,
instead of a false novel, was to produce a true  récit.
We may conclude by a brief parallel between  A Happy Death
and  The Stranger.  (In any exhaustive study, the parallel with
Caligula  would be inescapable.) Roger Quillit has shown that
“Mersault  is  ...  the  younger  brother  of  Mersault”;  he  has
pointed out that certain episodes and secondary characters
are common to both texts, but he is particularly sensitive to
the  dierences,  and  can  write:  “The  two  plots  have  no
relation ...,” or: “ A Happy Death  is in no way the matrix of
The Stranger:  it is an altogether dierent book ...”
However, despite the obvious dierences in plot, structure,
and intention, we may see in  A Happy Death  a preguration
of  The Stranger  and even, setting aside the biological sense of
the term, its matrix. To be convinced of this, we need merely
compare the structure of the two works:  A Happy Death  in its
nal  version  is  reduced  to  two  parts.  The  transition  from
ternary  to  binary  division  signies  for  Camus  the
abandonment  of  a  classical  articulation,  in  which  the
synthesis  of  contraries  is  eected,  for  the  sake  of  a  more
personal dialectic in which the contraries are short-circuited.
From this point of view,  The Stranger  is merely a tracing of  A
Happy Death : it is also in two parts, and has virtually the
same number of chapters (6 and 5 instead of 5 and 5). The
scheme  of  the  rst  part,  in  both  books,  is  noticeably  the
same:  scenes  of  everyday  life,  then  conversation  with  the
man with the dog (Salamano or Cardona), then a murder (of
Zagreus, moved to  the beginning, by artice,  in extremis , or

of the Arab). This murder transfers the hero from the realm
of the factitious to that of truth. Apparently the respective
second parts have nothing in common. Certainly the trip to
Prague  or  the  House  above  the  World,  elements
unassimilable  to  a  symbolic  récit ,  have  vanished  from  The
Stranger.  But if we consider Mersault in his isolation in the
Chenoua  and  Meursault  in  his  Algerian  prison,  we  shall
discover, in the rhythm of the visits which distract them, of
the seasons which stir them, of the imponderable time which
conducts them to their nal hour, a correspondence. And if
their fate seems quite dissimilar because one has committed
a perfect crime from which he benets while the other, a
clumsy murderer, becomes the victim of his judges, we must
not  forget  that  their  shared  problem  is  that  of  the  happy
death—“The Stranger or a Happy Man” is is the subtitle of
one manuscript—and that both men solve it victoriously, in
harmony with the world and released from humanity.
This is merely the sketch of a comparison which a close
study,  attached  less  to  the  substance  than  to  the  style  of
these two works, could establish in depth. The superiority of
The Stranger  would be merely emphasized. But may we not
merely  say,  nally,  that  A  Happy  Death ,  not  published  by
Camus,  is  a  document  rather  than  a  work,  and  that  it  is
enough in the long run that there gure in this document, to
be accounted for in the dossier of his genius, certain positive
elements? We leave the reader the pleasure of discovering
them for himself.
The  les  in  the  possession  of  Mme  Camus  contain  two
versions  of  A  Happy  Death   typed  by  Camus.  The  rst  is
amplied by manuscript additions and corrections that are
typed in the second, along with several variants. In May  and
June  of  1961,  Mme  Camus  had  three  copies  of  a  new
typescript  prepared,  representing  the  rst  typescript  on
which the variants of the second are registered in ink. The
present  edition  reproduces  this  typescript,  following  the

correction of certain errors of transcription. The variants of
the  second  typescript,  though  not  in  Camus’s  hand,  were
doubtless made with his consent and have been, for the most
part, retained.
In this typescript the divisions into chapters are indicated
by  a  blank.  We  have  nonetheless  restored  the  numerals
which  existed  in  the  rst  typescript,  and  which  are  to  be
found, as well, in  The Stranger.
There  also  exist  preparatory  dossiers  and  notes  for  A
Happy Death , to which must be added the fragments in the
Notebooks. These, in manuscript form, but generally in very
disjunct  fragments,  constitute  nearly  the  entire  novel,  for
which there exists no manuscript version except for the third
chapter of the second part.
In order to show how the various fragments of the novel
have  been  assembled,  a  choice  of  the  variants  has  been
made. Those taken from the preparatory dossiers and notes
are designated by Ms., those taken from the rst typescript
by T. When the  Notebooks  have been drawn on, the fact has
been indicated. In the case of some chapters, we have been
able to compare several manuscript texts, which have been
carefully distinguished.
Words or phrases scratched out on the typescript or the
manuscript  have  been  put  in  parentheses  in  the  Notes.
Words and phrases in italics indicate variant readings.
The establishment of these notes and variants, as of the
text  itself,  owes  a  great  deal  to  Mme  Camus,  whom  we
herewith thank.
Jean Sarocchi

Notes and Variants

 

PART ONE   Natural Death
The signicance of this title relates to “The Wind at Djemila” in
Noces  ( Nuptials )  and  to  a  manuscript  fragment  of  “Entre  oui  et
non” (“Between Yes and No”).
Chapter 1
A series of manuscript pages gives successively chapters 4 and 1.
As we know, Chapter 1 was originally Chapter 5.
1  The name Mersault may be regarded as a combination of  mer
(sea) and  soleil  (sun).
2  What is the source of the name Zagreus? Was Camus thinking of
Orphism’s  Dionysos-Zagreus,  victim  of  the  Titans,  whose  heart
gave birth to the Theban Dionysos of popular legend? In which
case Zagreus would be a Promethean gure, belonging to the type
of  sacricial  being  who  aords  liberation.  This  is  merely  a
conjecture.
3  Ms.: deserted.  This was two days after his conversation with Roland.
4  Ms.: hillside,  like the proud laughter of the golden earth.
5  Ms.: his gloves.  Everything depended on knowing if the chest was
unlocked and the revolver loaded.
6  knocked. (“You can come in, Mersault,” Zagreus said.)

7  Ms.: Zagreus was there in his study by the re.
T.: Zagreus was there in his study of course, sitting in an armchair
with a blanket over the stumps of his legs.
8  Ms.: rejoiced,  showing all its blue and gleaming teeth ,
9  Ms.: A great icy joy, a  classical dance of the world over the little
valley
10  Ms.: an expression  that combined the child and the mandarin. It
was the very aspect of truth which smiled at Mersault out of the sky.
11   The  manuscript  text  includes  another  paragraph,  beginning
“That evening, still in bed, he sent for the neighborhood doctor,”
which is now to be found at the end of Chapter 5.
Chapter 2
This  is  the  most  laboriously  and  the  least  skillfully  composed
chapter in the novel. It consists of several fragments, all intended
to create the impression of a prosaic and routine existence. In all
the sketches and outlines for  The Right Death  where it gures, it is
located in Part One. In the  Notebooks  for August 1937, we read:
“Part One. His life hitherto.” Or: “Part One. A1. M. Mersault’s day
seen from outside. B1. Workingmen’s neighborhod of Paris ( word
illegible ). Horse butcher’s. Patrice and his family. The mute. The
grandmother.”  Some  of  these  elements  will  be  transferred  to
Chapter 5.
Considerably  later  an  outline  species:  “Part  One:  1  the
workingmen’s neighborhood; 2 Patrice Mersault ...” and  at about
the same date, two plans for Part One are given as follows on the
same page:

Part One.
Mersault goes home. Detail ... Sunday. His dead mother (the
butcher  shop  across  the  street  To  Man’s  Noblest  Conquest ).
Sign:  to  rent.  (His  oce.  His  neighbor  the  barrelmaker.
Knock at the door. The barrelmaker asking him to come with
him to the graveyard.)
The lthy street.
1 Marthe waits for him impatiently (her jealousies)
2 Marthe and her indelities; jealousy; her rst lover Zagreus
3 Zagreus and conversation.
This outline is crossed out and replaced by the following one:
a) Mersault goes home. Detail. Sunday.
b) His house. Horse butcher’s. His neighbor the barrelmaker
and his sister. (Today M.’s mother died. Story of the ...  word
illegible )
At the restaurant: M. Lopez who eats at his table ...  several
words illegible
c) Marthe
d) Zagreus.
We may note that if the chapter’s place is ascertained—it is still
the rst—its substance as well as its composition is indeterminate;
for  example,  the  restaurant  scene,  initially  to  come  after  the
description of Mersault’s house and Sunday, will be moved to an
earlier place in the nal version. The barrelmaker’s story will be
isolated and transferred to Chapter 5.
No  complete  manuscript  exists  of  this  chapter,  composed  of
various fragments, some of which are taken from the  rst version
of “Voix du quartier pauvre” in  L’Envers et l’Endroit  (“The Wrong
Side and the Right Side” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays )

A.  The harbor, the injured man, racing for the truck with Emmanuel.
This part of the text was added much later to the chapter, and in
the manuscript ends with “When they reached Belcourt, Mersault
got o. Emmanuel went on ...” Sketches for this text are to be
found in the  Notebooks , I, pp. 23–4.
B.  For the rest of the chapter , after the arrival at Belcourt, a series
of manuscript pages forms an arrangement.
a)  Up to the restaurant.  Mersault’s actions are the subject of a
fragment  which  has  been  added  to  the  typescript.  On  the
manuscript pages, Emmanuel is named Marcel.
1  Ms.: young and vigorous,  under the anonymous jacket
2  Ms.: joy,  discovery
3   Ms.:  from  sports.  And  if  this  knowledge  overemphasized  the
“handsome  fellow”  aspect  in  Mersault,  at  the  same  time  his  body
inspired an instructive self-condence.
b)  Celeste’s anecdote.
   This is left blank on the manuscript pages, which merely
note, as a transition, the following episode:
“Good for him,” Mersault said, in order to say something.
“Oh you can’t be a bastard in life. All the same ...”
This anecdote exists in three manuscript versions, one inserted in
the hospital conversations. It was not, therefore, in a café that it
was taken from life.
4   The  earliest  manuscript  version  contains  this  sentence:
“Something in this man expressed the intelligence and frankness
inseparable from a simple heart.”

5   Ms.:  Fine  with  me.’  ”  Louis  ddled  with  the  tassels  of  a  rep
cushion  ...
   The name Louis, which preceded that of Mersault, designates
Camus in the hospital fragments.
6  Ms.: the wind was blowing.  He laughed self-indulgently. But just
when Louis stood up to leave, he suddenly said to him: “You always
have to look at life from the right side, and walk straight ahead.” Louis
was already out in the street. He walked very fast, avoided a shoeshine
boy, pushed another away, then stopped short and yielded his foot to a
third.
c)  Emmanuel’s anecdote.
      This  is  sketched  in  the  manuscript  pages.  It  is  obviously
another  anecdote  taken  from  life,  but  it  does  not  exist  in
extenso  in manuscript. Another hospital recollection? In any
case, Emmanuel is too young to have participated in the battle
of the Marne.
d)  the owner and his son.
e)  the  anecdote  about  Jean  Perez ,  left  blank  in  the  manuscript
pages.  It  is  taken  from  the  pages  of  the  text  “l’Hôpital  du
quartier pauvre.”
f)  Mersault’s reections , his return home (up to “he had kept the
best room for himself”).
7  Ms.: ate his  banana
8  Ms.: on his back.  His arms did the rest.
g)  the mother’s death; the burial.  
   Blank on the manuscript pages. This text, developed in the
rst  chapter  of  The  Stranger ,  reveals  one  of  Camus’s
obsessions:  death  of  the  mother,  the  wife,  or  even  of  the
mistress. Camus is never tired of writing on this theme.

   In what appears to be the earliest text from which this one
proceeds, the bereaved is not Mersault (Camus), but a trucker
—“inhabitant of the workingmen’s neighborhood”—who loses
his wife. The text  in extenso  follows:
A young man must have a powerful imagination to believe
he can grow old. And were it not for death, few would ever
believe they had. Thus this man’s life had been surprised by
old  age.  His  family’s  existence  had  been  conned  to  this
neighborhood, where they lived according to the opinion of
their neighbors and the pity of the world.
A beautiful woman enjoys—and expects to enjoy—a life of
diversion,  a  life  of  pleasure.  This  man’s  wife  had  been
beautiful, and she had expected to enjoy a life of diversion
and pleasure. He was a trucker, and worked hard all during
their  married  life.  They  had  had  two  daughters,  both  of
whom  were  married.  And  a  lame  son  who  was  a  leather-
worker and lived with his parents.
At about forty, this woman had been stricken by a terrible
disease. She was, etc., enriched by her heedless life. For a
decade  she  dragged  out  an  unendurable  existence.  This
martyrdom lasted so long that those around her ... she could
die.
She had a tubercular nephew who occasionally came to see
her.  She  enjoyed  his  visits  because  she  felt  on  an  equal
footing with him. But he was very young, and his natural
cowardice shrank from these ( illegible ) which sapped all his
resistance.
One day she died. She was fty-six. She had married very
young. Then her husband realized how old he was. He had
worked too hard to notice up till now. People felt sorry for
him.  In  the  neighborhood,  they  looked  forward  to  the
funeral.  They  recalled  the  husband’s  deep  feeling  for  the
dead woman. The daughters were warned not to cry, so that
their father would not give way to his grief. He was urged
not to mourn, to take care of himself. Meanwhile, the man

dressed in his best clothes. And with his hat in his hand, he
watched the arrangements, etc., that was all.
However, he immediately sold his truck, despite his lack of
means,  paid  his  debts,  and  then  found  himself  poor  and
penniless. He lived with one of his daughters now, spending
long days on the balcony. He had left his old neighborhood.
On the house where he had lived was a sign: For Rent, and
speculation over its meaning never ceased.
Another  manuscript,  virtually  without  erasures  and
obviously subsequent to the one just quoted, gives virtually
the  same  text,  but  begins  with  this  sentence  added  to  the
preceding  manuscript,  a  sentence  Camus  appears  to  have
valued  for  its  own  sake:  “A  beautiful  woman,  she  had
enjoyed—and expected to enjoy—a life of diversion, a life of
pleasure.”  Then:  “Her  husband  was  a  trucker  ...,”  etc.
Another modication in the last sentence may be noted: “this
sign: For Rent, which always means more than it says.”
h)  Mersault’s attachment to his room.
   The manuscript pages, after the blank left for the insertion
of the mother’s death and burial, continue:
But he had had to abandon his studies and his ambitions and
take a job. At rst he had resisted, he  had wanted to live for
himself, work, write, have a life of his own. Later on, he had
given  it  all  up  and  tried  to  expunge  his  own  life.  He
wakened, etc. (Mersault at the oce).
i)  Mersault at the oce.
   This text is given  in extenso  in the manuscript pages.
j)  Mersault at home.
   Idem.
9  Ms.: M. Langlois.  M. Langlois had read Courteline.

10  Ms.: in front of his name  or in an inuential position.
11  Ms.: strutting  and slobbering
12  Ms.: vegetables.  The secretaries were giggling openly. The old lady
bending  (illegible)  glancing up and still writing nally announced: “I
should appreciate it, M. Langlois, if you would do without my approval.”
    “One to zero,” P. said calmly. And he listened to the thousand noises
of the harbor behind the walls  (illegible)  tasting of salt and blood, so
remote and yet so close to him.  Then comes the line:  In the evening he
returned at 6 o’clock—It was Saturday.
13  Ms.: pasted  carefully  into a booklet  printed for the purpose
14  Ms.: beautiful,  sultry
15  Ms.: silk dress  and cloche hat ,
16  T.: The chapter ends as follows:
bread.  He  scratched  his  head  and  walked  toward  the  mirror,
meeting himself. He yawned and turned toward his bed. Already
he was taking o his shoes. He said: “Another Sunday shot.”
17  Ms. his windows.  He went to bed and slept till the next morning,
when he left for his oce.  For several years he lived this way, except
for certain evenings when Marthe came or when he went out with
her,  certain rarer Sundays which he shared with Zagreus and Marthe’s
girlfriends.
Here the manuscript pages end.
Chapter 3

Devoted to relations between Marthe and Mersault, this chapter, in
the rst outlines, was to take its place in the second part of the
novel, and was to be subdivided. Thus, in the rst outline in the
Notebooks , if we read Marthe instead of Lucienne, we nd:
Chapter B1 Recollections. Liaison with Lucienne.
Chapter B2 Lucienne describes her indelities.
Chapter B4 Sexual jealousy. Salzburg. Prague.
It will be noted that the trip and the liaison, by means of sexual
jealousy, are linked as eect to cause.
Somewhat later Camus sketches, among his six stories, that of
“sexual jealousy.” An outline dated August 1937 species, in the
second part; “... Liaison with Catherine ... Caught in the game.
Sexual jealousy. Flight.” Catherine now takes the role of Lucienne.
But  in  this  same  month,  another  sketch  situates  the  episode  of
sexual  jealousy  in  the  rst  part,  right  at  the  beginning.  This
episode  and  that  of  the  trip  which  follows  it  then  form  the
essentials of the plot, as this note proves: “Reduce and condense.
Story of sexual jealousy which leads to departure. Return to life.”
Later, when Marthe’s name has been adopted, the two episodes are
again united; this results in a partial outline
1 Liaison with Marthe ...
2 Marthe describes her indelities
3 Innsbruck and Salzburg operetta
the letter and the room
departure with fever
The heading “Liaison with Marthe” is followed by a bracket in
which can be made out, among several names, that of Othello. Did
Camus  want  to  make  some  reference  to  Shakespeare’s  study  of
jealousy? A curious text, which begins with “O! beware, my lord, of
jealousy  /  It  is  the  green-ey’d  monster”  suggests  as  much.  But
Camus will decide that Iago, Desdemona, and the Moor of Venice
have  nothing  to  do  with  Algiers,  where  Mersault  walks  with
Marthe on his arm. Moreover, he will reduce the importance of this

aair and cut it by the trip to central Europe. The only trace of the
old connection, at the end of the rst part, is found in the letter
breaking o the aair.
Of  this  third  chapter  two  manuscripts  exist,  one  for  the  rst
pages,  down  to  “all  the  shame  and  humiliation  that  had  been
awakened  in  Mersault’s  angry  heart,”  and  the  penultimate
paragraph,  down  to  “...  and  after  that  he  went  back  to  visit
Zagreus by himself,” the rest originally forming the beginning of
the chapter devoted to their conversation, the other for the rest of
the chapter, from “That was the day Mersault began to be attached
to  Marthe”  to  “He  wanted  to  meet  him,  and  his  relations  with
Zagreus  began  that  evening.  He  saw  him  frequently,  visiting
almost every Sunday morning.”
1  Ms.: some delicate intoxication,  designating him as its owner in the
world’s eyes.
2  Ms.: compared to the  crystalline brilliance of a woman’s face, in
which all the beauty and futility of the world appears, ultimate luxury of
a man’s life, given up to (pleasure?) and preoccupation.
3  Ms.: in his temples  and his eyes go blank.
4  Ms.: soiled,  transformed into a sordid scene in which rags dangled
above garbage.
5  T.: already asked you not to.
          “Yes, darling.”
6   According  to  Chapter  4,  Zagreus  is  at  least  fty;  hence  it  is
dicult  to  imagine  that  Marthe,  though  younger  than  Zagreus,
should be young enough for Mersault.

7  Ms.: Rose, Claire,  Catherine.  We may note that Camus’s mother
was named  Catherine  Sintès.
8  Ms.: Oran
9   Ms.  before  he  spoke.  Then  he  would  speak  fast  and  volubly,
generally  laughing,  but  drawing  swift  conclusions  which  were  always
concrete and gave a curious weight of experience to his most trivial
jokes. He was alive, that   was what was striking. This trunk of a man
was alive, and in his eyes appeared occasional dim gleams of a kind of
concentrated passion which was never melancholy.
Chapter 4
1  Ms.: at the oce.  Still I know the secret and ardent life I would have
if I had turned into a success, as the saying goes.
   It should be noted that in one of the last outlines, Chapter 2 of
Part II is called “ secret and ardent  happiness at Tipasa.”
2  Ms.: lled with warmth. “ Listen, Mersault. God knows I’m fond of
you. And you’ve already told me  ...”
    “Yes,” Mersault said. “Win or lose. I’ve lost, and that just suits my
laziness.”
3   Ms.:  Zagreus  smiled  and  said  abruptly:  “You’re  the  cripple,  my
friend,” and went on while Mersault blushed: “You live like an idiot,
and you think you’re smart.”
4  Ms.: sun bakes it.  The sun is the real mirror of the world.
5  Ms.: body’s limits (a kind of promise of happiness)
6  Ms.: But  I couldn’t care less about self-knowledge.

7   Ms.:  (opening  like  a  bottomless  pit  into  which  Mersault  felt
himself being dragged)
The preceding sentences in this paragraph do not appear in the
manuscript.
8  This sentence is added to the typescript.
9   Ms.:  And  yet  I  feel  entirely  consonant  with  this  human   ( and
desperate and protean )  image of the world which is my own life.
10  This last phrase is added to the typescript.
11  Ms.: smiled,  as though pleased at having guessed right.
12  Ms.: can stand,  have killed my will to happiness.
13   Purity  of  heart  is  one  of  the  major  problems  in  Camus.  He
attempts to distinguish it from virtue (see the end of  Chapter 4 ,
Part II: “in the innocence of his heart,” taken up like a refrain).
Kierkegaard annoyed Camus by linking it with virtue or goodness:
“Purity  of  heart  for  K.  is  unity.  But  it  is  unity  and   the  good.”
( Notebooks , II, p. 55) Camus’s entire moral development is located
within this problematic conjunction.
14  In the manuscript, Zagreus refers to the loss of his legs in the
war (it is to be recalled that Camus’s father was mortally wounded
in the battle of the Marne). The reference to the First World War
was  crossed  out  in  the  second  typescript  and  replaced  by  “the
accident.”
page 45 According to the  Notebooks , I, p. 21, it is apparently the
novel’s hero who plays with the revolver.

Chapter 5
A  number  of  texts—typescripts,  manuscripts,  documents  from
previously printed sources—draw on, transpose, and scarcely alter
Camus’s  family  circle  and  its  situation  in  the  description  of  the
barrelmaker  Cardona,  a  “voice  from  the  workingmen’s
neighborhood”   transcribed   with   particular   concern   for
autobiographical veracity.

PART TWO   Conscious Death
Chapter 1
The trip to Central Europe, complicated by a love aair, violently
aected Camus’s sensibility. Prague, for him, represented exile, the
wrong side (“ l’envers ”) of the kingdom. It will therefore come as no
surprise that this rst chapter—an elaborated extract of a travel
journal—was prepared from several texts. One gures in  L’Envers
et l’Endroit  (“The Wrong Side and the Right Side”) under the title
“La  Mort  dans  l’âme”  (“Death  in  the  Soul”).  According  to  a
manuscript version of this particular text, the description of the
dead man in the street has been transposed from Algiers, where it
actually  was  observed,  to  the  city  of  exile;  this  manuscript  is
designated here by Ms. 1.
1  Ms.: the man (Mersault)
2  Ms.: against their own demons (against the cruel grimaces of
life)
3  Ms. 1: left cheek.  He seemed dead drunk.
4  Ms. 1: a kind of wild  Sioux  dance
5   Ms.  1:  from  the  nearby  restaurant.  It  was  eleven  o’clock,  on
Christmas night ... Despite  the rather oppressive interplay of light
and shadow,  there was something about the scene that was not erce
and barbaric but instead a kind of primitive innocence.
6   Ms.  1:  everything  would  collapse  until  it  could  be  understood
without eort.

    And in fact everything would soon be explained. The police were
coming. The body was not that of a drunk, but of a dead man, his
friend dancing around him.
    Only half an hour before, they had knocked at the door of a little
restaurant  in  the  neighborhood.  They  had  already  had  too  much  to
drink and wanted something to eat. But it was Christmas night, and no
restaurant  had  room  for  them.  Though  shown  the  door,  they  had
insisted, and been thrown out. Then they had kicked the proprietress,
who happened to be pregnant. And the proprietor, a delicate, blond
young man, had picked up a gun and red. The bullet had lodged in
the man’s right temple.  The head was turned so that it rested on the
wound.  Drunk and terror-stricken, the friend had begun dancing.
    The episode was simple enough, and would end tomorrow with an
article in the newspaper, but for the moment , in this remote corner,
between the faint light on the moist pavement, the long wet hiss of
passing cars a few steps away, the distant screech of occasional
streetcars,  the scene acquired the disturbing quality of another world:
the insipid  and disturbing image of this neighborhood. When twilight
lls the streets with shadows, a single anonymous ghost indicated by a
faint sound of footsteps and a confused murmur of voices sometimes
appears, haloed by the red light from a pharmacy lamp  ...
   The manuscript ends here.
7  Cf. the newspaper that Meursault, in  The Stranger , nds in his
cell, between the mattress and the bedsprings, in which he reads
the story which is the source of  Cross-Purposes  ( Le Malentendu ).
8  Ms.:  silence into which he drained as though into sleep.
Chapter 2
1   Ms.:  take  it.  (At  the  Austrian  border,  the  customs  ocers
wakened him from a kind of shapeless dream. Because of it and
doubtless  too  because  of  his  haggard  features  Mersault  had  to

undergo  a  lengthy  questioning.  His  papers  were  minutely
examined ...)
2  Ms.: an image of the ungrateful  and desolate  world T.: a  symbol
of the ungrateful ...
3  T.: What are you up to?  Whence do you come? What are you?
Whither do you go?
4  T.: The House  above the World
5  T.: re-enlisting;  subscribing to L’Illustration.
page 79 The sojourn in Genoa actually dates from the autumn of
1937, a year later. In ctional elaboration, it is located just after
Prague.
7   This  sentence  does  not  gure  in  the  manuscript.  Camus  had
noted it on a separate sheet.
8  Ms.: vanity,  the strongest link of all
9  Ms.: to be run.  He had won his right to happiness.
Chapter 3
No manuscript of this chapter has been found except for a passage
concerning Lucienne contained in a fragment of  Notebooks, I  (pp.
81–2)  relating  to  Marthe.  All  the  variants  are  taken  from  the
typescript.
1  But Rose intervened,  always ready to defend Claire.

2  immerses her  in a calm that oods her soul.
3  keep their  truths.
4   Instead  of  the  passage  beginning  “Rose  comes  over  to  the
parapet ...”: “He loves what is the world in her, if not what is the
woman. She yields her whole weight to him, nestling her warmth
in the hollow of Patrice’s shoulder. He murmurs: ‘It will be dicult,
but that’s no reason.’
   “ ‘No,’ Catherine says, her eyes lled with the stars.”
Chapter 4
There exists one manuscript version of this entire chapter, as well
as a manuscript page of a passage concerning Lucienne and two
manuscript  sheets  of  the  rst  dialogue  between  Patrice  and
Catherine. The variants taken from the separate manuscript sheets
are designated as Ms. 2.
The  portion  of  this  chapter  up  to  Patrice’s  departure  from  the
House above the World has been inserted. Originally the chapter
began  with  the  marriage  to  Lucienne  and  the  dialogue  with
Catherine.
1  Ms. 2: Catherine had asked.
    “I’m not happy. I have been happy, little girl, but now I’m like a
sponge squeezed dry, all shriveled up.”
2  Ms. 2: for themselves.  But what’s the good of cheating? What they
want is to love, or to be loved. I’m old enough to have that to look
forward to.”

3  Ms. 2:  Men who are tired of loving don’t deserve to be loved. If I was
tired of this face lled with light that the world can show me, which
smiles  today  in  the  sky  and  on  the  water,  I  wouldn’t  deserve  the
world.”
4   Ms.  2:  “What  I’d  like,”  she  said,  “is  that  you  would  always  do
whatever you do without thinking of me.”
    Patrice turned around, his hand on the window latch, and sincerely:
“I’m  not  thinking  about  you,  little  girl.  I’d  rather  not  lie.  I  haven’t
thought about love for one minute. Understand me—if I’m telling you
this, it’s because I respect you. Being afraid to make you suer would
be a way of not respecting you.”
    “Yes,” Catherine said. “Thank you.”
5  Ms. 2: white birds.  Now he could see the tears lling her eyes as she
stared  at  him,  and  he  felt  rising  within  him  an  immense  tide  of
tenderness without love. He took her hands  ...
6  Ms. 2: shoulder.  “I have love.”
7  Ms. 2: strangely hard.  Incapable of loving, of shedding a single tear,
what right did he have to speak of love in the name of nothing but love
of life.
8  Ms. 2: and owers.  But that was what he was compelled to by the
blind, black god he would henceforth serve.
9  Ms.: ask of you.  For the rest, the same youth which has brought us
together will separate us someday. There’s more for me to do.”
10   T.  adapt  himself  to  everything.  (endure  life,  test  it,  which
continued in his esh and in his darkness. Of course. But he had to
want to endure it and to apply his will to the point of no longer
having any. That was everything.)

11  Ms.: capacity for  silence
12  Ms.: He  knew
13  Ms.: (Claire, Rose, and Catherine)
14  Ms.: better now.  Act in order to be happy: If I have to settle down
do it here in a place I like.
15  Ms.: not forcing ourselves  for other people.
16  Ms.: hoped it would.
    “Oh, it’s all right that way. A man’s destiny is never anything but a
secret pain.”
17  Ms.: with nature.  Unless,” he went on, staring at Mersault,  “unless
you’ve  come  here  the  way  you  withdraw  from  the  world  before
achieving some great project that will be the meaning of your life.”
    “For me,” Mersault said, “what seems great is the withdrawing. All
the rest is politics.”
18  Ms.: or on a tremendous  secret. ”
19   Apparently  in  the  early  sketches  for  the  novel,  Camus
anticipated  his  hero  would  discuss  his  hopes  of  his  literary
vocation. There exists a sketch for the third part ( Notebooks , I, p.
13) in which he condes in Catherine:
   Chapter 1: “Catherine,” says Patrice, “I know that now I am
going to write. The story of the condemned man. I have come back
to my real function, which is to write.”
20  Ms.:  “Goodbye, darling,” Lucienne said.

21  Ms.: Three  four
Chapter 5
The manuscript of this chapter consists of pages of various sizes.
Apparently  it  was  composed  in  several  stages,  from  various
sources, for example the rst paragraph which pregures the text
of “Les Amandiers” (“The Almond Trees”) in  L’Été  ( Summer ).
1  Ms.: his own body too,  and followed it inwardly, but with the same
truth as  ...
2  Ms.: a kind of eternity  of esh
3  Ms.: he was  hardened to pain
4  Ms.: you can stay.  Only don’t talk. ”
5  Ms.: left.  Night was falling.
6  Ms.: amazing.”
“What’s going to happen to me?” Lucienne asked.
“Nothing,” Mersault said.
7  T.: impotence,  all those who had not been able to nd eternity in the
esh
8  Ms.: this moment  when he realized how little freedom it had , his
body
T.: this moment  when he felt it so close to him , his body
9   Ms.:  cowardice,  far  from  the  touching  and  tragic  comfort  whose
crucixes people Europe.

   In Malraux’s rst novel, Camus could have read: “Of course there
is a higher faith, the faith proposed by all the village crucixes,
and those same crosses which stand over our dead. That faith is
love, and there is consolation in it. I shall never accept it.”
The  last  sentences  of  the  novel  were  carefully  reworked  and
recombined. There are many variants—in particular, at the very
end, the manuscript phrase: stone among the stones, he returned
(to the immobility of real things) to the truth of the motionless
worlds.
J. S.

BOOKS BY   A l b e r t   C a m u s
Awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1957
The First Man  (Le Premier Homme)  1995
A Happy Death  (La Mort Heureuse)  1972
Notebooks 1942–1951
(Carnets, Janvier 1942–mars 1951)  1965
Notebooks 1935–1942
(Carnets, mat 1935–février 1942)  1963
Resistance, Rebellion, and Death  (Actuelles —a selection) 1961
The Possessed  (Les Possédés)  1960
Caligula and Three Other Plays  (Caligula, Le Malentendu, L’Etat de siège, Les Justes)  1958
Exile and the Kingdom  (L’Exil et le Royaume)  1958
The Fall  (La Chute)  1957
The Myth of Sisyphus  (Le Mythe de Sisyphe)  and Other Essays 1955
The Rebel  (L’Homme Révolté)  1954
The Plague  (La Peste)  1948 The Stranger  (L’Etranger)  1946

A L B E R T   C A M U S
A LBERT  C AMUS  was born in Algeria in 1913. He spent the early years
of his life in North Africa, where he became a journalist, and from
1935  to  1938  he  ran  the  Théâtre  de  l’Équipe,  a  company  that
produced plays by Malraux, Gide, Synge, Dostoyevsky, and others.
During  World  War  II  he  was  one  of  the  leading  writers  of  the
French  Resistance  and  editor  of  Combat ,  an  underground
newspaper he helped found. His ction, including  The Stranger, The
Plague,  The  Fall ,  and  Exile  and  the  Kingdom ;  his  philosophical
essays,  The  Myth  of  Sisyphus   and  The  Rebel ;  and  his  plays  have
assured his preeminent position in modern letters. In 1957, Camus
was  awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  for  Literature.  Upon  his  untimely
death in a road accident in 1960, Jean-Paul Sartre wrote, “Camus
could never cease to be one of the principal forces in our cultural
domain, nor to represent, in his own way, the history of France
and this century.”

A L S O   B Y
A l b e r t   C a m u s
Winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature
THE FIRST MAN
In  The First Man  Albert Camus tells the story of Jacques Cormery, a boy who lived a
life much like Camus’ own. Camus summons up the sights, sounds, and textures of
a childhood circumscribed by poverty and a father’s death yet redeemed by the
austere beauty of Algeria and the boy’s attachment to his nearly deaf-mute mother.
The  result  is  a  moving  journey  through  the  lost  landscape  of  youth  that  also
discloses the wellsprings of Camus’ aesthetic powers and moral vision. Published
thirty-ve years after its discovery amid the wreckage of the car accident that killed
its author,  The First Man  is the brilliant consummation of the life and work of one
of the twentieth century’s greatest novelists.
Fiction/Literature
EXILE AND THE KINGDOM
From a variety of masterfully rendered perspectives, these six stories depict people
at painful odds with the world around them. A wife can only surrender to a desert
night by betraying her husband. An artist struggles to honor his own aspirations as
well  as  society’s  expectations  of  him.  A  missionary  brutally  converted  to  the
worship of a tribal fetish is left with but an echo of his identity. Whether set in
North Africa, Paris, or Brazil, the stories in  Exile  and  the  Kingdom  are probing
portraits of spiritual exile and man’s perpetual search for an inner kingdom in
which to be reborn. They display Camus at the height of his powers.
Fiction/Literature
THE FALL
Mordant, brilliant, elegantly styled, The Fall is a novel of the conscience of modern
man in the face of evil. In a seedy bar in Amsterdam, Clamence, an expatriate
Frenchman, indulges in a calculated confession. He recalls his past life as a respected
Parisian lawyer, a champion of noble causes, and, privately, a libertine—yet one

apparently immune to judgment. As his narrative unfolds, ambiguities amass; every
triumph reveals a failure, every motive a hidden treachery. The irony of his recital
anticipates his downfall—and implicates us all.
Fiction/Literature
A HAPPY DEATH
In his rst novel,  A  Happy  Death , written when he was in his early twenties and
retrieved from his private papers following his death in 1960, Albert Camus laid the
foundation for the  The Stranger , focusing in both works on an Algerian clerk who
kills a man in cold blood. But he also revealed himself to an extent that he never did
in  his  later  ction.  For  if  A  Happy  Death   is  the  study  of  a  rule-bound  being
shattering the fetters of his existence, it is also a remarkably candid portrait of its
author as a young man.
Fiction/Literature
THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS AND OTHER ESSAYS
One of the most inuential works of this century,  The Myth of Sisyphus and Other
Essays  is a crucial exposition of existential thought. Inuenced by works such as
Don Juan  and the novels of Kafka, these essays begin with a meditation on suicide:
the question of living or not living in a universe devoid of order or meaning. With
lyric eloquence, Albert Camus brilliantly posits a way out of despair, rearming the
value  of  personal  existence,  and  the  possibility  of  life  lived  with  dignity  and
authenticity.
Nonction/Literature
THE PLAGUE
A gripping tale of unrelieved horror, of survival and resilience, and of the ways in
which humankind confronts death,  The Plague  is at once a masterfully crafted novel,
eloquently understated and epic in scope, and a parable of ageless moral resonance
profoundly relevant to our times. In Oran, a coastal town in North Africa, the plague
begins as a series of portents, unheeded by the people. It gradually becomes an
omnipresent reality, obliterating all traces of the past and driving its victims to
almost unearthly extremes of suering, madness, and compassion.
Fiction/Literature
THE REBEL

For Albert Camus, the urge to revolt is one of the “essential dimensions” of human
nature, manifested in man’s timeless Promethean struggle against the conditions of
his existence, as well as the popular uprisings against established orders throughout
history. And yet, with an eye toward the French Revolution and its regicides and
deicides, he shows how inevitably the course of revolution leads to tyranny. As old
regimes throughout the world collapse,  The Rebel  resonates as an ardent, eloquent,
and supremely rational voice of conscience for our tumultuous times.
Nonction/Literature
RESISTANCE, REBELLION, AND DEATH
Resistance,  Rebellion,  and  Death   displays  Camus’  rigorous  moral  intelligence
addressing issues that range from colonial warfare in Algeria to the social cancer of
capital punishment. But this stirring book is above all a reection on the problem of
freedom, and, as such, belongs in the same tradition as the works that gave Camus
his reputation as the conscience of our century:  The Stranger, The Rebel , and  The
Myth of Sisyphus .
Fiction/Literature
Available wherever books are sold.
www.randomhouse.com