

Acclaim for  Albert Camus’s
THE FIRST MAN
“ The First Man  is perhaps  the most honest  book Camus  ever wrote,  and the most
sensual....  Camus  is not writing  at the height  of his powers,  he is writing  at the
depth of his powers.... It is a work of genius.”
— The New Yorker
“Rending,  brilliant  ...  joyfully  vivid....  The  First  Man   has  an  overwhel ming
emotional  integrity....  To read [it] is to visit a tomb and nd  that a spring is
bubbling from it.”
—Richard Eder,  Los Angeles Times Book Review
“A  beautiful  paean  to  the  past,  memory  and  family....  A  moving  novel  and  a
welcome  addition  to the Camus  oeuvre ,  The First Man  underscores  Camus’s  lifelong
celebration of existence itself.”
— San Francisco Sunday Examiner & Chronicle
“Fascinating....  The  First  Man   helps  put  all  of  Camus’s  work  into  a  clearer
perspective  and  brings  into  relief  what  separates  him  from  the  more  militant
literary  personalities  of his day, like Malraux  and Sartre....  There  is humor,  too,
and evidence  of a great capacity  for a ection,  friendship  and gratitude....  Camus’s
voice has never been more personal than in  The First Man .”
— The New York Times Book Review
“Utterly  absorbing  and evocative....  Much can be gleaned  along these lines from
the appended  interleaves  and notes and sketches  that detail  the author’s  wider
vision.  These items ... provide  an unusual  and privileged  window  into the writer’s
craft....  They demonstrate  in a simple  and haunting  way what Albert  Camus  was
thinking as he penned his last words.”
— Boston Book Review

“In his n al project , Camus  vigorously  captures  the tactile  truths  of his childhood
and adolescence  within a formal  frame of ction....  In  The First Man , isolated
young  Albert  Camus  speaks  painfully   through  the  sentences  of  the  world-wise
artist, revealing  the spare,  poignant  origins  of his exceptional  moral  conscience....
With the publicatio n of  The First Man , many  readers  will come to love Camus
again.”
— Philadelphia Inquirer
“Heartbreaking....  Every page bears the clarity  of the Camus  we have read, and
beyond  that a lyric sense of longing....  Camus’s  story is the oldest  story,  yet he
infuses  it with the intensity  of childhood  and the benecence  of his love for the
people  of Algeria.  The First Man  will expand posterity’s judgment  of Camus and
leave the reader sandblasted by feeling.”
— Miami Herald
“A  bittersweet  story  about  nding  one’s  place  in  the  world  without  betraying
one’s origins....  With  The First Man  we encounter  a new Camus,  more personal
and personable.  Drawing  explicitly  for the rst  time on the circumstances  of his
life, he is, as ever, wisely humane. But this time, he is more human as well.”
— Newsweek
“Let nobody  mistake  this work for a fragment  of interest  only to scholars  and
fans....  The First Man  is as satisfying  as a noble Greek  statue some of whose  limbs
are  missing:  Our  regret  over  the  lost  arms  of  the  Venus  de  Milo  is  nothing
compared to our joy over what remains.”
— Washington Post Book World
“The very unnished  quality  of  The First Man  lends it an appealing  directness  ...
these pages ... shimmer  with a lyricism  and sensuousness....  [Algeria]  is movingly
memorialized  in  this  book,  its  brilliant  colors,  spectral  light  and  lush  scents
conjured up in luxuriant detail.”
— The New York Times
“Camus  obviously  held high literary  ambitions  for his book, which  was going to
be large....  No one knows  how  The First Man  would  have turned  out....  But what
survives is complete in design, detail and density; radiant and deeply necessary.”

— Boston Globe



FIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, AUGUST  1996
Copyright © 1995 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc .
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New
York. Originally published in France in hardcover as  Le Premier Homme  by Editions
Gallimard, Paris, in 1994. Copyright © 1994 by Editions Gallimard. Louis Germain letter
copyright © 1994 by Bibliothéque Nationale. This translation rst published by Alfred A.
Knopf, Inc., New York, in 1995.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the Knopf edition as follows:
Camus, Albert, 1913–1960. [Le Premier homme. English]
The rst man / by Albert Camus;
translated by David Hapgood.
p. cm.
1. Hapgood, David. II. Title
PQ2605.A3734P7413 1995
843′.914  DC 20 95-2668
eISBN: 978-0-307-82786-9
Random House Web address:  http://www.randomhouse.com/
Cover design by Helen Yentus
v3.1

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Editor’s Note
Part One: Search for the Father
Intercessor: Widow Camus
Saint-Brieuc
3: Saint-Brieuc and Malan (J.G.)
4: The Child’s Games
5: The Father. His Death The War. The Bombing
6: The Family
Étienne
6A: School
7: Mondovi: The Settlement and the Father
Part Two: The Son or The First Man
1: Lycée
The Chicken Coop and Cutting the Hen’s Throat
Thursdays and Vacations
2: A Mystery to Himself
Interleaves
The First Man (Notes and Sketches)
Two Letters
A Note About the Translator
Other Books by This Author
About the Author

Editor’s Note
Judith  Jones, editor of the American  edition  of this book, has asked
me  for  a  more  explanatory  preface  than  the  one  I  wrote  for  the
French  edition.  Knopf  has taken  such pains with this book that I
cannot  refuse.  But I must warn the reader  that I am neither  a writer,
nor  an  academic,  nor  even  an  expert  on  Camus.  I  am  just  his
daughter,  and so I ask you to read this note with forbeara nce and to
forgive any awkwardness in it.
Why publish  this manuscript  so long after my father’s  death?  To
understand  this delay we must evoke the mood of 1960, the year my
father  died, and my mother,  Francine,  and his friends  decided not to
publish  his manuscript.  I shall try briey  to summarize  the mood of
that time by means  of what is certainly  an oversimplied  sketch  of
people’s opinions as they related to the question of publication.
French  intellectuals  were preoccupied  with two topics:  the Soviet
Union  and the war in Algeria.  On the rst,  the prevailing  opinion  on
the left forbade  criticism  of the Communist  regime  on the grounds
that any such criticism  would,  by damaging  the regime’s  credibility,
delay  humanity’s  progress  toward  a  better  world.  On  the  second
topic, the same people  favored  independence  for Algeria  under  Arab
rule and supported the FLN (Front de Libération Nationale).
Camus,  for  his  part,  condemned  the  Gulag,  Stalin’s  trials,  and
totalitarianism  in the Soviet  Union,  in the belief that ideology must
serve humanity,  not the contrary,  and that the ends did not justify
the  means.  He  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  means  used  by
totalitarian  regimes  destroyed  any hope for a better  world. As for
Algeria,  he advocated  a federation  in which  the Arab and European
peoples  would  be equally  represented.  Those  who read this book
may better understand his position.

So,  in  denouncing  totalitarianism,  and  in  advocating  a
multicultural  Algeria  where  both  communities  would  enjoy  the
same rights, Camus  antagonized  both the right and the left. At the
time of his death he was very much isolated  and subject  to attacks
from all sides designed  to destroy the man and the artist so that his
ideas would have no impact.
In  these  circumstances,  to  have  published  an  unnished
manuscript—144  handwritten  pages,  often  lacking  periods  and
commas,  never revised—might  well have given ammunition  to those
who were saying Camus  was through  as a writer.  His friends  and my
mother  decided not to run that risk. My twin brother  and I had no
say in the decision, for we were only fourteen years old.
The years went by, my mother died in 1979,  and I assumed  the
responsibility  that had been hers. Between  1980 and 1985 voices
began  to  be  heard  saying  that  perhaps  Camus  had  not  been  so
wrong,  and little by little the old disputes  died down.  As for me, I
rst  had to learn how to deal with a work of literature.  I prepared
Camus’s  Carnet  III  for publication,  and then in the early 1990s  my
brother  and I had to confront the question  of  Le Premier  Homme .
Two considera tions persuaded  us. First, we believed  a manuscript  of
such  importan ce  would  sooner  or  later  be  published  unless  we
destroyed  it. Since we had no right to destroy  it, we preferred  to
publish  it  ourselves  so  that  it  would  appear  exactly  as  it  was.
Secondly,  it seemed  to us that this autobiographical  account  would
be of exceptional value to those interested in Camus.
Finally,  it is obvious  that my father  would  never have published
this manuscript  as it is, rst  for the simple  reason  that he had not
completed  it,  but  also  because  he  was  a  very  reserved   man  and
would  no doubt have masked  his own feelings  far more in its nal
version.  But it seems  to me—and I say this with hesitation,  for I can
claim no objectivity—it  seems to me that one can most clearly hear
my father’s  voice in this text because  of its very rawness.  That is
why I hope readers will come to it in a spirit of brotherhood.
Catherine Camus
March 1995

The text of this edition  was established  from the manuscript  and from a
rst  typescript  by Francine  Camus.  Punctuation   has been added  as an
aid to comprehension.  Words  that were not clear are bracketed.  Words
or  parts  of  sentences  that  were  not  decipherable  are  shown  by  white
space between  brackets.  The author’s  variants,  written  at the top of the
manuscript  page,  appear  as  footnotes  indicated  by  an  asterisk;  his
marginal  inserts  are indicated  by letters;  the editor’s  or translator’s  notes,
by numbers .
In the appendix  are the author’s interleaves,  which  have now been
numbered  I to V. Some of these were inserted  in the manuscript  (sheet I
before  chapter  4 , II before  chapter  6A ), and the rest (III, IV, and V)
were at the end of the manuscript .
Also in the appendix is  “The First Man (Notes  and Sketches),”  the
contents  of the author’s  small spiral notebook  with graph paper.  These
notes will give the reader  an idea of the author’s  plans for the rest of the
book. It seems certain  that what he wrote was only the beginning  of a
novel  that  would  have  been  longer  by  several  hundred  pages,  about
Algeria  from  the  arrival  of  the  French  to  the  Second  World  War,
including  the war itself, and the Resistance  to the German  Occupation  as
lived by the protagonists in a love aair .
Once  you  have  read  The  First  Man  you  will  understand  why  the
appendix  includes  the letter Albert  Camus  wrote to his teacher,  Louis
Germain,  after  he  received  the  Nobel  Prize,  and  the  last  letter  Louis
Germain wrote to him.

PART ONE
Search for the Father

Intercessor: Widow Camus
To you who will never be
a able to read this book
Above  the wagon rolling  along a stony road, big thick clouds  were
hurrying  to the East through  the dusk. Three  days ago they had
inated  over the Atlantic,  had waited  for a wind from the West, had
set out, slowly at rst  then faster  and faster,  had ow n over the
phosphorescent  autumn  waters,  straight  to  the  continent,  had
b unraveled  on the Moroccan peaks,  had gathered  again in ocks  on
the  high  plateaus  of  Algeria,  and  now,  at  the  approac hes  to  the
Tunisian  frontier,  were trying  to reach the Tyrrhenian  Sea to lose
themselves  in it. After a journey of thousands  of kilometers  over
what  seemed  to  be  an  immense  island,  shielded  by  the  moving
waters  to the North and to the South by the congealed  waves of the
sands,  passing  scarcely  any faster above  this nameless  country  than
had empires  and peoples  over the millennia,  their momentum  was
wearing  out and some  already  were melting  into occasional  large
raindrops  that were beginning  to plop on the canvas  hood above  the
four travelers.
The wagon  was creaking  over a route that was fairly well marked
but had scarcely  any surfacing.  From time to time a spark would
ash  under  a metal wheel  rim or a horse’s  hoof, and a stone would
strike the wood of the wagon  or else would  sink with a muted  sound
into  the  soft  soil  of  the  ditch.  Meanwhile  the  two  small  horses
moved  steadily  ahead,  occasionally  inching  a  bit,  their  chests
thrust  forward   to  pull  the  heavy  wagon,  loaded  with  furniture,
continuously  putting  the road behind  them as they trotted  along at
dierent  paces.  One  of  them  would  now  and  then  blow  the  air

noisily  from its nostrils,  and would  be thrown  o   its pace. Then the
* Arab who was driving  would  snap the worn  reins at on its back,
and the beast would gamely pick up its rhythm.
The man who was on the front seat by the driver,  a Frenchman
about  thirty,  gazed  with  an  impenetrable  look  at  the  two  rumps
moving  rhythm ically  in  front  of  him.  He  was  of  medium  height,
stocky,  with a long face, a high square  forehead,  a strong  jaw, and
blue  eyes.  Though  the  season  was  well  along,  he  wore  a  three-
button  duckcloth  jacket,  fastened  at the neck in the style of that
c d time, and a light pith helmet  over his close-cut  hair.  When the rain
began  streaming  across  the  canvas  above  them,  he turned toward
the inside of the vehicle: “Are you all right?” he shouted.
On a second  seat, wedged  between  the rst  seat and a heap of old
trunks  and furniture,  sat a woman  who, though  shabbily  dressed,
was wrapped  in a coarse  woolen  shawl.  She smiled  feebly at him.
“Yes, yes,” she said, with a little gesture  of apology.  A small four-
year-old  boy slept leaning  against  her. She had a gentle  look and
regular  features,  a warm  gaze in her brown  eyes, a small straight
nose, and the black wavy hair of a Spanish  woman.  But there was
something  striking  about  that  face.  Not  only  would  fatigue  or
something  similar momentar ily mask its features;  no, it was more
like a faraway  look, a look of sweet distraction,  such as you always
see on some simpletons,  but which  would  burst out only eetingly
on the beauty  of this face. The kindness  of that gaze, which was so
noticeable,  would  sometimes  be joined  by a gleam  of unreasoning
fear  that  would  as  instantly  vanish.  With  the  at  of  her  hand,
already  worn with work and somewhat  gnarled  at the joints,  she
tapped  her husband’s  back: “It’s all right,  it’s all right,”  she said.
And  immediately  she  stopped  smiling  to  watch,  from  under  the
canvas  top,  the  road  where  puddles  were  already  beginning  to
shine.
The man turned  to the Arab, placid  in his turban  with its yellow
cords,  his  body  made  stouter  by  baggy  pants  with  a  roomy  seat
gathered above the calf. “Do we have much farther to go?”
The Arab smiled  under his big white moustache.  “Eight  kilometers
and you’re there.”

The man turned  to look at his wife, not smiling  yet  attentive.  She
had kept her eyes on the road. “Give me the reins,” the man said.
“As you wish,”  said the Arab. He handed  him the reins, and the
man stepped  across  while  the old Arab slipped  under  him to the
place just vacated.  With two slaps of the at  of the reins the man
took over the horses,  who picked up their trot and suddenly  were
pulling straighter. “You know horses,” the Arab said.
The husband’s reply was curt and unsmiling. “Yes,” he said.
The light had dimmed  and all at once night settled  in. The Arab
took the square  lantern  from its catch at his left and, turning  toward
the back, used several  crude  matches  to light the candle inside  it.
Then he replaced  the lantern.  Now the rain was falling  gently  and
steadily.  It shone  in the weak light of the lamp,  and, all around,  it
peopled  the utter darkness  with its soft sound.  Now and then the
wagon  skirted  spiny bushes;  small trees were faintly  lit for a few
seconds.  But the rest of the time it rolled  through  an empty  space
made still more vast by the dark of night.  The smell of burned  grass,
or, suddenly,  the strong  odor of manure,  was all that suggested  they
were passing  by land under  cultivation.  The wife spoke  behind  the
driver,  who held his horses  in a bit and leaned  back. “There  are no
people here,” the wife said again.
“Are you afraid?”
“What?”
The husband repeated the question, but this time he was shouting.
“No, no, not with you.” But she seemed worried.
“You’re in pain,” the man said.
“A little.”
He urged his horses  on, and once more all that lled  the night
were the heavy sounds  of the wheels  crushing  ridges  in the road and
the eight shod hooves striking its surface.
It was a night in the fall of 1913.  Two hours earlier  the voyagers
had left the railroad  station  in Bône where  they had arrived  from
Algiers  after  a  journey  of  a  night  and  a  day  on  hard  third-class
benches.  In  the  station  they  had  found  the  wagon  and  the  Arab
waiting  to take them to the farm located  near a small village, about
twenty  kilometers  into  the  interior  of  the  country,  where  the

husband  was to take over the management.  It had taken time to
load the trunks and their few belongings,  and then the bad road had
delayed  them still further.  The Arab, as if aware  of his companion’s
disquiet, said to him: “Have no fear. Here there are no bandits.”
“They’re  everywhere,”  the man said. “But I have the necessary.”
And he slapped his tight pocket.
“You’re right,” said the Arab. “There’s always madmen.”
At  that  moment,  the  woman  called  her  husband.  “Henri,”  she
said. “It hurts.”
e The man swore  and pushed  his horses  a bit more.  “We’re getting
there,”  he said. After a moment,  he looked  at his wife again.  “Does
it still hurt?”
She smiled  at him with a strangely  absent  air, yet she did not
seem to be suering. “Yes, a lot.”
He continued to gaze gravely at her.
Again she apologized. “It’s nothing. Maybe it’s the train.”
“Look,”  the Arab said, “the village.”  Indeed  they could see, to the
left of the road and a little farther  on, the lights of Solférino  blurred
by the rain. “But you take the road to the right,” said the Arab.
The man hesitated,  then turned  to his wife. “Should  we go to the
house or the village?” he asked.
“Oh, to the house, that’s better.”
A bit farther,  the vehicle  turned  to the right toward  the unfamiliar
house that awaited them. “Another kilometer,” said the Arab.
“We’re  getting  there,”  the man said, in the direction  of his wife.
She was bent over double,  her face in her arms. “Lucie,”  the man
said. She did not move.  The man touched  her with his hand.  She
was weeping  silently.  He shouted,  stressing  each syllable  and acting
out his words:  “You are going  to lie down there!  I will go get the
doctor!”
“Yes. Go get the doctor. I think this is it.”
The Arab was watching  them with surprise.  “She’s  going to have a
baby,” the husband said. “Is there a doctor in the village?”
“Yes. I’ll get him if you wish.”
“No, you stay at the house.  You keep watch.  I’ll go faster.  Is there
a small cart or a horse?”

“There’s  a cart.” Then the Arab said to the wife,  “You will have a
boy. Let him be a ne  one.” The wife smiled  at him without  seeming
to understand.
“She doesn’t  hear,”  the man said. “At the house,  you’ll have to
shout  out loud and make signs.” Suddenly  the wagon  was rolling
almost  without  sound  over the chalky  subsurface  of tu.   The road
was  narrower  now.  It  passed  alongside  some  tiled  sheds  behind
which  could be seen the rst  rows of the vineyard.  They were met
by  a  strong  smell  of  fermenting  grapes.  They  passed  some  large
buildings  with high-pitched  roofs, and the wheels  attened  the slag
of  a  yard  where  there  were  no  trees.  The  Arab  took  the  reins
without  speaking and pulled  them in. The horses  stopped,  and one
f of  them  snorted.   With  his  hand  the  Arab  indicated  a  small
whitewashed  house.  A creeping vine ran around  a low door with a
frame stained blue by copper sulfate. The man jumped to the ground
and ran throug h the rain to the house.  He opened  the door. It led to
a dark room which smelled  of an empty  hearth.  The Arab, who was
following  him, walked  straight  through  the dark to the replace,
and, scraping  an ember,  lit a kerosene  lamp that hung in the middle
of the room over a round  table. The man barely  took time to notice
that he was in a whitewashed  kitchen  with a sink of red ceramic
tile, an old sideboard,  and a sodden  calendar  on the wall. Stairs
nished  with the same red tiles led to the second  oor.  “Light  the
re,”  he  said,  and  he  returned  to  the  wagon.  (He  took  the  little
boy?) The woman  was waiting  in silence.  He took her in his arms to
set her on the ground  and, holding her close for a moment,  he lifted
her head. “Can you walk?”
“Yes,” she said, and she stroked his arm with her worn hand.
He led her to the house. “Wait,” he said.
The Arab had already  lit the re,  and with skillful  and precise
motions  he was stoking  it with shoots  of vine. She was standing near
the table, hands on her belly, and now her handsome  face turned  up
to the lamplight  was crossed  by brief waves  of pain. She seemed  to
notice  neither  the dampness  nor the odor of neglect  and poverty.
The man was busy in the rooms upstairs.  Then he appeared  at the
head of the stairs. “There’s no replace in the bedroom?”

“No,” said the Arab. “Not in the other room either.”
“Come,”  said  the  man.  The  Arab  joined  him,  then  reappeared,
walking  backwards,  carrying  a  mattress  that  the  husband  was
holding  by the other end. They placed  it next to the re place.  The
man pulled the table to a corner,  while the Arab went back upstairs
and soon returned  with a bolster and blankets.  “Lie down there,”  the
man said to his wife, and he led her to the mattress.
She hesitated.  Now they could smell the odor of damp hair rising
from  the  mattress.  “I  can’t  undress,”  she  said,  looking  around
fearfully as if she were only now seeing the place.
“Take  o  what  you  have  underneath,”  the  man  said.  And  he
repeated:  “Take o   your underwear.”  Then to the Arab: “Thanks.
Unhitch  a horse.  I’ll ride him to the  village.”  The Arab went out. The
wife went about  her preparations,  her back to her husband,  who
had also turned his back. Then she stretched  out, and as soon she
had done so, drawing  the covers  over her, she gave a single, long,
full-throated  howl, as if she wanted  to rid herself  at once of all the
cries  that  pain  had  stored  up  in  her.  The  man,  standing  by  the
mattress,  let her cry; then, when she fell silent,  he took o   his pith
helmet,  put one knee to the ground,  and kissed  the ne  forehead
over her closed  eyes. He put his hat on again and went out into the
rain.  The  unhitched  horse  was  turning  its  head,  its  front  hooves
planted in the slag. “I’ll get a saddle,” the Arab said.
“No, leave the reins on. I’ll ride him like this. Take the trunks  and
the other things into the kitchen. Do you have a wife?”
“She died. She was old.”
“Do you have a daughter?”
“No, God be thanked. But I have the wife of my son.”
“Tell her to come.”
“I’ll do that. Go in peace.”
The husband  looked  at the old Arab motionless  in the ne  rain
and smiling at him under  his wet moustache.  He himself  was still
unsmiling,  but he watched  the Arab with his direct  attentive  gaze.
Then he extended  his hand.  The other man took his hand in the
Arab fashion,  with the ends of his ngers,  then lifted it to his lips.

The husband  turned,  making  the cinders  crunch,  strode  to the horse,
vaulted onto it bareback, and rode o at a lumbering trot.
As he left the property,  the man headed  toward  the crossroads
from which they had rst  seen the lights of the village.  They were
shining  now with a more dazzling light, the rain had stopped  falling
and the road, to the right, that led toward  the village  was laid out
straight  through  the vineyards  where  the trellis wires glistened  here
and there. About  halfway,  the horse slowed  down to a walk. He was
nearing  a sort of rectangular  shanty;  one part was a room made of
masonry,  and  a  second,  larger  part  was  built  of  wooden  planks.
Projecting  from this second  part was a kind of counter  with a big
matting  pulled down over it. On a door recessed  in the masonry  one
could read: “Mme.  Jacques’s  Farm Canteen.”  Light seeped  under  the
door. The man stopped  his horse right by the door, and knocked
without  dismounting.  Immediately  a rm  resonant  voice asked from
inside, “What is it?”
“I’m the new manager  of the Saint-Apôtre  property.  My wife is
giving birth. I need help.”
No one answered.  After a moment  bolts were drawn,  bars were
lifted,  then dragged  away,  and the door opened  partway.  He could
make out the black curly head of a European  woman  with plump
cheeks  and  a  attish  nose  above  full  lips.  “My  name  is  Henri
Cormery.  Can  you  go  to  be  with  my  wife?  I’m  going  to  get  the
doctor.”
She gazed at him with the eye of one accustomed  to weighing
men and misfortune.  He met her look squarely,  but without  adding
a word of explanation. “I’ll go,” she said. “You hurry.”
He  thanked  her  and  kicked  the  horse  with  his  heels.  A  few
moments  later he entered  the village  by passing  between  rampart-
like  walls  made  of  dried  mud.  Stretching  before  him  lay  what
seemed  to be the only street,  bordered  with small one-story  houses,
all  alike;  he  followed  it  to  a  small  hard-surfaced  square  where,
surprisingly,  he found  a metal-framed  bandstand.  The square,  like
the street, was deserted.  Cormery  was already  headed  toward  one of
the houses when the horse shied.  An Arab, in a torn somber-colored
burnoose,  appeared from the shadows  and came toward  him. “The

doctor’s  house,”  Cormery  immediately  asked.  The Arab studied  the
horseman.  “Come,” he said after he had looked  him over. They went
back up the street.  Written  on a building  with a raised  ground oor
reached  by  whitewashed  stairs  were  the  words:  “Liberté,  Égalité,
Fraternité.”  Next to it was a small garden  surrounded  by roughly
nished  walls; at its far end was a house,  to which  the Arab pointed.
“That’s  it,” he said. Cormery  jumped  down from the horse, and, at a
pace that showed  no sign of fatigue,  he crossed  the garden, where
all he noticed  was, at the exact center,  a dwarf  palm with withered
leaves  and  a  rotted  trunk.  He  knocked  at  the  door.  No  one
g answered.  He turned  around.  The Arab was waiting  in silence.  The
husband  knocked  again.  From inside  could be heard  footsteps  that
stopped  behind  the  door.  But  the  door  did  not  open.  Cormery
knocked again and said, “I’m looking for the doctor.”
At once the bolts were drawn  and the door was opened.  A man
appeared.  His face was young  and chubby,  but his hair was almost
white.  He was tall and well built, and his legs were squeezed  into
leggings.  He was putting  on a sort of hunting  jacket.  “Well!  Where
did you come from?  I’ve never  seen you before,”  he said, smiling.
The husband  explained.  “Oh yes, the mayor  told me. But, you know,
this is a strange  place to come to have a baby.”  The husband  said he
had been expecting the event later and that he must have made a
mistake.  “Well,  that  happens  to  everyone.  Go  ahead,  I’ll  saddle
Matador and follow you.”
Halfway  back, and through  the rain that had begun  to fall again,
the  doctor,  mounted  on  a  dappled  gray  horse,  caught  up  with
Cormery,  who was now soaked through  but still erect on his heavy
farm  horse.  “Strange  way  to  arrive,”  the  doctor  called  out.  “But
you’ll  see, there’s  good in this place,  not counting  the mosquitoes
and the bandits  in the bush.”  He stayed  alongside  his companion.
“About  the  mosquitoes,  you  know,  you  don’t  have  to  worry  till
spring.  As for the bandits  ...” He laughed,  but the husband  rode on
without  a word.  The doctor  looked  at him with curiosity.  “Have  no
fear,” he said, “it will all go well.”
Cormery  turned  his  straightforward  gaze  on  the  doctor,  and,
looking  calmly  at him, said with a touch of warmth:  “I’m not afraid.

I’m used to hard knocks.”
“Is this your rst?”
“No, I left a four-year-old boy in Algiers with my mother-in-law.”
They came to the crossroads  and took the road to the  property.
Soon the cinders  were ying  under  the horses’  hooves.  When  the
horses  stopped  and silence  fell once more,  they heard  a loud cry
from the house. The two men dismounted.
Awaiting  them was a shadowy  gure  sheltered  under  a vine that
was dripping  water.  Drawing  closer,  they recognized  the old Arab
wearing  an improvised  hood made of a sack. “Greetings,  Kaddour,”
said the doctor. “How is it going?”
“I don’t know,  I especially  don’t go in where  the women  are,” the
old man said.
“Good  rule,”  said  the  doctor.  “Particularly  when  women  are
crying.”  But  no  cries  were  coming  now  from  inside.  The  doctor
opened the door and went in, Cormery behind him.
In  front  of  them  a  big  r e  of  vine  branches  aming  in  the
replace  lighted the room more than did the kerosene  lamp,  with
copper  and bead trim, that hung from the middle  of the ceiling.  To
their  right,  the  sink  was  now  all  covered  with  towels  and  metal
pitchers.  The table in the middle  of the room had been pushed  over
to the left, in front of a rickety  sideboard  made of unnished  wood.
On  it  were  an  old  traveling  bag,  a  hatbox,  and  various  bundles.
Pieces  of old luggage,  including  a big wicker  trunk,  lled  all the
corners  of the room,  leaving  a space only in the middle,  not far from
the  re.  In  that  space,  on  a  mattress  set  at  right  angles  to  the
replace,  the  wife  lay  stretched  out,  head  laid  back  on  a  pillow
without  a case, her hair let down.  The blankets  now covered  only
half the mattress.  The uncovered  part of the mattress  was hidden
from sight by the owner  of the  canteen,  who was on her knees to its
left.  She  was  wringing  out,  over  a  washbasin,  a  towel  dripping
reddish  drops  of  water.  To  the  right,  sitting  cross-legged,  an
unveiled  Arab woman  held out, as if making  an oertory , a second,
somewhat  aking  enamel  basin full of steaming  hot water.  The two
women  were on either  side of a folded  sheet that lay under the wife.
The  shadow  and  light  of  the  replace  rose  and  fell  on  the

whitewashed  walls,  on the baggage  that cluttered  the room,  and,
still closer,  glowed  red on the faces of the two nurses  and on the
form of the wife, bundled up under the blankets.
When  the two men entered,  the Arab woman  glanced  quickly  at
them,  gave a brief laugh,  then turned  to the re,  her thin brown
arms still oering  the washbasin. The owner  of the canteen looked
at them and joyfully  exclaim ed: “No more need for you, Doctor.  It
happened  by itself.”  She got to her feet and the two men saw, near
the patient,  something  shapeless  and bloody  stirring  with a sort of
still movement  and making  a continuing,  barely  perceptible  sound
h like a mued screeching.
“So they say,” said the doctor.  “I hope you haven’t  touched  the
cord.”
“No,” said the woman,  laughing.  “We had to leave you something
to do.”
She got up and gave her place to the doctor,  who again blocked
the newborn from the sight of Cormery,  still at the door, his head
uncovered.  The doctor  squatted  and opened  his case; then he took
the  basin  from  the  hands  of  the  Arab  woman,  who  immediately
withdrew  from the circle of light and took refuge  in the dark angle
of the replace.  The doctor  washed  his hands,  his back still to the
door, then poured  on those hands  some alcohol  that smelled a bit
like grape liquor; its odor at once lled  the room.  At that moment,
the wife lifted her head and saw her husband.  A marvelous  smile
transgured  that exhausted  beautiful  face. Cormery  went over to the
mattress.  “He came,”  she said under  her breath,  and she reached  out
her hand to the infant.
“Yes,”  said  the  doctor.  “But  stay  still.”  The  wife  gave  him  a
questioning look.
Cormery,  standing  at the foot of the mattress,  made  a quieting
gesture. “Lie down.”
She lay back down again.  The rain began  to come down twice as
hard  on  the  old  tile  roof.  The  doctor  went  to  work  under  the
blanket.  Then he straightened  up and seemed  to shake something  in
front of him. A small cry was heard.  “It’s a boy,” the doctor  said.
“And a good sturdy one.”

“There’s  one who’s  getting  o   to a good start,”  said the owner  of
the canteen. “By moving to a new home.”
The Arab woman  in the corner laughed  and clapped  her hands
twice. Cormery glanced at her and she turned away, embarrassed.
“All right,” said the doctor. “Now leave us for a moment.”
Cormery  looked at his wife. But her face was still tilted back. Her
hands,  lying relaxed  on the coarse  blanket,  were all there was to
remind  him of the smile that a while ago had lled  and transgured
that wretched  room.  He put on his helmet  and headed  toward  the
door.
“What  are you going  to name  him?”  the owner  of the canteen
called out.
“I don’t know,  we haven’t  thought  about  it.” He looked  at her.
“Since you were here, we’ll call him Jacques.”
The woman burst out laughing  and Cormery  went out. The Arab,
his head still covered  with the sack, was waiting  under  the vine. He
looked  at Cormery,  who said nothing  to him. “Here,”  said the Arab,
and held out an end of the sack.
Cormery  took shelter.  He could feel the shoulder  of the old Arab
against  him, and he smelled  the smoke  given o   by his clothes;  he
felt the rain falling on the sack over their two heads.  “It’s a boy,” he
said without looking at his companion.
“God  be  praised,”  answered  the  Arab.  “You  are  a  chief.”  The
water  that had come from thousands  of kilometers  away went on
falling  before  them, on the cinders  and the many puddles  that pitted
them,  on  the  vineyards  farther  distant,  and  the  trellis  wires  still
gleamed  under  the raindrops.  It would  never  get to the sea to the
East, and now it was going to drench  the whole  country,  the marshy
land  by  the  river  and  the  mountains  around  them,  the  immense
almost  uninhabited  territory  whose  powerful  odor reached  the two
men huddled  under  the one sack, while  behind  them a feeble  cry
resumed from time to time.
Late  in  the  night,  Cormery  was  lying  stretched  out,  in  long
drawers  and undershirt,  on a second  mattress  by his wife, watching
the  am es  dance  on  the  ceiling.  The  room  was  now  pretty  well
tidied.  On the other side of his wife, in a laundry  basket,  the infant

slept in silence  except  for an occasional  weak gurgle.  His wife was
also sleeping,  her face turned  toward  him, her mouth  partly  open.
The rain had stopped.  Tomorrow  he would  have to start work. Near
him, his wife’s  hand,  already  so worn it almost  seemed  made  of
wood,  also reminded  him of work.  He reached  out his own hand,
placed it gently on hers, and, laying his head back, closed his eyes.
a . (add geological anonymity. Land and sea)
b . Solférino.
*  split from wear and tear
c . or a kind of derby?
d . wearing heavy boots.
e . The little boy. [In the course  of this chapter,  the author  variously  places  the boy in
the wagon (p. 5) or in Algiers (p. 14)— Trans .]
f . Is it night?
g . I fought against the Moroccans (with a cryptic look) Moroccans, they’re no good.
h . like that of certain cells under the microscope.

S a i n t - B r i e u c
a Forty years later a man standing in the corridor  of the Saint-Brieuc
train was watching  with an air of disapproval  as the villages  and
ugly houses of the at  cramped countryside  that stretches  from Paris
to the Channel  marched  past under  the pale sun of an afternoon  in
spring.  The meadows  and el ds of a land that for centuries  had been
cultivated  to the last square  meter  passed,  in turn, before him. With
bare  head  and  hair  cut  short,  long  face  and  delicate  features,  a
direct  gaze in his blue eyes, the man was of medium  height,  and
despite  his forty years he still looked  slender  in his raincoat.  He
stood with his hands  rmly  placed on the railing;  leaning  his weight
on one hip, his torso at ease, he gave the impression  of competence
and  vigor.  Then  the  train  slowed  and  nally  stopped  in  a  small
shabby  station.  A  moment  later  a  rather  elegant  young  woman
passed  by the window  where  the man was standing.  She stopped  to
shift  her  suitcase  from  one  hand  to  the  other,  and  just  then  she
noticed  the traveler.  He looked  at her smiling,  and she could  not
help smiling  also. The man lowered  the window,  but the train was
already  leaving.  “Too  bad,”  he  said.  The  young  woman  was  still
smiling at him.
The  traveler  went  to  sit  down  in  his  third-class  compartment,
where  he had a seat by the window.  A man with sparse  plastered
hair—not  as old as his swollen,  blotchy  face suggested—was  sitting
huddled  across  from him; his eyes were closed  and he was breathing
hard,  obviously  disturbed  by  his  labored  digestion.  He  cast  an
* occasional  quick  glance at the traveler.  On the same seat, by the
corridor,  a  peasant  woman   in  her  Sunday  best,  crowned  by  a
peculiar  hat adorned  with a bunch  of wax grapes,  was blowing  the
nose of a redheaded  child whose face looked  dim and faded.  The

traveler’s  smile disappeared.  He took a magazine  from his pocket
and absently read an article that made him yawn.
A  bit  later  the  train  stopped,  and  a  small  placard  announcing
“Saint-Brieuc”  moved  slowly  into  the  frame  of  the  window.  The
traveler  immediately  stood up, eortlessly  lifted his suitcase  with its
expanding  sides from the overhead  rack, and, after nodding  to his
fellow  travelers,  who  responded  with  seeming  surprise,  he  left
rapidly  and  hurried  down  the  three  steps  of  the  car.  On  the
platform,  he looked  at his left hand,  dirty from the  soot that had
accumulated  on the railing  he had just been holding,  took out a
handkerchief  and carefully  wiped  it o.   Then he headed  toward  the
exit, where he was gradually  joined  by a group  of somberly  dressed
travelers  with blotchy  faces. Under  the shelter  with its small posts
he patiently  waited  his turn to hand over his ticket,  waited  again till
the taciturn clerk returned  it to him, crossed  a waiting  room with
bare dirty walls,  decorated  only with old posters  in which  even the
Riviera  had taken on the colors of soot, and, striding  at a lively pace
through  the slanting  afternoon  light, he went down the street that
led from the station to the town.
At the hotel he asked  for the room he had reserved,  refused the
help of the potato-faced  chambermaid  who wanted  to carry his bag,
and, after she had shown  him to his room,  gave her nonetheless  a
tip that surprised  her and brought  a friendly  look to her features.
Then he washed  his hands  again,  and went back downsta irs, still at
a lively pace, without  locking  his door. He found  the chambermaid
in  the  lobby,  asked  her  where  the  cemetery  was,  was  given  too
much explanation,  listened  amiably, then set out in the direction  she
had indicated.  Now he was walking  down streets  that were narrow
and  depressing,  bordered  by  commonplace  houses  with  ugly  red
tiles. Here and there he could see the crooked  slates of an old half-
timbered  house.  The  few  passersby  did  not  even  stop  before  the
shopwindows  that displayed  the glass products,  the masterpieces  in
plastic  and nylon,  the wretched  ceramics  that are found  in every
town  in  the  contemporary  Western  world.  Only  the  food  shops
showed  any  opulence.  High  forbidding  walls  surrounded  the
cemetery.  Near  its  gate,  meager  displays  of  owers  and  marble-

cutters’  shops.  The traveler  stopped  in front of one of these shops to
watch  a  bright-looking  child  in  a  corner  who  was  doing  his
homework  on a marble  slab that had yet to be inscribed.  Then he
entered  the  cemetery  and  went  to  the  caretaker’s  house.  The
caretaker  was not there.  The traveler  waited  in the barely  furnished
little oce,  then noticed  a map, which  he was studying  when the
caretaker  entered. He was a tall gnarled  man, with a big nose, who
smelled  of  the  sweat  under  his  thick  high-necked  jacket.  The
traveler asked for the location of those who died in the war of 1914.
“Yes,”  the  caretaker  said.  “That’s  called  the  square  of  French
Remembrance. What name are you looking for?”
“Henri Cormery,” said the traveler.
The caretaker  opened  a large book bound  in wrapping  paper and
went down a list of names  with his dirty nger.  His nger  came to a
stop. “Cormery  Henri,”  he said, “fatally  wounded  at the Battle of the
Marne, died at Saint-Brieuc October 11, 1914.”
“That’s it,” said the traveler.
The caretaker  closed  the book. “Come,”  he said. And he led the
way to the rst  row of gravestones,  some of them simple,  others
ugly and pretentious,  all covered with that bead and marble bric-a-
brac  that  would  disgrace  anyplace  on  earth.  “Was  he  related  to
you?” he asked absently.
“He was my father.”
“That’s rough,” the other man said.
“No, it isn’t. I was less than a year old when he died. So, you see.”
“Yes,” said the caretaker, “but even so. Too many died.”
Jacques  Cormery  did not answer.  Surely,  too many had died, but,
as to his father, he could not muster  a lial  devotion  he did not feel.
For all these years he had been living  in France,  he had promised
1 himself  to do what his mother,  who stayed  in Algeria,  what she  for
such a long time had been asking him to do: visit the grave of his
father  that she herself  had never seen. He thought  this visit made no
sense,  rst  of all for himself,  who had never known  his father,  who
knew  next  to  nothing  of  what  he  had  been,  and  who  loathed
conventional  gestures  and behavior;  and then for his mother,  who
never spoke of the dead man and could picture  nothing  of what he

was  going  to  see.  But  since  his  old  mentor  had  retired  to  Saint-
Brieuc  and  so  he  would  have  an  opportunity  to  see  him  again,
Cormery  had made up his mind to go visit this dead stranger,  and
had even insisted  on doing  it before  joining  his old friend  so that
afterwards he would feel completely free.
“It’s  here,”  said  the  caretaker.  They  had  arrived  at  a  square-
shaped  area enclosed  by small markers  of gray stone connected  with
a heavy chain that had been painted  black.  The gravestones—and
they were many—were  all alike:  plain inscribed  rectangles  set at
equal intervals  row on row. Each grave was decorated  with a small
bouquet  of fresh owers.  “For forty years the French  Remembrance
has been responsible  for the upkeep.  Look, here he is.” He indicated
a stone in the rst  row. Jacques  Cormery  stopped  at some distance
from the grave. “I’ll leave you,” the caretaker said.
Cormery  approached  the stone and gazed  vacantly  at it. Yes, that
was indeed  his name.  He looked up. Small  white  and gray clouds
were passing  slowly  across  the sky, which  was paler now, and from
it fell a light that was alternately  bright  and overcast.  Around him,
in the vast el d of the dead, silence  reigned.  Nothing  but a mued
murmur  from the town came over the high walls.  Occasionally  a
black  silhouette  would  pass  among  the  distant  graves.  Jacques
Cormery,  gazing  up at the slow navigation  of the clouds  across  the
sky, was trying  to discern,  beyond  the odor of damp  owers,  the
salty smell just then coming  from the distant  motionless  sea when
the clink of a bucket  against  the marble  of a tombstone  drew him
from his reverie. At that moment  he read on the tomb the date of
his father’s birth, which  he now discovered  he had not known.  Then
he  read  the  two  dates,  “1885–1914,”  and  automatically  did  the
arithmetic:  twenty-nine  years.  Suddenly  he was struck  by an idea
that shook  his very being.  He was forty years old. The man buried
b under that slab, who had been his father, was younger than he.
And the wave of tenderness  and pity that at once lled  his heart
was not the stirring of the soul that leads  the son to the memory  of
the vanished  father,  but the overwhelming  compassion  that a grown
man feels for an unjustly  murdered  child—something  here was not
in  the  natural  order  and,  in  truth,  there  was  no  order  but  only

madness  and chaos  when  the son was older than the father.  The
course  of time itself was shattering  around  him while he remained
motionless  among those tombs  he now no longer  saw, and the years
no longer kept to their places in the great river that ows  to its end.
They were no more than waves  and surf and eddies  where  Jacques
c Cormery  was now struggling  in the grip of anguish  and pity.  He
looked  at the other inscriptions  in that section  and realize d from the
dates  that  this  soil  was  strewn  with  children  who  had  been  the
fathers  of graying  men who thought  they were living in this present
time.  For  he  too  believed  he  was  living,  he  alone  had  created
himself,  he knew his own strength,  his vigor,  he could cope and he
had  himself  well  in  hand.  But,  in  the  strange  dizzine ss  of  that
moment,  the statue  every man eventually  erects  and that hardens  in
the re  of the years,  into which  he then creeps  and there awaits  its
nal  crumbling—that  statue  was  rapidly  cracking,  it  was  already
collapsing.  All that was left was this anguished  heart,  eager to live,
rebelling  against  the deadly  order of the world  that had been with
him  for  forty  years,  and  still  struggling  against  the  wall  that
separated  him from the secret of all life, wanting  to go farther,  to go
beyond,  and to discover,  discover  before  dying,  discover  at last in
order to be, just once to be, for a single second, but forever.
He  looked  back  on  his  life,  a  life  that  had  been  foolish,
courageous,  cowardly,  willful,  and always  straining  toward  that goal
which  he knew nothing  about,  and actually  that life had all gone by
without  his having  tried to imagine  who this man was who had
given him that life and then immediately  had gone o   to die in a
strange  land on the other side of the seas. At twenty-nine,  had he
himself  not been frail, been ailing, tense, stubborn,  sensual,  dreamy,
cynical,  and brave?  Yes, he had been all that and much else besides;
he had been alive, in short had been a man, and yet he had never
thought  of  the  man  who  slept  there  as  a  living  being,  but  as  a
stranger  who passed  by on the land where  he himself  was born, of
whom  his mother  said that he looked  like him and that he died on
the eld  of battle. Yet the secret  he had eagerly  sought  to learn
through  books  and  people  now  seemed  to  him  to  be  intimately
linked  with this dead man, this younger  father,  with what he had

been and what he had becom e, and it seemed  that he himself  had
gone far aeld  in search  of what was close to him in time and in
blood.  To tell the truth,  he had gotten  no help. In a family where
they spoke little, where  no one read or wrote,  with an unhappy  and
listless  mother,  who would  have informed  him about this young  and
pitiable  father?  No one had known  him but his mother  and she had
forgotten  him. Of that he was sure. And he had died unknown  on
this earth where he had eet ingly passed,  like a stranger.  No doubt
it was up to him to ask, to inform  himself.  But for someone  like him,
who has nothing  and wants  the world  entire,  all his energy  is not
enough  to  create  himself  and  to  conquer  or  to  understand  that
world.  After all, it was not too late; he could still search,  he could
learn who this man had been who now seemed  closer  to him than
any other being on this earth. He could ...
Now the afternoon was coming  to its end. The rustle of a skirt, a
black shadow,  brought  him back to the landscape  of tombs and sky
that surrounded  him. He had to leave;  there was nothing  more for
him to do here. But he could not turn away from this name,  those
dates.  Under that slab were left only ashes and dust. But, for him,
his father was again alive, a strange  silent life, and it seemed to him
that again he was going to forsake  him, to leave his father  to haunt
yet another night the endless  solitude  he had been hurled into and
then  deserted .  The  empty  sky  resounded  with  a  sudden  loud
explosion:  an  invisible  airplane  had  crossed  the  sound  barrier.
Turning  his  back  on  the  grave,  Jacques  Cormery  abandoned  his
father.
a . From the beginning, should show the alien in Jacques more.
*  dim
1 .  sic
b . Transition.
c . enlarge on war of 1914.

a 3   :   S a i n t - B r i e u c   a n d   M a l a n   ( J . G . )
That evening  at dinner,  J.C. watched  his old friend  attack  his second
slice of leg of lamb with a sort of disturbing  voracity;  the wind that
had come up was growling  softly  around  the small low-ceilinged
house  in a district  near the road to the beaches.  On his arrival J.C.
had noticed some small pieces  of dry algae in the gutter  bordering
the sidewalk,  which,  with their odor of salt, were all that suggested
the nearness of the sea.
Victor  Malan,  who  spent  his  entire  career  in  customs
administration,  had retired  to this small town; he had not chosen  it,
but he justied  the choice  after the fact by saying  that nothing  came
along to distract  him from solitary  meditation,  neither  an excess  of
beauty  nor  an  excess  of  ugliness,  nor  of  solitude  itself.  The
administration  of things  and the management  of men had taught
him a great deal, but rst  of all, apparently,  that we know  very
little.  Yet  he  was  immensely  cultivated  and  J.C.  admired  him
unreservedly,  for  Malan,  in  a  day  when  outstanding  men  are  so
banal,  was the one person  who had his own way of thinking,  to the
extent  that  that  is  possible.  At  any  rate,  under  his  deceptively
accommodating  exterior,  he  was  free  and  uncomp romisingly
original in his opinions.
“That’s  it, my son,” Malan  was saying.  “Since  you’re  going to see
your mother,  try to nd  out something  about your father.  And come
back—at  top speed—and  tell me what happened  next. I so seldom
nd anything to laugh about.”
“Yes, it’s ridiculous.  But now that my curiosity  is aroused  I might
as well try to pick up some more information.  It’s a bit pathological
that I’ve never concerned myself with it.”

“Not at all, it’s wisdom  in this case. I was married  for thirty years
to Marthe,  whom  you knew.  A perfect  woman  and I still miss her. I
1 always thought she liked her house.”
“No doubt  you’re  right,”  Malan was saying,  looking  away,  and
Cormery  waited  for  the  objection  that  was  bound  to  follow  his
approval.
“Nonetheless,”  Malan  resumed,  “I  myself,  and  I  am  surely
mistaken,  I would  restrain  myself  from trying  to learn more than life
has taught  me. But I am a bad example  in this respect,  am I not?
When  all is said and done,  it’s surely  a fault in me that I would
make  no  such  attempt.  Whereas  you”—and  his  eyes  lit  up
mischievously—“you are a man of action.”
Malan  had  a  Chinese  look,  with  his  moon  face,  a  somewhat
attened  nose, scarcely  any eyebrows,  a bowl-cut  hairdo , and a big
moustache  that  failed  to  cover  his  thick,  sensual  lips.  His  soft,
rounded  body,  the  eshy  hand  with  pudgy  ngers  suggested  a
mandarin  who disapproved  of traveling  by foot. When he half closed
his eyes while eating  heartily,  you could not help seeing him in a
silk robe holding  chopsticks  between  his ngers.  But the expression
changed  all that. The feverish  dark-brown  eyes, restless  or suddenly
intent,  as if the mind was focused  on a very specic  point, were the
eyes of an Occidental of great sensitivity and culture.
The elderly  maid brought  a cheese tray, which  Malan  ogled out of
the corner  of his eye. “I knew a man,”  he said, “who after he had
lived with his wife for thirty years ...” Cormery  paid close attention:
whenever  Malan  began  with “I knew a man who ...” or “a friend  ...”
or “an Englishman  who was traveling  with me ...” you could be sure
he was talking  about  himself ... “who didn’t  like pastries  and his
wife  never  ate  them  either.  Well,  after  twenty  years  of  living
together,  he caught  his wife in the pastry  shop, and by keeping  an
eye on her he found  out that she went there several  times a week to
stu    herself  with  coee  éclairs.  Yes,  he  thought  she  didn’t  like
sweets while in fact she loved coee éclairs.”
“So,” said Cormery, “we never know anyone.”
“If you will. But it might  perhaps be more accurate,  it  seems  to
me, in any case I think I would  prefer  to say, but blame  it on my

inability  to state anything  positively—yes,  suce  it to say that if
twenty  years of living  together  are not enough  to know a person,
then an inquiry  that is bound  to be supercial  forty years after a
man’s  death, runs the risk of bringing  you only limited  information,
yes, one can say information  with limited  meaning  about  this man.
Although, in another sense ...”
He lifted a knife and, with a fatalistic  air, brought  it down on the
goat cheese.  “Excuse  me. Won’t you have some cheese?  No? Still so
abstemious!  It’s  a  hard  job  pleasing  you!”  Again  there  was  a
mischievous gleam in his half-closed eyes.
Cormery  had known  his old friend  for twenty  years now (add here
why and how), and he accepted his irony with good humor. “It’s not
a matter of pleasing  me. Eating  too much  makes  me heavy,  and I
sink.”
“Yes, and then you no longer soar over the rest of us.”
Cormery  gazed at the handsome  rustic  furniture  that lled  the
low-ceilinged  dining  room  with  its  whitewashed  beams.  “My
friend,”  he said, “you’ve  always thought  I was arrogant.  I am, but
not always  or with everyone.  With you, for example,  I’m incapable
of arrogance.”
Malan  looked  away, which  in him was a sign of emotion.  “I know
that,” he said. “But why is it?”
“Because I love you,” Cormery said quietly.
Malan  pulled  the  bowl  of  chilled  fruit  toward  him.  He  said
nothing.
“Because,”  Cormery  went  on,  “when  I  was  very  young,  very
foolish,  and very much alone—you  remember,  in Algiers?—you  paid
attention  to me and, withou t seeming  to, you opened  for me the
door to everything I love in the world.”
“Oh, you were gifted.”
“Of course. But even the most gifted  person  needs  someone  to
initiate  him. The one that life puts in your path one day, that person
must be loved and respected  forever,  even if he’s not responsible.
That is my faith!”
“Yes, yes,” Malan said blandly.

“I know you n d that hard to believe.  Mind you, do not think that
my aection  for you is blind.  You have great,  very great faults,  at
least in my eyes.”
Malan  licked his thick lips. Suddenly  he seemed  interested.  “What
faults?”
“For example  you are, let us say, thrifty.  Not out of avarice,  it’s
true, but out of fear, fear of going  without,  and so forth.  All the
same, it’s a serious  fault, one that I generally  dislike.  But, above  all,
you  cannot  help  suspecting  others  of  ulterior  motives.  You  are
instinctively  unable  to  believe  that  anyone  has  disinterested
opinions.”
“Look  here,” said Malan  as he nished  his wine, “I shouldn’t  have
coee, and yet ...”
b But Cormery kept his self-possession.  “For example,  I’m sure you
couldn’t  bring yourself  to believe  me if I  told you that if you were
just to ask, I would immediately give you everything I have.”
Malan  hesitated,  and now he was looking  at his friend. “Oh, I
know. You’re generous.”
“No, I am not generous.  I’m stingy  with my time and my energy,
with anything  that tires me, and that disgusts  me. But what I said is
true. You—you  don’t believe  me, and that is a fault in you, that is
where  you are really helpless , even though  you are a superior  man.
Because  you’re  wrong.  One  word  from  you,  right  now,  and
everything  I have is yours.  You have no need of it and it’s only an
example.  But I didn’t  choose  it arbitrarily.  Truly,  everything  I have
is yours.”
“Thank  you, really,”  Malan  said, his eyes half closed.  “I am very
touched.”
“All right, I’m embarrassing  you. You don’t like people  to speak
too openly.  I just wanted  to tell you that with all your faults I love
you. I love or revere very few people.  As for the rest, I’m ashamed  of
my indierence  to them.  But for those I love, nothing  and no one,
neither  I  nor  certainly  they  themselves,  can  ever  make  me  stop
loving  them. It took me a long time to learn that; now I know it.
That  being  said,  let’s  go  on  with  our  conversation:  you  don’t
approve of my trying to nd out about my father.”

“No—that  is  to  say,  I  do  approve.  I  was  just  afraid  you’d  be
disappointed.  A friend  of mine who was very attracted  to a young
woman  and wanted  to marry her made the mistake  of asking  others
about her.”
“A bourgeois,” Cormery said.
“Yes,”  Malan  said, “I was the one.” They both burst  out laughing.
“I was young.  I collected  such contradictory  opinions  about her that
my own view of her became  confused.  I wasn’t  sure whether  or not I
loved her. In short, I married another woman.”
“I can’t nd myself a second father.”
“No,  and  luckily  so.  One  is  enough,  if  I  can  go  by  my  own
experience.”
“All right,” said Cormery.  “Anyhow,  I have to go see my mother
in a few weeks.  That gives me an opportunity.  I spoke to you about
it  particularly  because  I  was  disturbed  a  while  back  by  that
dierence in age in my favor. Yes, in my favor.”
“Yes, I understand.”
Cormery looked at Malan.
“Tell yourself  he never  grew old,” Malan  said. “He was spared
that suering, and it is long.”
“Along with a certain number of pleasures.”
“Yes, you love life. You have to, since that’s all you believe  in.”
Malan  seated  himself  heavily  in a cretonne-covered  easy chair,  and
suddenly a look of inexpressible melancholy came over his face.
“You’re  right,” said Cormery.  “I’ve loved life, I’m hungry  for it. At
the same time, life seems  horrible to me, it seems  inacces sible. That
is why I am a believer,  out of skepticism.  Yes, I want to believe,  I
want to live, forever.” Cormery fell silent.
“At sixty-ve,  every year is a stay of execution,”  Malan  said. “I
would  like  to  die  in  peace,  and  dying  frightens  me.  I  have
accomplished nothing.”
“There  are people  who vindicate  the world,  who help others  live
just by their presence.”
“Yes, and they die,” Malan said.
They were silent,  and the wind blew a little harder  around  the
house.

“You’re  right, Jacques,”  said Malan.  “Go nd  out. You no longer
need a father.  You brought  yourself  up alone.  Now you could love
him as you know how to love. But ...” he said, and he hesitated.
“Come  back to see me. I don’t have much time left. And forgive  me
...”
“Forgive you?” said Cormery. “I owe everything to you.”
“No, you don’t owe me very much.  Just forgive  me for sometimes
not knowing how to respond to your aection.”
Malan  gazed at the antique  lamp hanging  over the table, and his
voice was hollow  when he said what a few minutes  later Cormery,
alone  in  the  wind  in  the  deserted  neighborhood,  would  keep  on
hearing over and over:
“There  is a terrible  emptiness  in me, an indierence  that hurts
c ...”
a . Chapter to be written and deleted.
1 . This and the two preceding paragraphs are crossed out.
b . I often lend money  that I know I’ll never get back, to people  I don’t care about. It’s
just that I don’t know how to say no, and that exasperates me.
c . Jacques  / I tried to nd  out for myself,  from the start, when I was a child, what was
right and what was wrong—because  no one around  me could  tell me. And now that
everything  is leaving  me I realize  I need someone  to show me the way and to blame  me
and praise me, by right not of power but of authority, I need my father.
I thought I knew it, and that I had myself in hand, I don’t [know?] any longer.

4   :   T h e   C h i l d ’ s   G a m e s
A  gentle  short  swell  was  making  the  ship  roll  in  the  July  heat.
Jacques  Cormery,  lying  half  naked  in  his  cabin,  watched  the
fragmented  reection  of  the  sunlight  on  the  sea  dancing  on  the
copper  rim of the porthole.  He jumped  to his feet to turn o   the fan
that was drying the perspiration  in his pores before  it even began  to
trickle  down his chest; it was better  to sweat.  Then he relaxed  on his
bunk, narrow  and hard as he liked a bed to be. Now the dull sound
of the engines  rose from the depths of the ship in mued  vibrations,
like an enormous army forever  on the march.  He liked the sound
these  big  steamers  made,  night  and  day,  and  the  sensation  of
walking  on a volcano,  while all around  the immense  sea oered  its
open reaches  to his view. But it was too hot on the deck; after lunch,
passengers  besotted  with food had collapsed  in the deck chairs  on
the covered  deck or had ed  down the passageways  belowdecks  at
siesta  time. Jacques  did not like to take a siesta.  “ A  benidor ,” he
thought  bitterly:  that was the bizarre  expression  his grandmother
used when he was a child in Algiers  and  she was making  him join
her for the siesta.  The three rooms  of the small apartment  in an
Algiers  neighborhood  were enveloped  in the striped  shade of the
a carefully  closed  shutters.   Outsid e,  the  heat  was  baking  the  dry
dusty  streets,  and, in the half-light  of the rooms,  one or two big
energetic  ies  were buzzing  around  like airplanes  as they searched
tirelessly  for  a  way  out.  It  was  too  hot  to  read  Pardaillan   or
b L’Intrépide .  On rare occasions  when his grandmother  wasn’t  home
or was chatting  with the neighbor,  the child would  poke his nose
through  the shutters  in the living  room that faced the street.  The
street  was deserted.  The red and yellow  canvas  shades  had been
pulled  down in front of the shoe and notions  stores across the street,

a curtain  of multicolored  beads masked  the entrance  to the tobacco
shop, and Jean’s  café was empty  except  for the cat lying on the sill
between  the  sawdust-covered  oor  and  the  dusty  sidewalk,  and
sleeping as if it were dead.
The  child  then  turned  back  to  the  sparse  whitewashed  room,
furnished  with a square  table in the middle,  and, against  the walls, a
sideboard,  a small desk that was scarred  and spotted  with ink, and,
on the oor,  a small mattress  covered  with a blanket  where,  after
c nightfall,  his half-mute  uncle slept; and ve  chairs.  In a  corner,  on
a mantelpiece  of which  only the shelf was made of marble,  stood a
small owered  vase with slender  neck, of the kind one nds  at a
fair.  The  child,  caught  between  the  two  deserts  of  sunlight  and
shade,  started  circling  the table at a hurried  pace, repeating  like a
litany:  “I’m bored!  I’m bored!”  He was bored,  yet in that boredom
was a game,  a delight,  a kind of excitement,  for rage would  seize
him as he heard  his grandmother  calling  a  be nidor  when at last she
came home.  But his protest s were in vain. The grandm other had
raised  nine  children  in  the  bush,  and  she  had  her  own  ideas  on
upbringing.  With a single shove she pushed  him into the bedroom.  It
was one of two rooms  that looked  out onto the yard. The other had
two beds, his mother’s  and the one he shared  with his brother.  His
grandmother  was entitled  to a room of her own. But she would  take
the child in her big high wooden  bed, often for the night and always
for the siesta.  He would  take o   his sandals  and lift himself onto the
bed. He had to take his place at the back, against  the wall, ever
since the day he slipped  to the oor  while  his grandmother  was
sleeping,  to resume  circling  around  the table and reciting  his litany.
Once in his place, he would  watch  his grandmother  take o   her
dress  and  drop  her  coarse  linen  shift,  fastened  at  the  top  by  a
drawstring  with a ribbon  that she would  undo. Then she in turn got
up on the bed, and the child smelled  beside  him the odor of elderly
esh  while he stared  at the big blue veins and old-age  spots that
marred  his grandmother’s  feet. “Go on,” she would  say. “ A  be nidor .”
She  went  to  sleep  very  quickly,  while  the  child,  his  eyes  open,
followed the comings and goings of the tireless ies.

Yes, he had hated that for years; and even later, as a grown  man,
and  until  he  had  been  gravely  ill,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to
stretch  out  after  lunch  during  the  hot  season.  If  he  happened
nonetheless  to fall asleep,  he would  awaken  nauseous  and ill at ease.
Only recently,  since he had been suering  from insomnia,  could he
sleep for half an hour during  the day and awaken  fresh and alert.  A
benidor  ...
The wind must have dropped,  attened  by the sun. The ship had
stopped  its gentle  rolling  and now seemed  to be proceeding  in a
straight  line, the engines  at full speed,  the propeller  boring  directly
through  the depths  of the water,  and the sound  of the pistons  so
steady  that  it  could  no  longer  be  distinguished  from  the  soft
ceaseless  murmur  of  the  sunlight  on  the  sea.  Jacques  was  half
asleep,  and  he  was  lled  with  a  kind  of  happy  anxiety  at  the
prospect  of returning  to Algiers and the small poor home in the old
neighborhood.  So it was every time he left Paris for Africa,  his heart
swelling  with a secret  exultation,  with the satisfaction  of one who
has made good his escape  and is laughing  at the thought  of the look
on  the  guards’  faces.  Just  as,  each  time  he  returned  to  Paris,
whether  by road or by train, his heart would  sink when he arrived,
without  quite knowing  how, at those rst  houses  of the outskirts,
lacking  any frontier  of trees or water  and which,  like an ill-fated
cancer,  reached  out its  ganglions  of poverty  and ugliness  to absorb
this foreign  body and take him to the center  of the city, where  a
splendid  stage set would  sometimes  make him forget  the forest  of
concrete  and steel that imprisoned  him day and night and invaded
even his insomnia.  But he had escaped,  he could  breathe, on the
giant back of the sea he was breathing  in waves,  rocked  by the great
sun, at last he could sleep and he could come back to the childhood
from which  he had never recovered,  to the secret  of the light, of the
warm  poverty  that had enabled  him to survive  and to overcome
everything.  That  fragmented  reection  on  the  copper  of  the
porthole,  now  almost  motionless,  came  from  the  same  sun  that
pressed  with all its weight  on the shutters  of the dark room where
the grandmother  was sleeping  and plunged  a very slender  sword
into the darkness  through  the one opening  that a sprung  knot had

left in the butt-strap  of the shutters.  The ies  were missing,  it was
not they who were peopling  and nourishing  his reverie;  there are no
ies  at sea, and besides  they were dead, those ies  the child had
loved because  they were noisy,  the only living  beings  in that world
chloroformed  by the heat, and all the men and animals  were lying
inert on their anks—except  himself,  it’s true; he was turning  over
on the bed in the narrow  space left to him between  the wall and his
grandmother,  and he wanted  also to live, and it seemed  to him that
the time for sleep was being subtracted  from his time for living and
playing.  His playmates  were waiting  for him, that was certain,  in
rue  Prévost-Paradol,  with  its  small  gardens  that  in  the  evening
smelled  of damp  from their watering  and of the honeysuckle  that
grew everywhere,  whether  or not it was watered.  As soon as his
grandmother  awakened,  he  would  dash  out,  down  to  the  rue  de
Lyon, still deserted  under  its cus  trees, run as far as the fountain  at
the corner of Prévost-Paradol , quickly  turn the cast-iron  crank at the
top of the fountain,  putting  his head under  the faucet  to receive  the
gushing  stream  that would  ll  his nostrils  and his ears, run down
the open neck of his shirt to his belly and down his legs under  his
shorts  to his sandals.  Then, happily  feeling  the water foam between
his feet and the leather  of the soles, he would  run breathlessly  to
d join Pierre  and the others  who were sitting  at the hall entrance  of
the only two-story house  on the street,  sharpening  the cigar-shaped
1 piece of wood they would  soon be using to play  canette  vinga  with
the blue wooden racquet.
As soon as they were all there, they went o,   scraping  the racquet
along  the rusty garden  fences in front of the houses,  which  made
enough  noise to awaken  the neighborhood  and make the cats jump
out of their sleep under  the dusty wisteria.  They ran, crossing  the
street,  trying to catch each other, already  covered  with sweat,  but
always  in the same direction,  toward  the “green  eld”  not far from
their school,  four or ve  blocks  away.  But there was an obligatory
stop  at  what  was  known  as  the  waterspout,  an  enormous  round
fountain  on two levels  in a rather  large square,  where the water
never ran, but the basin,  long since clogged  up, would  on occasion
be  lled  to  the  brim  by  the  country’s  torrential  rains.  Then  the

water,  covered  with old moss,  melon  rinds,  orange  peels,  and all
sorts of refuse,  would  stagnate until the sun sucked  it up or the
municipal  authorities  roused  themselves  and decided  to pump it out,
and a lthy  dry cracking  sludge  remained  for a long time at the
bottom  of  the  basin,  waiting  till  the  sun,  pursuing  its  eorts,
reduced  it to dust and the wind or the brooms  of the street sweepers
blew it onto the shiny leaves  of the cus  that surrounded  the square.
In summer, at any rate, the basin was dry, and its broad  edge of
shiny dark stone,  made slippery  by thousands  of hands  and trouser
bottoms,  was available  to Jacques,  Pierre,  and the others  to play at
jousting,  swiveling  in their seats until the inevitable  fall hurled  them
into the shallow basin that smelled of urine and sun.
Then,  still running,  through  the heat and the dust that covered
their feet and their sandals  with a single  gray layer, they dashed  on
to the green  eld.  It was a vacant  lot behind  a cooperage,  where
among  rusted  hoops  and  old  rotting  barrel  bottoms  bunches  of
anemic  grass sprouted  between  patches  of chalky  tu.   There  amidst
loud cries they would  draw a circle in the tu.   One of them would
take up a position in the circle, racquet  in hand,  and the others
would  take turns hurling  the wooden  cigar into the circle.  If the
cigar landed  in the circle,  the thrower  took the racquet,  and then he
e defended  the circle.  The more skillful  among  them  would hit the
cigar on the y  and drive it far away.  In that case they had the right
to go where  it had landed,  make the cigar jump in the air by hitting
its end with the edge of the racquet,  then drive it still farther, and so
on until either  they missed  their swing or the others  caught it on the
y,  and they hurried  back again to defend  the circle from the cigar
hurled  quickly   and  expertly  by  the  opponent.  This  poor  man’s
tennis,  which  had a few more complex  rules,  would  take up the
whole  afternoon.  Pierre  was the best player.  He was thinner  than
Jacques,  and smaller,  almost frail; his hair was as much  blond  as
brown  hanging  down to his eyebrows  beneath  which  his blue eyes
were direct and vulnerable,  a bit hurt, astonished;  though  clumsy  in
his manner, in action  he was sure and accurate.  As for Jacques,  he
would  make impossible  parries  and miss routine  backhands.  Because
of the former,  and the successes that caused  his comrades  to admire

him, he thought  he was the best player  and often bragged  about it.
In fact, Pierre  beat him all the time and never said a word. But after
the game he would straight en up to his full height  and smile to
f himself while he listened to the others.
When  either  the  weather  or  their  mood  did  not  lend  itself  to
running  around  the streets  and vacant  lots, they would  rst  gather
in the hall of Jacques’s  house.  From  there they went out the back
door and down  into a small yard enclosed  on three sides by the
walls of houses. On the fourth side a big orange  tree stretched  its
branches  over a garden  wall; when it was in ower,  its scent rose
alongside  the wretched  houses,  drifting  through  the hall or down a
small stone stairs to the yard. Along  one side and half of another  a
small L-shaped  building  housed  the Spanish  barber  whose  shop was
g on the street,  and an Arab household  where  on some evenings  the
wife would be roasting  coee  in the yard. On the third side, the
tenants  kept hens up in high dilapidated  coops  made of wood and
wire screening.  Finally,  on the fourth  side, the black maws  of the
building’s  cellars  gaped  on either  side of the stairs:  caverns  without
exit  or  lighting,  cut  into  the  earth  itself,  without  any  partitions,
sweating  with humidity,  reached  by four steps covered  with green
mold,  where  the tenants  piled at random  their surplus  possessions,
that  is,  almost  nothing:  old  sacks  were  rotting  there,  scraps  of
chests,  rusty  old  washbasins  with  holes  in  them,  things  you  nd
lying around vacant lots that even the poorest  have no use for. It
was there,  in one of those cellars,  that the children  would gather.
Jean and Joseph, the two sons of the Spanish  barber,  were in the
habit of playing  there.  Since it was at the door to their hovel,  the
cellar was their own territory.  Joseph,  plump  and mischievous,  was
always  laughin g and would  give away everything  he had. The short
and thin  Jean was forever picking  up even the smallest  nail or screw
that he found, and he was particularly  stingy  with his marbles  and
with the apricot  pits that were necessary  for one of their favorite
h games.   You  could  not  imagine  more  opposite  types  than  these
inseparable  brothers. With Pierre,  Jacques,  and Max, the last of the
accomplices,  they would  plunge  into the humid  stinking  cellar. They
would  take torn sacks that were rotting  on the ground  and, after

ridding  them of the gray cockroaches  with jointed  shells that they
called  guinea pigs, they would  stretch  them over rusty iron uprights.
And under  this vile tent, in their own place at last (when  none of
them had ever had a room or even a bed he could call his own),
they would light a little re  that, conned  in that damp air, would
die out in smoke  and drive them out of their den until they covered
it over with some damp  earth they had scraped  up from the yard
itself. Then they would  share,  not without  an argument  from little
Jean, the big mint-avored  caramels,  the dried and salted  peanuts
and chick-peas,  the salted  lupine  seeds called  “tramousses,”  and the
barley  sugar  that  came  in  loud  colors,  sold  by  the  Arabs  who
displayed  their wares  in front of the nearby  movie  theatre on a y-
besieged  stand made by mounting  a plain wooden  box on rollers.  On
days when  it rained  heavily,  the excess  water  would  run o   the
saturated  yard and ood  the cellars,  and the children,  standing  on
old boxes,  would  play Robinson Crusoe  far from the open sky and
i the sea breezes, triumphant in their kingdom of poverty.
* But the best  days were those in summer  when,  under  one pretext
or another, the boys managed  by a clever  lie to escape  the siesta.
Then,  since they never had money for the trolley,  they would  walk
the long way to the experim ental garden,  through  a succession  of
the neighborhood’s  yellow-and-gray  streets,  crossing  the district  of
the  stables,  the  big  coachhouses  belonging  to  businesses  or
individuals  who supplied  the regions  of the interior  with their horse-
drawn  trucks,  then passing  alongside  big sliding  doors behind  which
they heard the horses  stampi ng, the sudden  snorts  that would make
the  animals’  lips  smack,  the  sound  of  the  metal  chains  used  as
halters  hitting  against  the  wood  of  the  manger,  while  the  boys
breathed  with delight  the odors of manure,  of straw,  and of sweat
that came from these forbidden places  that Jacques  would  still be
dreaming  about while he went to sleep. They, lingered  in front of an
open stable  where  the horses  were being  groomed,  heavyset  big-
hoofed  animals  that came from France;  they were beaten  down by
the heat and the ies,  and their eyes were those of exiles. Then,
chased  away  by  the  teamsters,  the  children  ran  on  to  the  huge
garden  where  the rarest of species  were raised.  There,  on the broad

walk  that led past a great vista of pools and owers  to the sea, they
were under the suspicious  eyes of the guards,  and they aected  the
manner  of casual,  worldly  strollers.  But at the rst  transverse  path,
they would  head toward  the eastern  part of the garden, through
rows of enormous  mangroves  so dense that in their shade it seemed
j almost  night,  then past the big rubber  trees  where  you could  not
tell the drooping  branches  from their multiple  roots,  which  grew
from the rst  branches  to reach the ground;  and still farther,  to the
real objective  of their expedition,  the big palms  that bore at their
tops tightly  packed  bunches  of round  orange  fruits that they called
“cocoses.”  Once there,  they rst  had to reconnoiter  in all directions
to make sure no guards  were nearby.  Then began  the search  for
ammunition—that  is, stones.  When  they had all returned  with their
pockets  full, they took turns ring  stones  at the bunches  of fruit
swaying  gently in the sky above  all the other trees. Each stone that
struck  home  knocked  down  a  few  fruits,  which  belonged  to  the
winning  marksman. The others  had to wait till he had picked up his
loot before they red  in their turn. Jacques,  who had a good arm,
equaled  Pierre  at this game.  But they both shared  their booty  with
those who were less successful.  The worst among  them at this game
was Max, who wore glasses  and had poor eyesight.  He was squat
and solidly  built, and the boys had respected  him ever since the day
they saw him ght.  The others,  and especially  Jacques,  who could
not  control  his  violent  temper,  were  in  the  habit  during  their
frequent  street  ghts  of hurling  themselves  at the adversary  in an
attempt  to inict  as much pain as quickly  as possible,  even at the
risk  of  being  hit  hard  in  return.  But  when  Max,  whose  name
sounded  German,  was called  a dirty Hun by the butche r’s fat son,
nicknamed  “Gigot,”  he  calmly  removed  his  glasses,  which  he
entrusted  to  Joseph,  took  up  the  boxer’s  stance  they  had  seen
pictured  in the newspapers,  and invited  the other boy to repeat  his
insult.  Then, not seeming  to raise a sweat,  he dodged  each attack  by
Gigot,  hit him several  times without  being even touched  in return,
and na lly, the supreme  glory, he gave Gigot a black eye. Since that
day, Max’s  popularity  in the little group  had been assured.  Now,
with their hands  and pocket s sticky  with fruit, they hurried out of

the  garden  toward  the  sea,  and  once  they  were  outside  the
boundary,  they ate the cocoses  stacked  on their dirty handkerchiefs,
chewing  delightedly  on brous  berries  that were nauseatingly  sweet
and rich, yet as light and savory  as victory.  Then they scurried  o   to
the beach.
To get there they had to cross what was called  the sheep’s trail,
because  in  fact  ocks  of  sheep  often  traveled  it  to  or  from  the
Maison-Carrée  market,  east of Algiers.  Actually  it was a lateral road
that divided the sea from the city spread  out on its hills like the arc
of  an  amphitheatre.  Betwee n  the  road  and  the  sea  lay  factories,
brickyards,  and a gasworks  separated  by stretches  of sand covered
with patches  of clay or lime dust where  scraps  of iron and wood
were  turning  white.  You  crossed  this  barren  land  to  reach  the
Sablettes  beach. Its  sand was somewhat  dirty, and the water  in the
rst  waves  was  not  always  clear.  To  the  right,  the  public  baths
oered  cabins,  and  its  hall,  a  big  wooden  box  on  pilings,  was
available  for dancing  on holidays.  Every  day, during  the season,  a
french-fries  peddler would  start up his stove.  Seldom  did the little
group  have even the price of a single  paper cornet  of fried potatoes.
k If by chance  one of them had the required  coin,  he would  buy his
twist,  march  solemnly  to  the  beach,  followed  respectfu lly  by  the
retinue  of his comrades,  and, in the shade  of an old derelict barge
by the sea, he would  set his feet in the sand and drop to a sitting
position  while  holding  his twist vertical  in one hand and covered
with the other,  to make sure he did not lose a single  one of the
crusty  fries. The custom  was that he would  then give his comrades
one fry apiece,  and they would reverently  savor the single tidbit,  hot
and  smelling  of  strong  oil,  that  he  permitted  them.  They  would
watch  while  the favored  boy gravely  relished  the remaining  fries
one by one. There  were always  crumbs  left at the bottom  of the
paper  twist, which  they would  implore  the glutted  owner  to share.
Most of the time, unless  it was Jean, he would  unfold  the oily paper,
spread  out the potato  crumbs, and authorize  them to take a single
crumb  each. All it took then was an eenie,  meenie,  minie,  moe to
decide  who would  go rst  and thus get the biggest  crumb.  When
their  feast  was  over,  both  pleasure  and  frustration  immediately

forgotten,  they would  race under  the harsh  sun toward  the western
end  of  the  beach,  until  they  came  to  a  half-destroyed  masonry
structure  that must have been the foundation  for a now vanished
bungalow,  behind which  they could undress.  In a few seconds  they
were naked, a moment  later in the water,  swimming  with clumsy
l vigor,  shouting ,  drooling and spitting,  daring each other to dive or
vying  as to who could  stay underwater  the longest.  The sea was
gentle  and warm, the sun fell lightly  on their soaked  heads, and the
glory of the light lled  their young  bodies  with a joy that made
them cry out incessantly.  They reigned  over life and over the sea,
and,  like  nobles  certain  that  their  riches  were  limitless,  they
heedlessly consumed the most gorgeous of this world’s oerings.
They forgot  the time as they ran back and forth between  beach
and sea, drying  the salt water that made  them sticky  while  they
were  on  the  sand,  then  in  the  water  washing  o   the  sand  that
clothed  them in gray. They ran on and on, and the swifts  with their
quick cries were beginning  to y  lower  over the factories and the
beach.  The sky, emptied  of the hot haze of the day, became  clearer,
then turned  greenish,  the light slackened,  and on the other side of
the bay, till now enveloped  in a sort of fog, the sweep  of houses  and
the city became  more distinct.  It was still day, but already  lamps
were being lit in preparation  for Africa’s  brief twilight.  Pierre  was
usually  the rst  to sound  the alarm:  “It’s  late,” and right away came
the stampede,  the quick farewell. Jacques  with Joseph  and Jean ran
toward  their  homes  without  worrying  about  the  others.  They
galloped  till they were out of breath:  Joseph’s  mother  was quick
with her hand.  And as for Jacques’s  grandmother  ... They ran on
through  the rapidly  falling  night,  panicked  when the rst  gaslamp
went on, the trolleys  with their lights on receding  before  them; they
ran faster,  dismayed  to see that night had already  fallen,  and parted
on the doorstep  without  even a goodbye.  On such evenin gs Jacques
would  stop on the dark stinking  stairs,  lean against  the wall, and
wait for his throbbing  heart to quiet down.  But he could not wait,
and the knowledge  made him gasp still more. In three strides  he was
on the landing;  he passed  by the door to the toilet for the oor,  and
he opened his door. There was a light in the dining  room at the end

of the hall, and, chilled,  he heard the rattle of spoons  against dishes.
a He  entered.  At  the  table  his  half-mute  uncle   went  on  noisily
sucking  up  his  soup;  his  mother,  still  young,  her  brown  hair
abundant,  gazed  at  him  with  her  lovely  gentle  look.  “You  know
perfectly well—” she began.
But his grandm other,  of whom  he only saw the back, interrupted
her daughter;  she was erect in her black dress, her mouth rmly  set,
her eyes direct and stern. “Where were you?” she asked.
“Pierre was showing me the arithmetic homework.”
The  grandmot her  stood  and  came  over  to  him.  She  snied  his
hair, then ran her hands  over his ankles  still covered  with sand.
“You were at the beach.”
“Then you’re liar,” the uncle managed to articulate.
The  grandmother  passed  behind  him  to  get  the  crude  whip,
known  as a bull’s pizzle,  that was hanging  behind  the door, and she
gave him three or four lashes on his legs and buttocks  that burned
till he howled.  A little while later, sitting  with tears lling  his mouth
and throat before the plate of soup that the uncle,  moved  to pity,
had served  him, he strained  every nerve  to keep those tears from
overowing.  And  his  mother,  after  a  glance  at  the  grandmother,
would  turn to him that face he so loved:  “Eat your soup,”  she would
say. “It’s all over. It’s all over.” That was when he let go and wept.
Jacques  Cormery  awakened.  The sun was no longer  reected  in the
copper  of the porthole,  but had dropped  to the horizon  and was
lighting  up the wainscoting  across  the cabin.  He dressed  and went
out on the deck. He would nd Algiers at the end of the night.
a . Around his tenth year.
b . Those big books  printed  on newsprint,  with crudely  colored  covers  on which the
price was printed in bigger type than the title or the name of the author.
c . extreme cleanliness.
A wardrobe,  a wooden dressing  table with a marble  top. A bedside  rug with knotted

stitches,  worn and dirty, frayed  at the edges.  And in a corner,  a big trunk covered  with
an old tasseled Arab rug.
d . His friend Pierre was also the son of a war widow, who worked in the post oce.
1 . See the author’s explanation below.
e . put the skillful defender in the singular.
f .  The  green  eld  was  where  the  donnades   took  place.  [Fights  between  boys  that
followed a strict ritual. See pp. 153–54— Trans .]
g . Omar is the son of this couple—the father is a city street sweeper.
h . You put one pit on top of a tripod  of three other pits. Someone  tries to knock this
structure  down by throwing  another  pit at it from a given distance.  If he succeeds,  he
picks up the four pits. If he misses, his pit belongs to the owner of the pile.
i . Galoufa.
*  biggest.
j . give the name of the trees.
k . 2 sous
l . If you drown,  your mother’ll  kill you. Aren’t  you ashamed  to let everything  hang out
like that. Where’s your mother.
m . the brother.

5   :   T h e   F a t h e r .   H i s   D e a t h
The War. The Bombing
He held her in his arms, right at the door, still out of breath  from
racing  up the stairs four at a time, in a single  surefooted  dash not
missing  a step, as if his body still remembered  the exact height  of
each  stair.  When  he  had  gotten  out  of  the  taxi,  the  street  was
a already  lively  and  still  sparkling  in  spots  from  the  morning’s
sprinkling,  which  the burgeo ning heat was beginning  to disperse  in
mist;  he  saw  her  there  where  she  had  been  long  ago,  on  the
apartment’s  single  narrow  balcony between  the two rooms,  over the
barber’s  roof—but  this barber  was no longer  the father  of Jean and
Joseph;  he  died  of  tuberculosis;  it  goes  with  the  trade,  his  wife
would  say, always  having  to breathe  hair—the  corrugated-iron  roof
still carried  the same load of cus  berries,  bits of crumpled  paper,
and old cigarette  butts.  She was there,  her hair still abundant  but
turned  white years ago, still erect despite  her seventy-two  years;  she
looked  ten  years  younger  because  she  was  so  slender  and  her
strength  was still evident—t hey were all like that in the family,  a
clan of lean people with a nonchalant  manner  whose  energy  was
inexhaustible;  old age did not seem to have any hold on them.  At
1 fty  his  half-mute  Uncle  Émile   looked  like  a  young  man.  The
grandmother  had  died  without  bowing  her  head.  And  as  for  his
mother,  toward whom  he was now running,  it seemed  that nothing
could erode her gentle  endurance, since decades  of exhausting  labor
had spared the young  woman  in her that Cormery  as a child had
admired with all his heart.

When  he arrived  on the doorstep, his mother  opened  the door and
threw  herself in his arms.  And there,  as she did every time they
were  reunited,  she  kissed  him  two  or  three  times,  holding  him
against  her with all her strength; and in his arms he felt her ribs, the
hard  jutting  bones  of  her  shoulders,  trembling  a  bit,  while  he
breathed  the soft smell of her skin that made  him remember  the
spot, under her larynx,  between  the two jugular  tendons,  that he no
longer  dared to kiss, but that as a child he had loved to nuzzle  and
fondle  on  those  infrequent  occasions  when  she  took  him  on  her
knees and he pretended  to sleep, his nose in the little hollow  that to
him had the scent of a tenderness all too rare in his young  life. She
embraced  him, and then, having  let go of him, she looked  at him
and took him again in her  arms to kiss him once more, as if she had
measured  in herself  all the love she had or could express  and found
that one measure  was still missing.  “My son,” she said, “you were
b far away.”  And immediately  she turned  away,  went back into the
apartment,  and  seated  herself  in  the  dining  room  that  faced  the
street;  she  no  longer  seemed  to  be  thinking  of  him  nor  for  that
matter  of anything,  and she even looked  at him from time to time
with an odd expression,  as if—or  so at least it seemed  to him—he
were now in the way, were disturbing  the narrow,  empty,  closed
universe  which  she circled  in her solitude.  What was more,  once he
was seated by her, she seemed on this day to be seized  with some
sort of anxiety,  and occasion ally she would  glance  furtively  out at
the street with her lovely  melancholy  expression,  her eyes feverish
until she turned to Jacques and they became peaceful.
The street was getting  noisier,  and the heavy  red trolleys  were
rattling  by more often.  Cormery  watched  his mother,  in her small
gray blouse set o   by a white collar,  sitting  in prole  on the same
2 uncomfortable  chair []  by the window where  she had always  sat,
her back a bit rounded  by age, but still not seeking  the support  of
the chair,  her hands  clasped  around  a small handkerchief  that now
and then she would  roll into a ball with her stiened  ngers,  then
leave in the hollow  of her dress between  her motionless  hands,  her
head turned  a  little toward  the window.  She was just as she had
been  thirty  years  ago,  and  behind  the  wrinkles  he  once  more

discovered  the same miraculo usly young  face, the arch of her brows
as smooth  and polished  as if they had been cast with the forehead,
her small straight  nose, the mouth still clearly  delineated  despite  the
tension  at the corners  of her lips from her dentures.  The neck itself,
which  is so soon laid waste,  had kept its form although  the tendons
were knotty and the chin a bit slack.
“You went to the hairdresser,” Jacques said.
She smiled with her look of a little girl caught  in some misdeed.
“Yes, you know,  you were coming.”  She had always  been coquettish
in her almost invisible  way. And, as plainly  as she might  be dressed,
Jacques  did not remember  ever seeing  her wear anything  ugly. Even
now, the grays and blacks  in which  she dressed  were well chosen.
That was the way of the clan, who were always  wretched,  or just
poor, or occasionally,  in the case of certain  cousins,  somewhat  well
o.    But  all  of  them,  especially  the  men,  insisted  like  all
Mediterraneans  on white shirts and pressed  pants,  nding  it natural
that this work of upkeep—constant,  given their meager  wardrobes—
should  be added  to the labor of the women,  whether  mothers  or
c spouses.  As for his mother,  she had always reckoned  that it was not
enough  to wash other people’s  laundry  and do their housework,  and
as far back as he could remember,  Jacques  had  seen her ironing the
single  pair of pants that he and his brother  each had, until he left to
go o into the world of women who neither iron nor do laundry.
“It’s the Italian,”  his mother  said. “The hairdresser.  He does good
work.”
“Yes,”  said Jacques.  He was going to say: “You’re  very beautiful,”
and he stopped  himself.  He had always  thought  that of his mother
and had never dared  to tell her so. It was not that he feared being
rebued  nor that he doubted  such a compliment  would  please  her.
But  it  would  have  meant  breaching  the  invisible  barrier  behind
which  for all his life he had seen her take shelter—gentle,  polite,
complaisant,  even passive,  and yet never  conquered  by anyone  or
anything,  isolated  by her semi-deafness,  her diculty  in expressing
herself,  beautiful  surely  but virtually  inaccessible,  and never  more
so than when she was full of smiles  and when his own heart most
went out to her—yes,  all his life she had had the same manner,

fearful  and submissive,  yet also distant,  the same look she had thirty
years ago when she watched  without  intervening  while her mother
beat Jacques  with a whip, she who had never touched  or even really
scolded  her children;  there was no doubt  that those blows  wounded
her too, but she could  not intervene  because  she was exhausted,
because  she could not nd  the words,  and because  of the respect  she
owed her mother;  she had not interfered,  she had endured  through
the  long  days  and  the  years,  had  endured  those  blows  for  her
children,  just as for herself  she endured  the hard days of working  in
the service of others,  washin g oors  on her knees,  living  without  a
man and without  solace  in the midst of the greasy leavings  and dirty
linen of other people’s  lives, the long days of labor adding  up one by
one to a life that, by dint of being deprived  of hope, had become
also a life without any sort of resentment,  unaware,  persevering,  a
life resigned to all kinds of suering,  her own as well as that of
others.  He had never heard her complain,  other than to say she was
tired or that her back hurt after a big washday.  He had never heard
her speak ill of anyone,  other than to say a sister or aunt had not
been nice to her, or was “stuck  up.” But on the other hand, he had
seldom  heard  her laugh  wholeheartedly.  She laughed  a little more
now  that  she  was  no  longer  working  because  her  children  were
paying  for all her needs.  Jacques  looked  around  the room,  which
had  also  remained  unchang ed.  She  had  not  wanted  to  leave  this
apartment  where  she  had  her  own  routines,  this  neighborhood
where  everything  was easy for her, to go to a more comfortable
place where  everything  would  have become  dicult  for her. Yes, it
was the same room.  They had replaced  the furniture;  it was decent
now, less wretched.  But the pieces  themselves  were still bare, still
pushed back against the wall.
“You’re always poking around,” his mother said.
Yes, he could  not keep himself from opening  the buet,  which
still contained  only the bare necessities,  despite  all his entreaties;  its
nakedness  fascinated  him.  He  also  opened  the  drawers  of  the
sideboard  that housed  the two or three medications  with which  this
household  made do, mixed  in with two or three old newspapers,  bits
of  string,  a  little  cardboard  box  lled  with  odd  buttons,  an  old

identication  photo.  Here  even  the  unnecessary  was  shabby,
because  they never had anything superuous.  And Jacques  was well
aware  that had his mother  been put in a standard  household  where
objects  were  as  plentiful  as  they  were  in  his  present  home,  she
would  only have made use of what was strictly  necessary.  He knew
that  in  the  next  room,  his  mother’s,  furnished  with  a  small
wardrobe,  a  narrow  bed,  a  wooden  dressing  table,  and  a  straw-
bottomed  chair,  its one window  hung with a crocheted  curtain,  he
would  nd  no articles  at all, except,  now and then, the small rolled-
up handkerchi ef that she would leave on the bare wooden  top of the
dressing table.
That  was  just  what  had  struck  him  when  he  rst  saw  other
households,  those of his classmates  at the  lycée  or later those of a
more  well-to-do  world:  the  number  of  vases,  bowls,  statuettes,
paintings  that crowded  those rooms.  In his home,  his family  said
“the vase that’s on the mantelpiece”;  the pot, the soup dishes,  and
the few articles  you might  nd  had no names.  At his uncle’s,  on the
other hand,  one was made to admire  the glazed  earthenware  from
the Vosges  and you ate o   the Quimper  dinner  service.  Jacques had
grown  up in the midst of a poverty  naked  as death,  among  things
named  with common  nouns;  it was at his uncle’s  that he discovered
those  proper  nouns.  And  still  today,  in  this  room  with  freshly
washed  tiles, on this plain shiny furniture,  there was nothing  except
an  Arab  ashtray  made  of  chased  copper,  there  because  he  was
coming,  and a post oce   calendar  on the wall. There was nothing  to
see here, and  little to say, and that was why he knew nothing  about
his mother except  what he learned  from his own experience.  Nor
about his father.
“Papa?”
d She looked at him, and now she was paying attention.
“Yes.”
“His name was Henri, and what else?”
“I don’t know.”
“Didn’t he have any other name?”
“I think he did, but I don’t remember.”  Suddenly  distracted,  she
gazed at the street where  the sun was now beating  down with all its

force.
“He looked like me?”
“Yes,  he  was  your  spitting  image.  He  had  blue  eyes.  And  his
forehead was like yours.”
“What year was he born?”
“I don’t know. I was four years older.”
“And you, what year were you born?”
“I don’t know. Look in the family book.”
Jacques  went into the bedroo m and opened  the wardrobe.  Among
the towels, on the top shelf, were the family  record  book, a pension
book, and some old documents  in Spanish.  He came back with the
papers.
“He was born in 1885 and you in 1882.  You were three years
older.”
“Ah! I thought it was four. It was a long time ago.”
“You told me he lost his father  and mother  when  he was very
young, and his brothers put him in an orphanage.”
“Yes. His sister too.”
“His parents had a farm?”
“Yes. They were Alsatians.”
“At Ouled-Fayet.”
“Yes. And we were at Chéragas. It’s right nearby.”
“How old was he when he lost his parents?”
“I don’t know.  Oh, he was young. His sister left him. That wasn’t
right. He didn’t want to see them anymore.”
“How old was his sister?”
“I don’t know.”
“And his brothers? Was he the youngest?”
“No. He was the second one.”
“But then his brothers were too young to look after him.”
“Yes, that’s it.”
“Then it wasn’t their fault.”
“No, he held it against  them. After the orphanage,  when he was
sixteen,  he went to his sister’s  farm. They made him work too much.
It was too much.”
“He came to Chéragas.”

“Yes, to our place.”
“That’s where you met him?”
“Yes.”  Again she turned  her head away,  toward  the street,  and he
felt himself  unable  to continu e along that line. But she herself  went
in another  direction.  “You have to understand,  he didn’t  know how
to read. They didn’t learn anything in the orphanage.”
“But you showed me postcards he sent you from the war.”
“Yes, he learned from M. Classiault.”
“At Ricome.”
“Yes.  M.  Classiault  was  the  boss.  He  taught  him  to  read  and
write.”
“How old was he?”
“Twenty,  I think.  I don’t know.  All that was long ago. But when
we were married,  he had learned  about  wines  and he could work
anywhere.  He had a good head on his shoulders.”  She looked  at
him. “Like you.”
“And then?”
“And  then?  Your  brother  came.  Your  father  was  working  for
Ricome, and Ricome sent him to his farm at Saint-Lapôtre.”
“Saint-Apôtre?”
“Yes. And then there was the war. He died. They sent me the shell
splinter.”
The shell fragment that had split his father’s  skull was in a little
biscuit  can behind  those same towels  in that same wardrobe,  with
the dry and terse cards written  from the front that he could recite by
heart.  “My dear Lucie.  I’m well. We’re  changing  quarters  tomorrow.
Take good care of the children. I kiss you. Your husband.”
Yes, in the depths  of the night when  he was born during their
move,  an emigrant,  child of emigrants,  Europe  was already  tuning
its cannons  that would  go o   in unison  several  months  later, chasing
the Cormerys  from Saint-Apôtre,  he to his army corps in Algiers,  she
to  her  mother’s  little  apartment  in  that  wretched  neighborhood,
carrying  in her arms the baby swollen  with mosquito  bites from the
Seybouse.  “Don’t  trouble  yourself,  Mother.  We’ll leave when Henri
comes back.”

And  the  grandmother,  erect,  white  hair  pulled  back,  her  eyes
bright and hard: “Daughter, you’ll have to go to work.”
“He was in the Zouaves.”
“Yes. He was in the war in Morocco.”
It was true. He had forgotten.  In 1905 his father  was twenty years
old.  He  had  been  on  active  duty,  as  they  say,  against  the
e Moroccans.  Jacques recalled  what M. Levesque,  the principal  of his
school,  had told him when he ran into him on the streets of Algiers
several  years earlier.  M. Levesque  had been called  up at the same
time as his father.  But they spent only a month  in the same unit.
According  to him, he did not know Cormery  well, for the latter had
little to say. Hardened  to fatigue,  closemouthed,  but easygoing  and
fair-minded.  On  just  one  occasion,  Cormery  had  seemed  beside
himself.  It was at night,  after a scorching  day, someplace  out in the
Atlas Mountains  where  the detail had made camp at the top of a hill
protected  by a rocky pass. Cormery  and Levesque  were supposed  to
relieve  the sentinel  at the bottom  of the pass. No one answered their
call. And, at the foot of a hedge of prickly  pears,  they found their
comrade  with his head back, bizarrely  facing  toward  the moon.  And
at rst  they did not recognize  his head because  of its strange  shape.
But it was very simple.  His  throat  had been cut and that ghastly
swelling  in his mouth  was his entire  sexual  organ.  That was when
they  saw  the  body,  with  the  legs  spread  wide,  the  Zouave’s
pantaloons  slashed,  and,  in  the  middle  of  the  gap,  that  swampy
f puddle,  which  they could see by the now indirect  light of the moon.
A  hundred  meters  farther  on,  this  time  behind  a  large  rock,  the
second  sentinel  was displaye d in the same position.  The alarm  was
sounded,  the number  of sentries doubled.  At dawn,  when they had
gone back up to the camp,  Cormery  said their enemies  were not
men. Levesque,  who was thinking  about  it, answered  that for them
that was how men should  act, that we were in their country,  that
they fought by any and all means.
Cormery’s  face was dead set. “Maybe.  But they’re  wrong.  A man
doesn’t do that.”
Levesque  said that according  to the other side, there were certain
circumstances  in which  a man was supposed  to do anything and

[destroy everything].
But Cormery had shouted  as if crazed  with anger:  “No, a man
doesn’t  let himself  do that kind of thing!  That’s  what makes  a man,
or otherwise  ...” Then he calmed  down.  “As for me,” he said in a
low voice,  “I’m poor, I came from an orphanage,  they put me in this
uniform,  they dragged  me into the war, but I wouldn’t  let myself  do
that.”
“There are Frenchmen who do do it,” [said] Levesque.
“Then  they too, they aren’t  men.”  And suddenly  he cried out: “A
lthy  race! What a race! All of them, all of them ...” And, white as a
sheet, he went into his tent.
When  he thought about it, Jacques  realized  that the most he had
learned  about his father  was from this old teacher,  of whom  he had
now lost track. But it was no more,  except  in the details,  than what
he had been able to surmise  from his mother’s  silences.  A hard man
and  a  bitter  one,  who  had  worked  all  his  life,  had  killed  on
command,  had submitted  to everything  that could not be avoided,
but had preserved some part of himself  where  he allowed  no one to
trespass.  A  poor  man,  after  all.  For  poverty  is  not  a  choice  one
makes,  but a poor person  can protect  himself.  And Jacques  tried,
with the little he knew from his mother,  to picture  the same man
nine  years  later,  married,  father  of  two,  who  had  achieved  a
somewhat  better  position  in life and then was summoned  back to
g Algiers  to be mobilized,  the long journey  by night with the patient
wife  and  the  unbearable  children,  the  parting  at  the  station  and
then, three days later, at the little apartment  in Belcourt,  his sudden
appearance  in  the  Zouave  regiment’s  handsome  red-and-blue
uniform  with its baggy  pantaloons,  sweating  under the thick wool in
* the  July   heat,  a  straw  hat  in  his  hand  because  he  had  neither
tarboosh  nor helmet,  after he had sneaked  out of the depot  under
the arches  of the docks and run to kiss his wife and children  before
h shipping  out that night for the France  he had never seen,  on the sea
that had never before  carried  him; and he embraced  them,  strongly
and quickly, and he left at the same pace, and the woman  on the
little balcony waved to him and he responded  on the run, turning  to
wave the straw hat, before  once more racing  down  the street that

was gray with dust and heat, and then he disappeared  in front of the
movie  theatre,  farther  on, into the radiant  light of the morning  from
which  he would  never  return.  Jacques  would  have to imagine  the
rest. Not through  what could be told to him by his mother,  who had
no idea what history  and geography  might  be, who knew only that
she lived on land near the sea, that France  was on the other side of
that sea which she too had never traveled,  France  in any case being
an obscure  place lost in a dim night which  one reached  through  a
port named  Marseilles,  which  she pictured  like the port of Algiers,
where  there was a shining  city they said was very beautif ul and that
was called  Paris, where  there was also a region  named  Alsace  that
her husband’s  family  came from—it  was a long time ago, they were
eeing  enemie s called  Germans  to settle in Algeria,  and now that
same region  had to be taken back from those same enemies  who
were always  evil and cruel,  especially  with the French,  and for no
reason  at all. The French  were always  obliged  to defend  themselves
against  these quarrelsome,  implacable  men. It was there,  along with
Spain,  which  she could  not locate but in any case it was not far
away,  from where  her own family, natives  of Mahon,  had emigrated
as long ago as her husband’s  family  to come to Algeria,  because they
were dying of hunger  in Mahon, and she did not even know that it
was on an island,  not knowing  anyway  what an island  was, for she
had never seen one. About  other countries,  she might  sometimes  be
struck  by the names  without  always  being able to pronounce  them
correctly.  And in any case she had never heard  of Austria-Hungary
nor of Serbia,  Russia—like  England—was  a dicult  name,  she did
not  know  what  an  archduke  was,  and  she  could  never  have
articulated  the four syllables  of Sarajevo.  The war was there,  like an
evil cloud thick with dark menace,  but you could not keep it from
invading  the sky, no more than you could  stop the locusts  or the
devastating  storms  that would swoop  down  on the high plains  of
Algeria.  The Germans  were forcing  France  into war once again,  and
we were going to suer—there  were no causes  for it, she did not
know the history  of France,  nor what history  was. She knew a little
of her own history, barely  knew the history  of those she loved,  and
those she loved had to suer   as she did. Into the night of the world

she could  not imagine,  and the history  she did not know,  a still
darker  night had just come;  mysterious  orders  had arrived,  brought
out into the bush by a sweating, weary  constable,  and they had to
leave the farm where  they were just getting  ready  to harvest  the
grapes—the  parish  priest was at the station  in Bône for the draftees’
departure:  “We must pray,”  he said to  her, and she had answered,
“Yes, Monsieu r Curé,”  but actually  she had not heard  him, for he
had  not  spoken  loudly  enough,  and  besides  the  idea  of  praying
would  never  have entered  her mind,  she never  wanted  to bother
anyone—and  now  her  husband  was  gone  away  in  his  handsome
multicolored  outt;  he  would  come  back  soon,  that  was  what
everyone  was saying,  the Germans  would  be punished,  but in the
meantime  she had to nd  work.  Luckily,  a neighbor  had told the
grandmother  that they needed women  in the cartridge  factory  at the
armory  and that they would  give preference  to the wives of men in
service,  especially  if they had family  responsibilities,  and she would
have  the  good  fortune  to  work  ten  hours  a  day  arranging  little
cardboard  tubes according  to their thickness  and color;  she would
be  able  to  bring  money  home  to  the  grandmother,  the  children
would  have enough  to eat until the Germans  were punished  and
Henri came home. Of course,  she did not know there was a Russian
front,  nor what a front was, nor that the war could spread  to the
Balkans,  to the Middle  East, to the planet;  everything  was going on
in France,  where  the Germans  had entered  without  giving  warning
and  were  attacking  children.  Actually  everything  over  there  was
happening  with the troops  from Africa,  among  them H. Cormery,
transported  as quickly  as possible,  led as they were to a mysterious
region  people were talking  about,  the Marne,  and there was no time
to nd  them helmets;  the sun was not strong  enough  to erase colors
as it did in Algeria,  so that waves  of Arab and French  Algerians,
dressed  in smart shining  colors, straw hats on their heads, red-and-
blue targets  you could see for hundreds  of meters,  went over the top
in  droves  into  the  re,  were  destroyed  in  droves,  and  began  to
fertilize  a  narrow  stretch  of  land  where  for  four  years  men  who
came  from  all  over  the  world,  crouching  in  muddy  lairs,  would
struggle  for each meter  under a sky bristling  with ares,  with shells

screaming  while  great  artillery  barrages  proclaimed  their  futile
i assaults.   But  for  the  moment  there  were  no  dugouts,  only  the
African  troops who melted  away under  re  like multicolored  wax
dolls,  and  each  day  hundreds  of  new  orphans,  Arab  and  French,
awakened  in every  corner  of Algeria,  sons and daughters  without
fathers  who would  now have to learn to live without  guidance  and
without  heritage.  A  few  weeks  passed  and  then  on  a  Sunday
morning,  on  the  small  indoor  landing  of  the  only  upper  oor,
between  the  stairs  and  the  two  unlit  toilets—black  holes  dug
Turkish-style  through  the masonry,  constantly  being  cleaned with
cresyl  and  always  stinking—Lucie  Cormery  and  her  mother  were
sitting  on two low chairs  picking  over lentils  by the light of the
window  at the top of the stairs,  and the baby in a small laundry
basket  was sucking  a carrot  covered  with his drool,  when a grave
and well-dress ed gentleman  appeared  on the stairs with a sort of
envelope.  The two surprised  women  put down the dishes  they were
sorting  lentils  into, from a pot set between  them,  and were wiping
o   their hands  when the gentleman,  who had stopped  on the next to
last step, bade them not to disturb  themselves,  and asked for Mme.
Cormery.  “There  she is,” the grandmother  said, “I’m her mother,”
and  the  gentleman  said  he  was  the  district  mayor,  that  he  was
bearing  painful  news,  that  her  husband  had  died  on  the  eld  of
honor,  and  that  France  mourned  him  and  at  the  same  time  was
proud  of him. Lucie Cormery  had not heard him, but got to her feet
and  very  respectfully  oered  him  her  hand;  the  grandmother
stiened,  hand  over  her  mouth,  and  was  saying  “My  God”  in
Spanish  again and again.  The gentleman  held Lucie’s  hand in his,
then squeezed  it between  both his hands,  and murmured  his words
of  condolence;  then  he  handed  her  his  envelope,  turned,  and
descended the stairs at a heavy gait.
“What did he say?” Lucie asked.
“Henri is dead. He was killed.”
Lucie had stared  at the envelope without  opening  it, neither  she
nor  her  mother  could  read;  she  turned  it  over,  without  a  word,
without  a tear, unable  to imagine  this death,  so far away in the
depths  of a mysterious  night.  And then she put the envelope  in the

pocket  of her apron,  passed  by the baby without  looking at him,
went into the bedroom  she shared  with her two children,  closed  the
door and the shutters  of the window  that looked  out on the yard,
and stretched out on her bed, where  she remained  for many hours
silent and without  tears, squeezing  the envelope  in her pocket  and
j staring into the dark at the misfortune she did not understand.
“ Maman ,” said Jacques.
She was still gazing  at the street,  in her same manner,  and she did
not hear him. He touched  her thin wrinkled  arm, and she turned
smiling to him.
“Papa’s cards, you know, the ones from the hospital.”
“Yes.”
“You received them after the mayor came?”
“Yes.”
A  shell  fragment  had  split  open  his  skull  and  he  had  been
transported  in  one  of  those  ambulance  trains  dripping  blood,
scattered  with  straw  and  bandages,  that  shuttled  between  the
slaughterhouse  and the evacuation  hospitals  at Saint-Brieuc.  There
he was able to scrawl  two cards, by guesswork  since he could  no
longer  see: “I’m wounded.  It’s nothing.  Your husband.”  Then after a
few  days  he  died.  The  nurse  wrote:  “It  was  better  this  way.  He
would  have been left blind or insane.  He was very brave.” And then
she received the shell fragment.
A patrol of three armed  parachutists  was passing  by in single le
on the street,  looking  in all directions.  One of them was black;  he
was tall and supple  and he  looked  like a splendid  animal  in the
spotted skin of his camouage.
“It’s for the bandits,”  she said. “And I’m glad you went to his
grave. As for me, I’m too old and besides it’s far. Is it beautiful?”
“What, the grave?”
“Yes.”
“It’s beautiful. There are owers.”
“Yes. The French are good people.”

She said it and she believed  it, but without  giving  any further
thought  to her husband,  forgotten  now, along with the misfortune  of
long ago. And nothing  was left, neither  in her nor in this house,  of
that man who was consumed  in a cosmic  re  and of whom  there
remained  only a memory  as imperceptible  as the ashes of a buttery
wing incinerated in a forest re.
“The stew is going to burn, wait a minute.”
k She had gotten  up to go to the kitchen  and he had taken  her
place,  gazing  down  in  his  turn  at  the  street,  unchanged  after  so
many years,  with the same stores, their colors  faded and aked  by
the sun. Only the tobacconist  across  the street had put up long strips
of multicolored  plastic  in place of the curtain  of little hollow  reeds
that made a special  sound—which  today Jacques  could still hear—
when he used to go through  it to penetrate  into the exquisite  odor of
newsprint  and tobacco  and to buy  L’Intrépide  where he would thrill
to tales of  honor  and courage.  Now the street was experiencing  the
liveliness  of a Sunday  morning.  Workingmen  in freshly  washed  and
ironed  white shirts were chatting  on their way to the three or four
cafés,  which  smelled  of  cool  shade  and  anise.  Some  Arabs  were
passing  by, poor also but decently  dressed,  their wives  still veiled
but  wearing  Louis  XV  shoes.  Now  and  then  entire  Arab  families
went  by  in  their  Sunday  best.  One  of  these  families  had  three
children  in tow, one of them dressed  up as a parachutist.  And just
then the patrol  of parachutis ts came back along the street, relaxed
and  seemingly  indierent.  The  explosion  resounded  at  the  very
moment Lucie Cormery came back to the room.
It  sounded  very  close,  enormous,  as  if  it  would  never  stop
reverberating.  It seemed  that they had long since stopped  hearing  it,
but the bulb in the dining-room  light was still shaking  behind  its
glass shell. His mother  had recoiled  to the back of the room,  pale,
her  dark  eyes  full  of  a  fear  she  could  not  control,  and  she  was
unsteady on her feet.
“It’s here. It’s here,” she was saying.
“No,”  Jacques  said,  and  he  ran  to  the  window.  People  were
eeing  in the street, he did not know where  to; an Arab family  had
gone into the notions  store across the street,  hurrying  their children

inside,  and the shopkeeper  let them in, closed  the door and removed
the door handle,  then stood behind  the window  watching  the street.
At  that  moment  the  parachute  patrol  came  back,  running  at  top
speed  in  the  opposite  direction.  Cars  pulled  up  hastily  on  the
sidewalk  and stopped.  The street had emptied  in a few seconds.  But
by leaning forward,  Jacques  could see a big crowd  in motion  farther
away,  between  the Musset  movie  theatre  and the trolley  stop. “I’m
going to go see,” he said.
l 3 At the corner  of the rue Prévost-Paradol,   a group of men were
shouting.
“That lthy race,” a short worker in an undershirt  said, looking  in
the direction of an Arab standing  as if glued in a gateway  near the
café.
“I didn’t do anything,” the Arab said.
“You’re  all in it together,  all you fucking  sons of bitches,”  and he
started  toward  him. The other men held him back. Jacques  said to
the Arab: “Come with me,” and he took him into the café, which
was now run by Jean, his childhood  friend,  the son of the barber.
Jean was there, still the same, but wrinkled,  short and thin, his face
sly and alert.
“He  didn’t  do  anything,”  said  Jacques.  “Take  him  into  your
home.”
Jean  looked  the  Arab  over  while  he  wiped  o   the  counter.
“Come,” he said, and they disappeared out the back.
Jacques went outside, and the worker scowled at him.
“He hasn’t done anything,” Jacques said.
“We should kill them all.”
“That’s what you say when you’re angry. Think it over.”
The worker  shrugged.  “Go over there and see what you say after
you’ve seen the mess.”
Ambulance  sirens were rising,  rapid,  urgent.  Jacques  ran to the
trolley  stop. The bomb  had exploded  by the line pole close to the
stop. A lot of people,  all in their Sunday  dress, had been waiting  for
the  trolley.  The  little  café  nearby  was  full  of  cries  of  anger  or
suering, you could not tell which.

He went back to his mother.  She was standing  erect now and very
pale. “Sit down,”  and he led her to the chair close to the table. He
sat by her and took her hands.
“Twice this week,” she said. “I’m afraid to go out.”
“It’s nothing,” Jacques said. “It’ll stop.”
“Yes,”  she said. She looked  at him with an odd air of indecision,
as if she were divided  betwee n her faith in her son’s intelligence  and
her conviction  that  life  in its entirety  was a misfortune  you could not
struggle against but could only endure.
“You see,” she said, “I’m old. I can’t run anymore.”
Now the blood was returning  to her cheeks.  In the distance  could
be heard the sirens of the ambulances,  urgent,  rapid.  But she did not
hear them.  She breathed  deeply, calmed  herself  a little more,  and
smiled  at her son with her beautiful  brave smile.  Like all her people,
she had grown  up with danger, and danger  might  wring  her heart
but she would  endure  it as she did everything  else. It was he who
could not bear that  pinched  look of a dying person  he had suddenly
seen on her face.
“Come  with me to France,”  he said to her, but she shook  her head
with resolute  sorrow:  “Oh no, it’s cold over there. I’m too old now. I
want to stay home.”
a . Sunday.
1 . Later called Ernest.
b . transition.
2 . Two illegible marks.
c . the bony polished brow where the dark and feverish eye was shining.
d . The father—interrogation—war of 14—Attack.
e . 14
f . Croak with it or without it, you’re still dead, the sergeant said.
g . 1814 newspapers in Algiers. [ Sic—Ed .]
*  August.
h . He had never seen France. He saw it and was killed.

i . to develop  j . she thinks shells explode by their own volition.
k . changes in the apartment  l . —He saw it before coming to see his mother?
—Rework the  Kessous  bombing in the third part, and in that case only mention it here.
—Farther along.
3 . This entire section up to “you could not tell which” is circled with a question mark.

6   :   T h e   F a m i l y
a “Ah!”  his  mother  said  to  him,  “I’m  glad  when  you’re  here.   But
come in the evening,  I’ll be less bored.  It’s the evenings  especially,
in winter  it gets dark early. If only I knew how to read. I can’t knit
either  in this light, my eyes hurt. So when Etienne’s  not here, I lie
down and wait till it’s time to eat. It’s a long time, two hours like
that. If I had the little girls with me, I’d talk with them. But they
come and they go away.  I’m too old. Maybe  I smell bad. So it’s like
that, and all alone ...”
She spoke all at once, in short simple  sentences  that followed each
other as if she were emptying  herself  of thoughts  that till then had
been silent.  And then, her thoughts  run dry, she was again silent,
her  lips  tight,  her  look  gentle  and  dejected,  gazing  through  the
closed  dining-room  shutters  at the suocating  light coming  up from
the street,  still at her same place on the same uncomfortable  chair
and her son going around  the table in the middle  of the room as he
b used to do.
c She watched him as once more he circled the table.
“Solférino, it’s pretty?”
“Yes, it’s spotless.  But it must have changed  since the last time
you saw it.”
“Yes, things change.”
“The doctor sends you his greetings. You remember him?”
“No. It was long ago.”
“No one remembers Papa.”
“We didn’t stay long. And besides, he didn’t say much.”
“ Maman? ” She looked  at him, unsmiling,  with a mild and vacant
expression.  “I  thought  you  and  Papa  never  lived  together  in
Algiers.”

“No, no.”
“Did  you  understand  me?”  She  had  not  understood;  he  could
guess as much from her slightly frightened  manner,  as if she were
apologizing,  and  he  articulated  the  words  as  he  repeated  the
question: “You never lived together in Algiers?”
“No,” she said.
“But how about  the time Papa went to see them cut o   Pirette’s
head?”
He  hit  his  neck  with  the  side  of  his  hand  to  make  himself
understood.  But she answere d immediately:  “Yes, he got up at three
o’clock to go to Barberousse.”
“So you were in Algiers?”
“Yes.”
“But when was it?”
“I don’t know. He was working for Ricome.”
“Before you went to Solférino?”
“Yes.”
She said yes, maybe  it was no; she had to reach  back in time
through  a  clouded  memory,  nothing  was  certain.  To  begin  with,
poor people’s  memory  is less nourished  than that of the rich; it has
fewer  landmarks  in  space  because  they  seldom  leave  the  place
where  they live, and fewer reference  points  in time throughout  lives
that are gray and featureless . Of course  there is the memory  of the
heart that they say is the surest  kind, but the heart wears out with
sorrow  and  labor,  it  forgets  sooner  under  the  weight  of  fatigue.
Remembrance  of things  past is just for the rich. For the poor it only
marks  the faint traces  on the path to death.  And besides,  in order to
bear up well one must not remember  too much,  but rather  stick
close to the passing  day, hour by hour, as his mother  did, somewhat
by  necessity  no  doubt,  since  that  childhood  illness  (by  the  way,
according  to his grandmothe r, it was typhoid.  But typhoid does not
have such aftereects.  Typhus perhaps.  Or else? Here again,  all was
darkness)  since that childhoo d illness  had left her deaf and speaking
with diculty,  then prevent ed her from learning  what is taught  to
even the most wretched,  so her mute resignation  was forced on her,
but it was also the only way she had found  to face up to her life,

and what else could  she have done,  who in her place could  have
found  another  way? He wanted  her to be  fascinated  by describing
for him a man who had died forty years earlier  and whose  life she
had shared  (and had she really shared  it?) for ve  years.  She could
not do that; he did not even know if she had passionately  loved that
man, and in any case he could not ask it of her, for in her presence
he too was in his own way mute and crippled;  at heart he did not
even want to know what there had been between  them, and so he
had  to  give  up  on  learning  anything  from  her.  Even  the  one
circumstance  that had made such an impression  on him as a child,
had pursued  him throughout  his life and even into his dreams,  his
father  getting  up  at  three  o’clock  to  attend  the  execution  of  a
notorious  criminal—even  that he had learned  from his grandmother.
Pirette  was an agricultural  laborer  on a farm in the Sahel,  quite
close to Algiers. He had killed his employers  and the three children
in the house  with a hammer.  “To rob them?”  Jacques  asked  as a
child.  “Yes,”  said Uncle  Étienne. “No,”  said his grandmother,  but
without  any further  explanation.  They found  the disgured  corpses,
the house  splattered  with blood  right up to the ceiling,  and, under
one of the beds, the youngest  child still breathing;  he died also, but
he had found the strength  to write on the whitewashed  wall with his
blood-soaked  nger:  “It’s Pirette.”  They searched  for the murderer
and  found  him,  dazed,  out  in  the  countryside.  Horried  public
opinion  deman ded the death penalty;  it was readily  granted,  and the
execution  took place before  Barberousse  prison  in the presence  of a
considerable  number  of spectators.  Jacques’s  father  had gotten  up in
the night and gone to attend  the exemplary  punishment  of a crime
that,  according  to  the  grandmother,  had  outraged  him.  But  they
never  knew  what  had  happened.  Apparently  the  execution  had
taken place without  incident.  But Jacques’s  father  was livid when he
came home; he went to bed, then got up several  times to vomit,  and
went back to bed. He never wanted  to talk about what he had seen.
And on the night he heard the story, Jacques  himself,  when he was
lying huddled on the side of the bed to avoid touching  his brother,
with whom  he slept, choked  back his nausea  and his horror  as he
relived  the  details  he  had  heard  and  those  he  imagined.  And

throughout  his  life  those  images  had  followed  him  even  into  his
sleep  when  now  and  then,  but  regularly,  a  recurrent  nightmare
would  haunt  him, taking  many  forms,  but always  having  the one
theme:  they were coming  to take him, Jacques,  to be executed.  And
for a long time when he awakened  he would  shake o   his fear and
anguish  and  return  to  that  soothing  reality  where  there  was
absolutely  no chance  that he would  be executed.  Then, by the time
he had come of age, world  events  around  him were such that his
execution  was  no  longer  so  unlikely  a  possibility,  and  reality  no
longer  assuaged  his dreams,  but on the contrary  was fed during  a
very [precise]  number  of years by the same dread that so distressed
his father and that he had left to his son as his only clear and certain
legacy.  But it was a mysterious  bond that connected  him to the dead
stranger  of Saint-Brieuc  (who,  after all, had not thought  he would
die a violent  death either),  a bond beyond  the reach of his mother,
who had known  that story, had seen his vomiting,  and had forgotten
that morning,  just as she had not  realized  later on that times had
changed.  For her the times were always  the same:  disaster  could
emerge at any moment without calling out a warning.
d His grandmoth er,  on the other hand, had a more accurate  picture
of  things.  “You’ll  end  up  on  the  gallows,”  she  would  often  tell
Jacques.  Why not? It was no longer  unusual.  She did not know that
but, being the person  she was, nothing  would  have surprised  her.
Erect  in  her  long  black  robe  of  a  prophetess,  uninformed  and
stubborn,  she at least had never known  resignation.  And she more
than anyone  else had domina ted Jacques’s  childhood.  Raised  by her
parents  from Mahon  on a small farm in the Sahel,  she was very
young  when she married  a slender and delicate  man, also of Mahon
origin,  whose  brothers  had already  settled  in Algeria  by 1848,  after
the tragic  death  of the paternal grandfather,  a sometime  poet who
composed  his verses  mounte d on a donkey  and riding  around  the
island  between  stone walls that bordered  vegetable  gardens. It was
during  the course  of one of these outings  that a scorned  husband
shot poetry  in the back, in the belief that he was punish ing a lover
but misled by the silhouette  and the broad-brimmed  black hat, thus
killing  a model  of familial  virtue, who, however,  left nothing  to his

children.  The  eventual  result  of  this  tragic  misunderstanding  in
which  a poet found  his death was the settling  on the Algerian shore
of  a  nest  of  illiterates  who  multiplied,  far  from  any  school,
harnessed  to a life of exhausting  labor under a  ferocious  sun. But the
husband  of Jacques’s  grandmother,  judging  by his photos,  had kept
something  of his poet grandfather’s  inspiration,  and his thin face
with  its  clear-cut  features  under  a  lofty  brow,  and  his  dreamer’s
expression,  did not suggest  that he could hold his own against  his
young,  beautif ul, and vigorous  spouse.  She gave him nine children,
of whom  two died in infancy,  another  was saved only at the price of
being handicapped,  and the last was born deaf and partly  mute. She
raised  her brood on that somber little farm while doing her share of
their hard common  labor;  she sat at the end of the table with a long
stick at hand that spared  her any superuous  speech,  the guilty  one
being  immedia tely  hit  over  the  head.  She  held  sway,  demanding
respect  for  herself  and  her  husband,  whom  the  children  had  to
address  in the polite  form of speech,  according  to Spanish  practice.
Her  husband  would  not  long  enjoy  this  respect:  he  died
prematurely,  worn  out  by  sun  and  labor,  and  perhaps  by  his
marriage,  without  Jacques  ever being able to discover  what disease
he died of. Left alone,  the grandmother  disposed  of the little farm
and went to live in Algiers  with her younger  children,  the others
having  been sent out to work as soon as they were old enough to be
apprenticed.
When  Jacques   had  grown  up  enough  to  observe  her,  she  was
impaired  by neither  poverty  nor adversity.  Only three children were
1 still  with  her.  Catherine,   Who  did  housewor k  for  others;  the
youngest,  the  handicapped  one,  who  had  become  an  energetic
cooper;  and Joseph,  who had not married  and who worked  for the
railroad.  All  three  earned  paltry  wages  that,  combine d,  had  to
support  a family  of ve.  His grandmother  managed  the household’s
money,  and that is why the rst thing that struck  Jacques  about her
was her penny-pinching—not  that she was a miser  except  in the
sense that we are miserly  with the air we breathe  that keeps  us
alive.

It was she who bought  the children’s  clothes.  Jacques’s  mother
came home late in the day, and was satised  to watch  and listen to
what was said, overwhelmed  by the energy  of the grandmother,  to
whom  she  relinquished  everything.  Thus  it  was  that  Jacques,
throughout  his life as a child,  had to wear raincoats  that were too
long,  for  his  grandmother  bought  them  to  last  and  counted  on
nature  for the child’s  size to catch up with that of the clothing.  But
Jacques  grew  slowly,  not  really  deciding  to  sprout  till  he  was
fteen,  and  his  raincoat  would  wear  out  before  he  grew  into  it.
Another  would  be  bought  on  the  same  thrifty  principle,  and
Jacques,  whose  classmates  mocked  his dress, had no recourse  but to
pu    out  his  raincoat  at  the  waist  in  order  to  make  what  was
ridiculous  look original.  Anyway,  these brief episodes  of shame were
quickly  forgotten  in  the  classroom,  where  Jacques  regained  the
upper  hand, and on the playground,  where  soccer  was his kingdom.
But that kingdom  was prohibited,  because  the playground  was made
of  cement  and  soles  would  be  worn  out  so  quickly  that  his
grandmother  had forbidden  Jacques  to play soccer  during  recess.
She herself  bought  her grandsons  thick solid boots that she hoped
would  prove immortal.  In order to stretch  out their longevity,  she
would  also have the soles studded with enormous  cone-shaped  nails,
which  were doubly  useful:  you had to wear out the studs before
wearing  out the sole, and they enabled  her to detect  infractions  of
the ban on playing  soccer.  Running  on the cement  yard did in fact
quickly  wear down  the studs and give them a shine that betrayed
the guilty one. Every day when he got home,  Jacques  had to report
to the kitchen,  where  Cassandra  presided  over the black pots, and,
with knee bent and sole facing  up, in the posture  of a horse being
shod, he would have to show her his soles. Of course  he could not
resist the call of his friends  and the lure of his favorite  sport, and he
would  apply himself  not to attempting  an impossible  virtue but to
disguising  the resulting  sin. So on leaving  school,  and later the  lycée ,
he would  spend a good deal of time rubbing  his soles in damp earth.
Sometimes  this ruse was successful.  But the time would  come when
the wear on the studs was glaringly  obvious,  or sometim es the sole
itself would  be damaged,  or—the  worst of catastrophes—the  upper

sole would  be detached  from the lower by an awkward  kick against
the ground  or the grille that protected  the trees, and Jacques  would
come home with a string  tied around  his shoe to hold it together.
Those  were nights  for the leather  whip.  The only consolation  his
mother  oered  the  weeping  Jacques  was:  “You  know  they’re
expensive.  Why can’t you be more careful?”  But she herself never
laid  a  hand  on  her  children.  The  next  day,  they  put  Jacques  in
espadrilles  and took his shoes to the shoemaker.  Two or three days
later he would get them back dotted  with new studs, and once more
he would  have to learn to keep his balance  on his slippery  unstable
soles.
The grandmoth er was capable  of going still further,  and even after
so many years Jacques  could not recall this story without  a shiver  of
* shame  and  disgust.   He  and  his  brother  were  given  no  pocket
money,  except  occasionally  when  they  would  agree  to  go  visit  a
shopkeeper  uncle or an aunt who had married  well. It was easy in
the case of the uncle because  they liked him. But the aunt had a way
of  rubbing  in  her  comparative  wealth,  and,  rather  than  feel
humiliated,  the two children  preferred  to go without  money  and the
pleasures  it would  procure  them.  In any event,  and although  the
pleasures  of  the  sea,  the  sun,  and  the  neighborhood  games  were
free,  fries,  caramels,  Arab  pastries,  and  in  Jacques’s  case  certain
soccer  matches  required  a little money,  at least a few centimes.  One
evening  Jacques was coming  home after doing  errands,  holding  at
arm’s length the dish of potatoes and cheese  that he had taken to
the neighborho od baker to be baked  (they had neither  gas nor range
in their home,  and they cooked on an alcohol  stove.  So there was no
oven, and when they had something  to bake they would  take it all
prepared  to the baker,  who for a few centimes  would  put the dish in
the  oven  and  keep  an  eye  on  it),  the  dish  before  him  steaming
through  the dishtowel  that protected  it from the dust of the street
and made it possible  for him to hold it around  the edges.  The string
bag lled  with provisions  bought  in very small quantities  (a half-
pound  of  sugar,  a  quarter-pound  of  butter,  twenty-ve  centimes’
worth  of grated  cheese,  etc.) did not weigh  heavily  in the crook of
his right arm and Jacques  snied  the good smell of potatoes  and

cheese  as he made his way nimbly  through  the working-c lass crowd
that  at  this  hour  was  milling  around  on  the  sidewa lks  of  the
neighborhood.  At that moment  a two-franc  piece slipped  through  a
hole in his pocket and fell clinking  on the sidewalk.  Jacques  picked
it up, counted  his change,  which  was all there,  and put it in his
other pocket.  “I could have lost it,” he thought  suddenl y. And the
next day’s match,  which  till then he had banished  from his thoughts,
now returned to his mind.
No one had actually  taught  the child what was right and what
was  wrong.  Some  things  were  forbidden  and  any  infraction  was
severely  punished.  Others  were  not.  Only  his  teachers  would
sometimes  talk about  morality,  when the curriculum  left them the
time, but there again the prohibitions  were more explicit  than the
reasons  for  them.  All  that  Jacques  had  been  able  to  see  and
experience  concerning  morality  was  daily  life  in  a  working-class
family  where it was evident  no one had ever thought  there was any
way  other  than  the  hardest  kind  of  labor  to  acquire  the  money
necessary  to their survival.  But that was a lesson  in courage,  not
morals.  Nonetheless,  Jacques  knew it was wrong  to hide those two
francs.  And he didn’t  want to do it. And he would  not do it; maybe
he could do what he’d done before,  squeeze  between  two boards  to
get in the old stadium  at the parade  grounds  and see the match  free.
That  was  why  he  himself  did  not  understand  why  he  did  not
immediately  give back the change,  and why, a little later, he came
from the toilet and declared  that a two-franc  piece had fallen in the
hole when he dropped  his pants.  Even “toilet”  was too exalted  a
term for the small space that had been improvised  in the masonry  of
the landing of the one upper oor.  A Turkish-style  hole had been
drilled  in  a  mid-size  pedestal  jammed  between  the  door  and  the
back wall. The place was without air, without  electric  light, without
faucet,  and they had to pour jerry cans of water  in the hole after
each use. But nothing  could keep the stink from overo wing into
e the stairs.  Jacques’s  explana tion was plausible.  It saved him from
being sent back out on the street to look for the lost coin, and it cut
short any further  action.  Yet Jacques  felt a pang as he announced
his bad news.  His grandmoth er was in the kitchen  chopping garlic

and parsley  on an old board that was green and pitted  with use. She
stopped  and looked  at Jacques,  who was waiting  for her to explode.
But she remained  silent  and studied  him with her icy-clear eyes.
“You’re sure?” she said at last.
“Yes, I felt it drop.”
She was still studying him. “Very well,” she said. “We shall see.”
And Jacques,  horried,  saw her roll up her right sleeve,  baring
her knotty  white arm, and go out on the landing.  He dashed  into the
dining  room,  on the verge  of throwing  up. When  she summoned
him, he found  her at the washbasin.  Her arm was covered  with gray
soap,  which  she  was  rinsing   o   in  a  gush  of  water.  “There  was
nothing there,” she said. “You’re a liar.”
He stammered: “But it could have been washed down.”
She  hesitated.  “Maybe.  But  if  you’re  lying,  it’ll  be  your  tough
luck.”
Yes, it was his tough luck, for in that instant  he understood  it was
not  avarice  that  caused  his  grandmother  to  grope  around  in  the
excrement,  but the terrible  need that made two francs  a signicant
amount  in this home.  He understood  it, and now he clearly  saw,
with a spasm  of shame,  that he had stolen  those two francs from his
family’s  labor.  Even  today,  watching  his  mother  at  the  window,
Jacques  could not explain  how he could have failed to return  those
two francs and yet have enjoyed going to the match the next day.
His grandmother  was also linked  with other shameful  memories
for which there was less legitimate cause.  She had wanted  Henri,  his
older brother,  to have violin  lessons.  Jacques  had dodged  this by
claiming  he could  not continue to do so well in school  with this
extra  work.  So  his  brother  had  learned  to  scrape  a  few  horrible
sounds  from a frigid violin,  he could play popular  songs with a few
false  notes.  For  fun,  Jacques,  whose  voice  was  quite  true,  had
learned  the  same  songs,  without  any  idea  of  the  calamitous
consequences  of  this  innocent  pastime.  Sure  enough,  on  Sunday,
f when his grandmother’s  married daughters,  two of whom  were war
widows,  would call on her, or her sister,  who still lived on a farm in
the Sahel and spoke  the Mahon  dialect  more readily  than Spanish,
would  come to visit, after she had served  big bowls  of black coee

on  the  oilcloth-covered  table,  his  grandmother  summoned  her
grandchildren  to  give  an  impromptu  concert.  The  dismayed  boys
brought  the  metal  music  stand  and  the  two-page  scores  of  well-
known  tunes.  They had to perform.  Jacques  followed  the zigzags  of
Henri’s  violin  as  best  he  could,  singing  “Ramona,”  “I  had  a
wonderful  dream,  Ramona,  we’d  gone  away  just  you  and  I,”  or
“Dance,  O my Djalmé,  this night it’s you I want to love,” or else,
staying  in the Orient,  “Nights  of China,  nights  of caresses,  night of
love,  night  of  ecstasy,  of  tenderness  ...”  On  other  occasions  the
grandmother  would  make  a  special  request  for  more  true-to-life
songs.  So Jacques  would  sing: “Is it really you my man, you whom  I
so loved,  you who vowed,  God knows  you did, never  to make me
cry.” As it happened,  this was the only song Jacques  could sing with
real feeling, for at the end its heroine  repeats  its touching  refrain  in
the middle of a crowd  watching  the execution  of her wayward  lover.
But the grandmother’s  favorite  song was one she no doubt  loved for
its melancholy  and tenderness,  which  one would  seek in vain in her
own nature. It was Toselli’s  “Serenade,”  which  Henri  and Jacques
brought  out with quite a bit of brio,  although  the Algerian  accent
was not really suited  to the enchanted  hour evoked  by the song. On
a sunny afternoon,  four or ve  women  dressed  in black,  all of whom
except  the  grandmother  had  put  aside  the  black  mantillas  that
Spanish  women  wear,  were  seated  in  a  row  around  the  poorly
furnished  room with its rough-cast  white  walls,  and were nodding
gently  in approval  of the outpouring  of the music  and the lyrics—
until the grandmother,  who had never been able to tell a  do  from a
si , and for that matter  did not even know the names  of the notes of
the scale, would  break the spell with a curt “You made a mistake,”
which  took the wind out of the performers’  sails. We were  there , the
grandmother  would  say when the thorny  passage  had been gotten
through  in  a  way  satisfying   to  her  taste;  once  again  the  women
would  rock in time to the music,  and at the end they applauded  the
two virtuosi,  who hastily  packed  up their equipment  and went out
to join their comrades  in the street.  Only Catherine  Cormery  had
remained  silent  in  a  corner.  And  Jacques  still  remembered  that
Sunday  afternoon  when,  as he was about  to leave with his music,

his mother had said, in reply to one of the aunts who complimented
her about him, “Yes, that was good.  He’s intelligent,”  as if there
were any connection  between  the two statements.  But when he had
looked  back, he understood  the connection.  Her face was quivering,
her gentle eyes feverish,  and she gazed  at him with an expression
that made him recoil,  hesitate,  then ee.  “She loves me, then she
loves me,” he said to himself  in the staircase,  and at the same time
he realized  how desperately  he loved her, that he had craved  her
love with all his heart,  and that until that moment  he had always
doubted whether she loved him.
Performances  at the movies  held other pleasures  in store for the
child ... The ritual took place on Sunday  afternoon  and sometimes
on  Thursday.  The  neighborh ood  movie  house  was  just  down  the
street from their building  and bore the name of a Romantic  poet, as
did  the  street  alongside  it.  Before  going  in,  you  had  to  pass  an
obstacle  course  of  Arab  peddlers’  stands  bearing  helter-skelter
displays  of  peanuts,  dried  salted  chick-peas,  lupine  seeds,  barley
sugar coated in loud colors,  and sticky  sourballs.  Others  sold gaudy
pastries,  among  them  a  pyramid  of  creamy  swirls  sprinkled  with
pink sugar,  and still others  displayed  Arab fritters  drippin g with oil
and honey.  A swarm  of ie s and children,  both attracted  by the
same sweets,  buzzed  and shouted  as they chased  each other around
the  stands  amidst  the  curses  of  the  peddlers,  who  feared  for  the
stability  of  their  goods  and  who  brushed  both  ies  and  children
away with a single gesture.  Some of the peddlers  had found  shelter
under  the marquee  that extended over one side, others  had put their
gummy  riches  out under  the strong  sunlight  and the dust raised  by
the children’s  games.  Jacques  would  escort  his grandmother,  who
had sleeked  back her white  hair for the occasion  and fastened  her
eternal  black dress with a silver brooch.  She would  sedately part the
howling  kids who blocked  the entrance  and present  herself  at the
one ticket window  to buy “reserved”  seats. Actually  the only choice
was between  these “reserved”  seats,  uncomfortable  folding chairs
that  opened  noisily,  and  the  benches  toward  which  the  children
surged  at the last moment,  bickering  over their places,  when a side
door was opened  for them. At each end of the benches  was stationed

an  usher,  armed  with  a  leather  whip,  who  was  responsible  for
keeping  order, and it was not unusual  to see him expel an overly
boisterous  child or adult.  In those days the theatre  showed  silent
lms,  the newsreel  rst,  then a short comedy,  the main feature,  and
nally  a  serial  shown  at  the  rate  of  one  episode  per  week.  The
grandmother  particularly  liked  these  serials,  where  each  episode
ended  in  suspense.  For  example,  the  muscular  hero  carrying  the
wounded  blond  girl in his arms would  start out on a vine bridge
over a canyon  torrent.  And the last frame  of the weekly episode
would  show a tattooed  hand severing  the vines of the bridge  with a
crude  knife. The hero would  continue  proudly  on his way despite
g the  warnings  shouted  by  the  spectators  in  the  benches.   The
question  then was not whether  the couple  would  escape—no  doubt
on that score being permitte d—but  only how they would  extricate
themselves,  which  explains  why so many spectators,  both Arab and
French,  would  come back the next week to see the lovers  stopped  in
their  mortal  plunge  by  a  providential  tree.  The  show  was
accompanied  throughout  on the piano by an old maiden  lady, who
met the jeers of the benches  with the calm stillness  of her thin back
shaped  like a bottle  of mineral  water  capped  with a lace collar.  At
the  time,  Jacques  thought   it  a  mark  of  distinction  that  this
impressive  lady wore her ngerless  gloves  during  the most torrid
hot  spells.  Nor  was  her  job  as  easy  as  one  might  have  thought.
Providing  musical  commentary  to the news,  in particular,  required
her to change  melodies  according to the nature  of the events  being
shown  on the screen.  She would go without  transition  from a lively
quadrille  accompanying  the  spring  fashion  shows  to  Chopin’s
Funeral  March for a ood  in China  or the funeral  of a personage
important  on  the  national  or  international  scene.  Whatever  the
piece,  it  was  always  imperturbably  performed,  as  if  ten  little
mechanical  instruments  were executing  precise  maneuvers  on the
old yellowed  keyboard  that had been ordained  once and for all by
clockwork.  In that hall with bare walls, its oor  littered  with peanut
shells,  the smell of cresyl mingled with a strong  odor of humanity.  It
was the pianist,  in any case, who silenced  the deafening  racket  by
launching  with full pedal into the prelude  that was supposed  to set

the mood for the matinée  show.  A great throbbing  sound  announced
that the projector  was starting,  and that was when Jacques’s  ordeal
began.
Since they were silent,  the lms would  project  a certain  amount
of written text intended  to clarify the plot. As his grandmother  was
illiterate,  it was Jacques’s  job to read these texts to her. Despite  her
age, his grandm other was not at all hard of hearing.  But rst  of all
he had to make himself  heard over the sound  of the piano and that
of the audience,  whose  vocal responses  were plentiful.  Furthermore,
though  the texts were extrem ely simple,  his grandmother  was not
very  familiar  with  some  words  and  others  were  completely
unknown  to  her. Jacques, for his part, did not want to disturb  their
neighbors  and was especially  anxious  not to tell the entire  hall that
his grandmoth er did not know how to read (sometimes  she herself
would  be  embarrassed  enough  to  say,  raising  her  voice,  at  the
beginning  of  the  show:  “You’ll  have  to  read  to  me,  I  forgot  my
glasses”),  so he would  not read the text as loudly  as he might  have.
The  result  was  that  the  grandmother  only  half  understood,  and
would  insist that he read it again and louder.  Jacques  would try to
raise his voice, the shushes  would plunge  him into a vile shame,  he
stammered,  the  grandmother  scolded  him,  and  soon  another  text
appeared,  all the more mysterious  to the poor old woman  because
she had not understood  the preceding  one. Confusion  would  only
compound  until Jacques  found  enough  presence  of mind to sum up
in a few words a crucial  moment in, for example,  The  Mark  of Zorro ,
with Douglas  Fairbanks,  Sr. “The villain  wants  to take the girl away
from him,” Jacques  would  rmly  articulate,  taking  advantage of a
pause in the sound  of the piano or the audience.  It all became  clear,
the lm  went on, and the child could breathe  easier.  Usually  that
was the extent of his worries.  But some lms  on the order of  Les
Deux  Orphelines  were really  too complicated,  and, caught  between
his grandmother’s  demands  and the ever-angrier  reprimands  of their
neighbors,  Jacques  would  end by remaining  completely  silent.  He
still remembered  one of these performances  when the grandmother,
beside  herself,   had  nally  walked  out,  while  he  followed  her  in
tears, distressed  at the thought  that he had spoiled  one  of the poor

woman’s  rare pleasures  and that it had been paid for out of their
h meager funds.
As  for  his  mother,  she  never  came  to  these  performances.  She
could not read either,  and she was half deaf besides.  Beyond  that,
her  vocabulary  was  even  more  limited  than  her  mother’s.  Even
today,  her life was without  distractions.  In forty years she had been
to the movies  two or three times,  had understood  nothing,  and it
was only in order not to displease  those who invited  her that she
would  say  the  dresses  were  pretty  or  that  the  one  with  the
moustache  looked  like a very bad man. Nor could she listen to the
radio.  And as to the newspap ers, sometimes  she would  leaf through
those that were illustrated,  would get her sons or grandda ughters  to
explain  the  pictures,  would  decide  that  the  Queen  of  England
seemed  sad, and close the pages  to gaze once more out the same
window  and watch  the activity  on the same street that she had been
i contemplating through half her lifetime.
a . She never used a subjunctive.
b . Relations with brother Henri: the ghts.
c . what they ate: stew of innards, codsh stew, chick-peas, etc.
d . Transition.
1 . On page 8 Jacques  Cormery’s  mother  is given the name Lucie.  From here on, she is
named Catherine.
*  where shame and disgust mingle
e . No. It was because  he had already  claimed  to have lost the coin in the street that he
had to nd another explanation.
f . Her nieces.
g . Riveccio.
h .  add  symptoms  of  poverty—unemployment—holiday  camp  summer  in  Miliana—
blowing  the bugle—expelled—Doesn’t  dare tell her. Speak  up: well we’ll drink coee
tonight.  From time to time it changes.  He looks at her. He’s often read stories  of poverty
where  the woman  is valiant.  She didn’t smile.  She left to go in the kitchen,  valiant—Not
resigned.

i . Bring on Uncle  Ernest  old,  before —his portrait in the room where  Jacques and his
mother were. Or have him come  after .

É t i e n n e
1 In a sense,  she was less involved in life than her brother Ernest,
who lived with them;  he was stone deaf, and he expressed  himself
as much by onomatopoeic  sounds  and gestures  as with the hundred-
odd words at his disposal.  But Ernest,  who could not be put out to
work  when  he  was  young,  had  haphazardly  attended  school  and
learned  to make out the letters  of the alphabet.  He did go to the
movies  sometimes,  and he would  come home with an account of the
lm  that astounded those who had already  seen it, as the wealth  of
his imagination  would  make up for what he had missed.  Moreover,
he was shrewd  and crafty,  and a sort of native  intelligence  enabled
him to make his way in a world  and among  people  who nonetheless
remained  obdurately  silent to him. Thanks  to that same intelligence,
he would  bury himself  every day in the newspaper,  where he could
make out the headlines  and so have at least a nodding  acquaintance
with world aairs.  “Hitler,”  he would  say, for example,  to Jacques
when he had come of age, “no good, eh.”
“No, that wasn’t good.”
“The Huns, always the same,” the uncle added.
“No, it wasn’t that.”
“Yes,  there’re  some  good  ones,”  his  uncle  acknowledged.  “But
Hitler  that’s no good,”  and right after, his love of a joke gaining  the
upper  hand:  “Levy”  (that was the mercer  across  the street) “he’s
scared.”  And he guawed.  Jacques  would  try to explain.  His uncle
would  become  serious  again:  “Yes. Why he wants  to hurt the Jews?
They’re like other people.”
He always loved Jacques,  in his fashion.  He admired  his success  in
school.  He would  rub the child’s  skull with his hard hand on which
tools and manual labor had left a hornlike  callus.  “Got a good head,

this one. Hard”—and  he tapped  his own head with his big st—“but
good.” Sometimes he added: “Like his father.”
One day Jacques  took the opportunity  to ask if his father had
been intelligent.
“Your  father,  hard  head.  Did  what  he  wanted,  always.  Your
mother always yes yes.”
Jacques was unable to get any more out of him.
In  any  case,  Ernest  would  often  take  the  child  with  him.  His
energy  and vitality,  nding  no outlet  in speech  or in the complex
relations  of social  life, would explode  in his physical  life and its
sensations.  Even on awakening,  when someone  shook  him out of the
hermetic  sleep of the deaf, he would  rear up wild-eyed,  bellowing
“huhn  huhn!”  like a prehistoric  beast that wakens  each day to a
strange  and hostile  world.  But once he was awake,  his body and its
functioning  made him secure  on his feet. Despite  the hard labor of
his job as a cooper, he liked to go swimming  and hunting. When
a Jacques  was still a child,  his uncle  would take him to Sablettes
beach,  make him get up on his back, and immediately  set out to sea
with a rudimentary  but powerful  stroke,  making  inarticulate  sounds
that translated  rst  his surprise  at the coldness  of the water,  then his
pleasure  at being  there or his anger  at an errant  wave.  “You not
scared,”  he would  say from time to time to Jacques.  Yes, he was
afraid  but did not say so; he was spellbound  by the solitude where
they were, between the sky and the sea, one as vast as the other;
when he glanced back, the beach seemed  like an invisible  line, and
an acid fear would  grip his stomach  and, with the beginnings  of
panic,  he pictured  the immense  dark depths  below  where  he would
sink like a stone if ever his uncle should  let him loose.  Then the
child would  clutch  the swimm er’s neck a little tighter.  “You scared,”
his uncle said right away.
“No, but go back.”
Docile,  the uncle turned,  took a few breaths,  and set o   again as
condently  as if he were on terra rma.  On the beach,  and hardly
out  of  breath,   he  rubbed  Jacques  vigorously,  with  great  gusts  of
laughter,  turned  aside to urinate  with a loud splash,  still laughing,
then  would  congratulate  himself  on  the  ne  functioning  of  his

bladder,  slapping  his belly with the “Good,  good”  that accompanied
all his enjoyable  sensations,  among  which  he made no distinction,
whether  they were of excretion  or of nutrition,  stressing  in each case
and  with  the  same  innocence  the  pleasure  they  gave  him,  and
always  wantin g  his  family  to  share  his  pleasure,  which  at  the
dining-room  table would  provoke  a protest  from the grandmother,
who accepted  that these things  were discussed,  and even spoke  of
them  herself,  but,  as  she  would  say,  “Not  while  we’re  eating,”
though  she put up with his watermelon  act; the fruit had a great
reputation  as a diuretic;  Ernest  adored  it and he would  begin  his
consumption  of  it  by  laughing,  by  mischievous  winks  at  the
grandmother,  by an assortment  of sounds  of inhaling,  regurgitating,
and slurping,  and after the rst  few mouthfuls  that he would  bite
right down to the skin, he would  perform  a whole  pantomime  in
which  with his hand he would  repeatedly  demonstrate  the journey
the handsome  rose and white fruit was supposed  to make from his
mouth  to  his  penis,  while  he  made  faces  and  rolled  his  eyes  to
illustrate  how  spectacularly  he  was  enjoying  himself,  all  this
accompanied  by: “Good,  good. Washes  you out. Good,  good”—until
it was so irresistible  that everyone  would  burst out laughing.  This
Adam-like  innocence  caused  him to attach  exaggerated  importance
to a series of eeting  ailmen ts he would  complain  of, frowning,  his
gaze turned  inward  as if he were scrutinizing  the mysterious  night
of his organs.  He claimed  to be suering  from a “stitch,”  its location
varying  widely,  or a “lump”  that wandered  all over the  place.  Later,
when  Jacques   was  attending  the  lycée ,  his  uncle  would  question
him, in the belief that there was one science  that applied  equally  to
everyone,  showing  him the small of his back: “Right  there, it pulls,”
he would say. “That’s  bad?”  No, it was nothing.  And Ernest  would
go out relieved,  descending  the stairs with his small hurried steps to
join  his  comrades  in  the  neighborhood  cafés,  with  their  wood
furnishings  and zinc bar, smelling  of anisette  and sawdust,  where
Jacques  sometimes  had to go fetch him at dinnertime.  It was not the
least  of  the  child’s  surprises  to  nd  this  deaf-mute  at  the  bar
surrounded  by his comrades  and talking  his head o   while they all
laughed,  laughter  in which  there was no mockery,  for his friends

b c d e adored  Ernest  for his good nature  and his generosity.         Jacques
would  be well aware  of that when his uncle took him hunting  with
his comrades,  all of whom  were coopers  or workers  at the port or on
the  railroad.  They  got  up  at  dawn.  Jacques  was  responsible  for
awakening  his uncle,  whom  no alarm  could  rouse from his sleep.
Jacques  himself  responded  to the ringing,  his brother  turned  over in
bed  grumbling,  and  his  mother,  in  the  other  bed,  stirred  softly
without  awakening. He got up groping  his way, struck  a match,  and
lit the small kerosene  lamp on the night table that stood between
the two beds. (Ah! the furnishings in that room:  two iron beds—one
single,  where  the  mother  slept,  the  other  double,  where  the  two
children  slept—a  night table between  the two beds, and, across  from
the  night  table,  a  wardrob e  with  a  mirror.  At  the  foot  of  the
mother’s  bed was a window  that faced the yard. Below  that window
was a cane trunk covered  with a crocheted  blanket.  While he was
still small,  Jacques  had to kneel on the trunk to close the shutters  of
the window. And no chair.)  Then he would  go to the dining room,
shake his uncle, who bellowed,  looked  up in terror at the lamp over
his eyes, and nally came to his senses.  They  dressed.  And Jacques
heated  leftove r coee  on the little alcohol  burner  while  his uncle
packed  sacks  with  provisions:  a  cheese,  sobrasada   sausages,
tomatoes  with salt and pepper,  and a half loaf of bread  cut in two
where  a big omelet  made by the grandmother  had been inserted.
Then  the  uncle  for  the  last  time  checked  the  double-barreled
shotgun  and the cartridges,  over which  a great ceremony  had taken
place the night before.  After dinner  they had cleared  the table and
carefully  cleaned  its oilcloth  cover.  The uncle had seated  himself  at
one side of the table and gravely set before  him, by the light of the
big kerosene  lamp lifted down from its hanging  position,  the pieces
of the disassembled  gun that he had painstakingly  greased . Sitting  at
the other side, Jacques  waited  his turn. So did the dog Brillant.  For
there was a dog, a mongrel  setter,  boundlessly  good-nat ured, who
couldn’t  hurt a y,  the proof of that being that if he happened  to
catch one on the wing, he would spit it out with a disgusted  look
accompanied  by  a  great  display  of  outstretched  tongue  and
smacking  of his chops.  Ernest and his dog were inseparable,  and

there  was  a  perfect  understanding  between  them.  You  could  not
help thinking  of them as a couple  (and only one who neither  knew
nor loved dogs would  see that as ridiculous).  And the dog owed the
man obedience  and love, while  the man agreed  to have only this
single  responsibility.  They lived together  and never left each other,
sleeping  together (the man on the dining  room couch,  the dog on a
skimpy  bedside  rug that was threadbare),  went to work together
(the dog would  lie on a bed of wood shavings,  made just for him,
under  a workbench in the shop), went out to cafés together, the dog
waiting  patiently  between  his master’s  legs until his performance
had come to an end. They spoke in onomatopoeia  and relished  each
other’s  smells.  One must never tell Ernest  that his seldom-washed
dog gave o   a strong  odor, especially  after it had rained.  “Him,”  he
would  say, “no smell,”  and he would  lovingly  sni    the inside  of the
dog’s big quivering ears. Hunting  was a spree for both of them, their
night on the town. Ernest  had only to bring out the knapsack  for the
dog to race madly  around  the little dining  room,  setting  the chairs
to dancing  by bumping  them with his rear, and thumpi ng his tail
against  the  sideboard.  Ernest  would  laugh.  “He  understands,  he
understands,”  and he would  calm the animal,  who would  then place
his  muzzle  on  the  table  and  watch  their  minute  preparations,
yawning  discreetly  from  time  to  time  but  never  leaving  the
f g delightful spectacle until it was over.  
When  the shotgun  was once more assembled,  his uncle handed  it
to him. Jacques  received  it reverently,  and he shined  its barrels  with
an old linen rag. Meanwhile  the uncle was preparing  his cartridges.
He  had  before  him  some  brightly  colored  cardboard  tubes  with
copper  bases in a sack from which  he also removed  gourd-shaped
metal  asks  containing  the  powder  and  shot  and  brown  felt
wadding.  He carefully  lled  the tubes with powder  and wadding.
The tubes would  be tted  into a small machine  he also took from
the sack. A little crank  worked  a cap that crimped  the tops of the
tubes down to the level of the wadding.  When  the cartridges  were
ready,  Ernest  handed  them one by one to Jacques,  who devoutly
placed  them in the cartridge  belt he had in front of him. In the
morning  one knew they were leaving  when  Ernest  put the heavy

cartridge  belt around  his belly, which  had already  been augmented
by two layers  of sweaters.  Jacques  buckled  the belt behind his back.
And  Brillant,  who  since  waking  had  been  coming  and  going  in
silence,  trained  to control  his delight  so as not to awaken  anyone,
but who was breathing  his feverishness  on every object  within  his
reach,  would now rear up against his master,  paws on his chest, and
try by stretchin g his back and neck to give that beloved  face a good
strong licking.
They  hurried  toward  the  Agha  station  under  a  sky  that  was
already  growin g light, the fresh smell of the cus  trees oating  in
the  air,  with  the  dog  racing  at  full  speed  ahead  of  them  on  a
zigzagging  course  that  sometimes  ended  with  him  sliding  on
sidewalks  still wet from the night’s humidity,  then coming  back just
as fast, visibly  terried  that he had lost them,  Étienne  carrying  the
shotgun  muzzle-down  in its heavy canvas  case, as well as a sack and
a game bag, Jacques  with his hands  in the pockets  of his shorts  and
a big knapsack  on his back. Their friends  were at the station  with
their dogs, who did not leave their masters  except  to make quick
h inspections  under their fellows’  tails. There were Daniel  and  Pierre,
brothers  who  worked  in  the  shop  with  Ernest,  Daniel  always
laughing  and  full  of  optimism,  Pierre  more  contained,  more
methodical,  full of opinions  and words  of wisdom  about people  and
things.  Also there was Georges,  who was employed  at the gasworks
but who would  earn some extra pay by boxing  an occasio nal match.
And often two or three others  besides,  all good fellows,  at least for
this occasion,  happy  to have escaped  for a day from the workshop,
from  small  overcrowded  apartments,  sometimes  from  their  wives
also, uninhibit ed and in a mood of amused  tolerance  that is peculiar
to men when they have gotten  together  among  themselve s for some
brief violent pleasure.  They climbed  cheerfully  into one of those cars
where  every compartment  opens to the platform,  they handed each
other the knapsacks,  they made  the dogs get in, and they settled
down,  happy now to feel themselves  sitting  side to side sharing  the
same warmth.  On these Sundays  Jacques  learned  that the company
of men was good and could nourish  the soul. The train started  out,
then picked up speed with short pus   and an occasional  brief sleepy

whistle.  They were crossing  one end of the Sahel,  and on reaching
the rs t elds  these loud sturdy men fell oddly  silent and watched
the day dawn over carefully  cultivated  elds  where  morning  mists
trailed  like scarves  on the hedges  of big dry reeds that separated  the
elds.  Now and then clumps of trees would  slip past the window
with the whitewashed  farmhouse  they protected,  where  everyon e
was sleeping.  A bird that was ushed  out of the ditch alongside  the
embankment  came suddenly  up to their level, then ew  in the same
direction  as the train, as if trying  to race it, until it abruptly  set o
at a right angle to the course  of the train, and now it seemed  as if it
had been pulled  away from the window  and hurled  to the rear of
the train by the wind of their passage.  The green  horizon  turned
pink, then all at once red, and the sun appeared  and rose visibly  in
the sky. It sucked  the mists o   all the expanse  of elds,  kept on
rising,  and suddenly  it was hot in the compartment;  the men took
o   one  sweater  after  another,  made  the  dgety  dogs  lie  down,
traded  some  jokes,  and  already  Ernest  was  telling  stories  in  his
manner  about food, about sickness,  and also [about]  ghts  in which
he  always  had  the  upper  hand.  Sometimes  one  of  the  comrades
would  ask Jacques  about his school;  then they talked  of other things
or called him to witness  one of Ernest’s  charades.  “He’s tops, your
uncle!”
The countryside  was changing,  becoming  more rocky,  the orange
trees  gave  way  to  oaks,  and  the  little  train  chugged  harder  and
harder  and gave o   great blasts of steam.  Suddenly  it was colder,
for the mountain  had come between  the sun and the travelers,  and
then they realized  it was still only seven  o’clock.  At last the train
gave a nal  whistle, reduced  its speed,  slowly  rounded  a tight curve,
and arrived  at a small station  that was alone in the valley,  deserted
and silent,  for it only served  some distant  mines;  it was planted  with
big eucalyptuses  whose  sickle-shaped  leaves  shivered  in the morning
breeze.  They left the train with the usual hubbub,  the dogs tumbling
out of the compartment,  missing  the two steep steps down, the men
again lining up to pass each other the sacks and guns. But at the exit
of the station,  where  the rs t slopes  began  immediately,  the silence
of wild nature  bit by bit drowned out their exclamations  and shouts;

the little troop nished  climbing  the hill in silence,  while the dogs
circled  in endless  gure  eights. Jacques  would  not let his vigorous
companions  leave him behind.  Daniel,  his favorite,  had taken  his
knapsack,  over his objections,  but he still had to take two steps for
one of theirs  to keep up, and the sharp morning  air was scorching
his lungs.  After an hour they at last came to the edge of a vast and
gently  undulating  plateau  wooded  with  dwarf  oaks  and  junipers,
over which  a fresh and softly sunlit sky stretched  its immense space.
This  was  their  hunting  terrain.  The  dogs  came  back,  as  if  they
already  knew,  and gathered  around  the men. They agreed  to meet
for lunch at two o’clock  in the afternoon  at a pine thicket,  where  a
small spring  was conveniently  located  at the edge of the plateau  and
where  they could see over the valley  and far out on the plain. They
synchronized  their  watches.  The  hunters  grouped  themselves  in
pairs,  whistled  to  their  dogs,  and  set  out  in  dierent  directions.
Ernest  and Daniel  were paired. Jacques  was given  the game bag,
and he put it carefully  over his shoulder.  Ernest,  from a distance,
announced  to the others  that he would  bring back more rabbits  and
partridges than anyone else. They laughed, waved, and disappeared.
Now for Jacques  began  a time of ecstasy  that he would always
cherish  nostalgically  with wonder  in his  heart:  the two men two
meters  apart but staying  abreast,  the dog in front,  himself  always
kept  at  the  rear,  his  uncle,  whose  eye  was  suddenly  wild  and
cunning,  always  checking  to make sure he kept his distance, and the
interminable  walking  in silence,  through  bushes  from which  a bird
they passed  up would  someti mes y  with a piercing  cry, going down
small  ravines  full  of  scents  where  they  would  follow  the  bottom
ground,  going  back  up  toward  the  sky,  radiant  and  warmer  and
warmer,  the rising heat rapidly drying  soil that was still damp when
they set out. Gunshots  across  the ravine,  the sharp  clacking  of a
covey  of dust-colored  partridges  ushed  out by the dog, the double
report  repeated  almost  immediately,  the  dog’s  dash  ahead,  his
return  with eyes madly  ash ing and holding  in his blood-covered
jaws a bundle  of feathers  that Ernest  and Daniel  took from him, and
that Jacques received  a moment  later with mingled  excitement  and
horror;  the search  for more victims,  and when they saw them fall,

Ernest’s  yelping  that  you  sometimes  could  not  distinguish  from
Brillant’s;  and  again  the  progress  forward,  Jacques  sagging  now
under  the sun despite  his little straw hat, while the plateau  around
them  was  beginning  to  vibrate  heavily  like  an  anvil  under  the
hammer  of the sun, and occasionally  a gunshot  or two, but never
more, for only one of the hunters had seen the hare or rabbit  scurry
o,   it was doomed  if it was in Ernest’s  line of re,  he was always  as
agile as a monkey  and now he was running  almost  as fast as his dog,
baying  like him, to pick up the dead creature  by its hind legs and
display  it from far away to Daniel and Jacques,  who arrived  jubilant
and out of breath.  Jacques  opened  wide the game bag to receive  the
new trophy before  setting  o   again,  staggering  under  the sun his
master,  and so, for hours without  end on a land without  boundaries,
his head lost in the unremitting  light and the immense  space of the
sky, Jacques felt himself  to be the richest  of children.  As the hunters
returned  toward  the place where  they were to meet for lunch,  they
kept an eye out for any opportunity,  but their hearts  were no longer
in it. They were dragging  their feet, they were mopping  their brows,
they were hungry.  They arrived  two by two, showing  their prizes  to
each other from a distance,  deriding  the empty  game bags, declaring
that the same ones were always empty,  all recounting  their catches
at the same time, each having  some special  detail  to add. But the
great  braggart  was  Ernest,  who  nally  got  the  oor  and  mimed,
with an accuracy  that Jacque s and Daniel  were well placed to judge,
the way the partridges  took o,   and the scurrying  rabbit  zigzagged
twice then rolled  on his back like a rugby  player  making  a try from
behind  the goal. Meanwhile  the methodical  Pierre  poured  anisette
in the metal goblets he had collected  from each person  and went to
ll  them with fresh water at the spring  trickling  by the edge of the
pines.  They improvised  a makeshift  table with dishtowels , and each
one brought out his provisions.  But Ernest,  who was talented as a
cook  (summe rtime  shing  expeditions  always  began  with  a
bouillabaisse  that he would  put together  on the spot and that he
spiced  so generously  it would  have burned  the tongue  o   a tortoise),
whittled  some sticks  until they were sharp,  speared  pieces  of the
sobrasada  he had brought,  and grilled them over a little wood r e

till  they  burst  and  a  red  liquid  dripped  on  the  embers  where  it
sizzled  and  caught  re.  He  put  the  scorching  hot  and  fragrant
sausages  between  two  pieces  of  bread  and  handed  them  to  the
others,  who greeted  them with exclamations  and devoured  them,
washed  down  with rosé wine they had cooled  in the spring.  Then
there  was  laughter,  and  stories  about  their  jobs,  and  jokes,  but
Jacques,  who was dirty and worn out, his mouth  and hands  sticky,
was barely listening because  he was falling  asleep.  But, in fact, all of
them were sleepy,  and for some time they drowsed,  gazing  vacantly
at the distant plain under  its haze of heat, or else, like Ernest,  they
went  sound  asleep,  each  with  a  handkerchief  covering  his  face.
However,  at four o’clock  they had to start down to catch the train,
which  would  come  at  half  past  ve.  Now  they  were  in  their
compartment,  crammed  together  in  fatigue,  the  worn-out  dogs
under  the  seats  or  between  the  men’s  legs,  bloodthirsty  dreams
running  throug h their heavy  sleep. The day was beginning  to fade at
the edges of the plain; then it was the brief African  twilight,  and the
night,  always  disturbing  on  those  wide-open  spaces,  would  fall
without  transition. Later on, in the station,  they were in a hurry to
get home to eat and go to bed early for the next day’s work, so they
parted  quickly  in the dark, almost  without  words  but with great
friendly  backslapping.  Jacques  heard  them  moving  away,  he
listened  to their warm  rough voices,  he loved them.  Then he fell in
step with Ernest,  whose  pace was still spirited,  while his own feet
were dragging.  Near their home,  Ernest  turned  to him in the dark
street:  “You happy?”  Jacque s did not answer.  Ernest  laughed  and
whistled  to his dog. But, a few steps farther,  the child slipped  his
small hand in the hard calloused  hand of his uncle,  who squeezed  it
very hard. And so they went home in silence.
i j     Ernest  was,  however,  subject  to  an  anger  as  immediate  and
wholehearted  as  his  pleasures.  The  impossibility  of  reasoning  or
even  talking  with  him  made  his  rages  seem  like  a  natural
phenomenon.  You see a storm  gathering,  you wait for it to break.
Nothing  else to do. Like many deaf people,  Ernest  had a very well-
developed  sense of smell (except  when it concerned  his dog). This
privileged  condition  brought  him great delights,  as when he inhaled

the odor of split-pea  soup or those dishes  he loved above  all others,
squid in its ink, sausage  omelet,  or the stew of innards  made with
beef heart and lung, the bourguignon  of the poor, which was the
grandmother’s  great  success,  and  often  appeared  on  their  table
because  it  was  cheap;  or  on  Sundays  when  he  would  sprinkle
himself  with  cheap  eau  de  cologne  or  the  lotion  known  as
[Pompero]  (that Jacques’s  mother  also used),  its mild and lemony
bergamot-based  scent  always  lingered  in  the  dining  room  and  in
Ernest’s  hair, and he would  sni    deeply  at the bottle  with an air of
rapture  ... But his sensitivity  in this regard  also caused  him trouble.
He would  not tolerate  certain  odors that could not be detected  by
the normal nose. For example,  he had gotten  in the habit of sning
his plate before  beginning  his meal,  and he would  turn red with
anger  when he discovered  what he claimed  was the smell of egg.
The grandmoth er would  then take the suspect  plate, sni    it, declare
that she smelled  nothing  there,  and hand it to her daughter  for her
opinion.  Catherine  Cormery  would  pass her delicate  nose over the
porcelain,  and, without  even sning,  say softly  that no, it didn’t
smell.  They  snied  the  other  plates  in  order  better  to  form  a
denitive  judgment,  except  those of the children,  who ate from iron
dishes.  (The reasons  for that matter  were a mystery,  lack of china
perhaps,  or,  as  the  grandm other  once  stated,  to  save  breakage,
though  neither  he nor his brother  was clumsy  with his hands.  But
family  traditions  are often no more soundly  based,  and ethnologists
certainly  make me laugh  when they seek the reasons  for so many
mysterious  rituals.  The real mystery,  in many cases,  is that there is
no  reason  at  all.)  Then  the  grandmother  would  pronounce  the
verdict:  it  did  not  smell.  In  truth  she  never  would  have  decided
otherwise,  especially  if  it  was  she  who  did  the  dishes  the  night
before.  She  would  not  have  given  an  inch  on  her  honor  as  a
housekeeper.  But that was when Ernest’s  real anger  exploded,  and
all the more so because  he could not nd  the words  to express  his
k conviction.  One had to let the  tempest  run its course,  whether  he
sulked  instead  of eating,  or picked  with a disgusted  air at his plate,
though  the grandmother  had changed  it, or even left the table and
stormed  out declaring  that he was going to a restaurant;  in fact he

had never set foot in that kind of place,  nor had anyone  in their
home,  although  when any dissatisfaction  was expressed  at the table,
the grandmoth er would  never fail to pronounce  the fateful  line: “Go
to a restaurant.”  From that time on the restaurant  appear ed to all to
be one of those sinful and falsely alluring  places  where  everything
seems  easy  provided  you  can  aord  it,  but  where  the  very  rst
guilty  delights  it dispenses  will one day or another  be dearly  paid
for by your stomach.  In any event the grandmother  never responded
to her youngest  child’s  anger. On the one hand because  she knew it
was  useless,  on  the  other  because  she  had  always  had  an  odd
weakness  for him, which  Jacques, once he had done some reading,
attributed  to the fact that Ernest  was handicapped  (though  we have
so many examples  of parents  who, despite  our preconceptions,  will
turn  away  from  the  handicapped  child),  and  which  he  better
understood  one day much later when,  catching  a tenderness  he had
never seen in his grandmother’s  usually  hard eyes, he turned  to see
his uncle putting  on the jacket  of his Sunday  outt.  The dark cloth
made him look even more slender,  his features  were delicate  and
youthful,  he was freshly  shaved and his hair carefully  combed,  and
for once he was wearing  a fresh collar and a tie—he  had the look of
a Greek shephe rd in holiday  dress—and  Jacques  saw his uncle as he
really was, which  was very handsome.  And then he understood  that
his grandmother’s  love for her son was physical,  that, like everyone,
she  was  in  love  with  the  grace  and  strength  of  Ernest,  and  her
weakness  for  him  that  had  seemed  unusual  was  after  all  very
common;  it softens  us all more or less, and delightfully  so besides,
and helps make the world bearable—it is our weakness for beauty.
Jacques  also remembered  another  of Uncle Ernest’s  rages,  this one
more  serious  since  it  almost  ended  in  a  stght  with  Uncle
Josephin,  the one who worked  for the railroad.  Josephin  did not
sleep  at  his  mother’s  home  (and  indeed  where  would  he  have
slept?).  He had a room in the neighborhood  (where  he had never
actually  invited  any of the family and which  Jacques,  for example,
had never seen) and took his meals  with his mother,  to whom  he
paid a small amount  for his board.  Josephin  was as dierent  from
his brother as he could be. Ten years older,  with a short moustache

and  a  crew  cut,  he  was  also  more  stolid,  more  reserved,  and
especially  more  calculating.  Ernest  often  accused  him  of  avarice.
Actually  he  expressed  it  more  simply:  “He  Mzabite.”  To  him  the
Mzabites  were the neighborh ood grocers;  they did in fact come from
Mzab,  and for many years they would  live behind  their shops,  which
smelled  of  oil  and  cinnam on,  living  without  wives  on  next  to
nothing  in order to support  their families  in the ve  towns  of Mzab,
out  in  the  desert,  where  this  tribe  of  heretics,  puritans   of  Islam,
persecuted  unto death by the orthodox,  had landed  centuries  ago, in
a place they had chosen  because  they were quite sure no one would
ght  them for it, there being nothing  there but stone— it was as far
from the half-civilized  world of the coast as a lifeless  cratered planet
might  be from the earth;  there they did in fact settle and build ve
towns  around  stingy  waterholes,  and conceived  this strange  ascetic
life  of  sending   their  able-bodied  men  to  the  coast  to  engage  in
business  in order to support  this creation  of the spirit and the spirit
alone,  until those men could  be replaced  by others  and return  to
their earth-and-mud-fortied  towns  to enjoy the kingdom  they had
at last won for their faith. Thus the sparse  lives and the avarice  of
these Mzabites  could only be judged  in the light of their profound
aims. But the working-class  people  of the neighborhood,  who knew
nothing  of  Islam  and  its  heresies,  saw  only  the  surface.  And  for
Ernest,  or anyone  else, to call his brother  a Mzabite  was the same as
2 comparing  him to Harpagon.  Josephin was in fact pretty  close with
his  money,  in  contrast  to  Ernest,  who,  accordin g  to  the
grandmother,  was “openhand ed.” (It is true that when she was in a
fury with him, she would  accuse  him of letting  money  run through
the ngers  of that same hand.)  But beyond  their dierent  natures
was the fact that Josephin  earned a little bit more than Ernest  and it
is  always  easier  to  be  extravagant  when  you  have  nothing.  Few
indeed  are those who continue  to be openhanded  after they have
acquired  the means  for it. Such as these are princes  among men,
before  whom  one  must  bow  down.  Certainly  Josephin  was  not
rolling  in money,  but in addition to his salary,  which  he managed
with  care  (he  practiced  the  so-called  envelope  system ,  but,  too
cheap  to  buy  real  envelopes,  he  would  make  them  out  of

newspapers  or grocery  bags), he made extra money  with some small
well-calculated  deals.  Working  for the railroad,  he was entitled  to
travel  free once every two weeks. So every other Sunday  he would
take the train into what was called  the “interior”—that  is, the bush
—and  he would  go around  the Arab farms  buying  eggs, scrawny
chickens  or  rabbits  at  low  cost.  He  would  bring  back  this
merchandise  and sell it to his neighbors  at a fair prot.  His life was
well ordered in every aspect.  He was not known  to have a woman.
In any case, between  his week of work and his Sundays  devoted  to
trade,  he lacked  the time needed to pursue  sensual  pleasures.  But he
had always  proclaimed  that at forty he would  marry  a well-placed
woman.  Until then he would  stay in his room,  amassing  money  and
continuing  to live part time at his mother’s.  Strange  as it seemed,
given his lack of charm,  he nonetheless  carried  out his plan as he
had said, and married  a piano  teacher  who was far from ugly and
who,  with  her  furniture,  brought  him  at  least  a  few  years  of
bourgeois  bliss.  It  is  true  that  Josephin  ended  up  keeping  the
furniture  and  not  the  wife.  But  that  was  another  story,  and  all
Josephin  had not foreseen  was that after his quarrel  with Ernest  he
would  not be able to take his meals with his mother  but would have
to resort to the costly  delights  of the restaurant.  Jacques  no longer
remembered  the  origin  of  the  drama.  Obscure  feuds  sometimes
would  divide  his family,  and in truth no one could  sort out their
causes,  especially  because  all of them were so  lacking  in memory
that no one could recall the reasons  for the feud but would  conne
themselves  to  keeping  alive  consequences  they  had  accepted  and
digested  once and for all. About that day, all he could  remember
was Ernest standing at the table in the middle  of the meal shouting
insults,  incomprehensible  other than “Mzabite,”  at his brother,  who
remained  seated  and went on eating.  Then Ernest  struck  his brother,
who  got  up  and  fell  back  before  coming  at  him.  But  the
grandmother  was  already  hanging  on  to  Ernest,  and  Jacques’s
mother,  white  with emotion,  was pulling  at Josephin  from behind.
“Let him be, let him be,” she was saying,  and the two children, their
faces pale and their mouths  open, watched  motionless  and listened
to the ood of enraged  curses  that were all owing  in one direction

until  Josephin   said  sullenly,  “He’s  a  dumb  animal.  You  can’t  do
anything  to him,” and circled  the table while the grandmother  held
on to Ernest, who wanted to run after his brother.
Ernest  was still struggling  after the door had slammed.  “Let me
go, let me go,” he said to his mother. “I’ll hurt you.”
But she had seized  him by the hair and was shaking  him: “You,
you, you’d hit your mother?”
And Ernest  dropped  into his chair sobbing,  “No, no, not you. You
like the good Lord for me!”
Jacques’s  mother  went to bed without  nishing  her meal, and the
next day she had a headach e. From that day on, Josephin  never
returned  home,  except  once in a while when he was sure Ernest  was
not there, to visit his mother.
l  There was another  rage Jacques  did not like to recall because  he
himself  did not want to know its cause.  For quite a while a certain
M.  Antoine,  with  whom  Ernest  was  vaguely  acquainted—a
shmonger  in  the  market,  of  Maltese  origin,  quite  handsome  in
bearing,  slender and tall, who always  wore a strange  dark derby and
at the same time a checkered  bandanna  that he rolled  and knotted
around  his  neck  inside  his  shirt—would  come  by  their  home
regularly  before  dinner.  Thinking  about  it later, Jacques  saw what
had not struck  him at the time, that his mother  was dressing a bit
more  smartly;  she  was  wearing  brightly  colored  aprons ,  and  you
could even see a hint of rouge on her cheeks.  This was also the time
when women  were beginning  to cut their hair, which  until then they
had  worn  long.  Jacques  liked  to  watch  his  mother  or  his
grandmother  perform  the ceremony  of combing  and xing  her hair.
With a napkin  around  the shoulders  and a mouth  full of hairpins,
they would comb their waist-length  hair for a long time, then put it
up, pull a headband  very tight around  the bun at the nape of the
neck, riddle it with hairpins  that they would  withdraw  one at a time
from the mouth,  their lips parted and teeth clenched,  and would
stick one by one in the thick mass of the bun. The new style seemed
both  ridiculous  and  shameful  to  the  grandmoth er,  who,
underestimating  the  true  power  of  fashion,  declared  without
bothering  about  logic that only women  who “walked  the streets”

would  let themselves  so be made ridiculous.  His mother  had taken
that for granted, and yet a year later, at about the time Antoine  was
calling,  she came home one evening  with her hair cut, looking fresh
and  rejuvenate d;  she  said,  outwardly  cheerful  but  behind  it  one
could  sense  her  anxiety,  that  she  had  wanted  to  give  them  a
surprise.
It  was  a  surprise  indeed  to  the  grandmother,  who,  eyeing  her
from  head  to  foot  and  contemplating  this  irremediable  disaster,
merely  said to her, in front of her son, that now she looked  like a
whore.  Then  she  went  back  to  her  kitchen.  Catherine  Cormery
stopped  smiling,  and  all  the  sorrow  and  weariness  of  the  world
appeared  on her face. Then she saw her son’s intent  expression,  and
tried to smile again,  but her lips trembled  and she dashed  weeping
to her bedroom , to the bed that was her only refuge  for rest, for
solitude,  and for sorrow.  Jacques,  bewildered,  went to her. She had
buried  her face in the pillow;  her neck, exposed  by her short curls,
and her thin back were shaking with sobs.
“ Maman,  maman ,”  Jacques  said,  touching  her  timidly  with  his
hand. “You’re very beautiful like this.”
But she had not heard  him, and with her hand she asked him to
leave  her.  He  retreated  to  the  doorway  and,  leaning  against  the
* jamb, he too began to weep with helplessness and love.
For the next several  days the grandmother  did not  speak a word
to  her  daughter.  At  the  same  time,  Antoine  was  received  more
coolly  when  he  called.  Ernest,  especially,  kept  a  distant  manner.
Though  he was a swell and a smooth  talker,  Antoine  could certainly
sense something.  What was going  on? Several  times Jacques  saw
signs of tears in his mother’ s beautiful  eyes. Ernest  would  usually
remain  silent and would  scue  with Brillant.  One summer  evening,
Jacques  noticed that his uncle seemed  to be watching  something
from the balcony.
“Is Daniel coming?” the child asked.
His uncle grunted.  And suddenly  Jacques  saw Antoine  arrive  after
not  having  come  for  several  days.  Ernest  rushed  out,  and  a  few
seconds  later mued  sounds  came up the stairs.  Jacques  dashed  out
and saw the two men ghting  silently  in the dark. Ernest,  heedless

of the blows  he was taking,  was striking  and striking  with sts  hard
as iron, and a moment  later Antoine  rolled  down the stairs,  got up
with his mouth bloody,  and took out a handkerchief  to wipe o   the
blood,  all the while keeping  his eyes on Ernest,  who went o   like a
madman.  When  he  went  back  inside,  Jacques  found  his  mother
sitting  in the dining  room,  not moving,  her face still. He also sat
m down  without  speaking.  And then Ernest  came back, grumbling
curses,  and darted  a furious  look at his sister.  Dinner  took place as
usual,  except  that his mother  did not eat; she simply  said “I’m not
hungry”  when her mother  insisted.  Once the meal was over, she
went to  her room. During the night,  Jacques  woke up and heard her
turn over in her bed. Starting  the following  day, she went back to
her  black  or  gray  dresses,  nothing  but  the  clothing  of  the  poor.
Jacques  found  her just as beautiful,  even more beautiful  for being
more distant and absent  in spirit, now that she was settled  forever  in
n poverty, in solitude, and in old age soon to come.
For a long time Jacques  held a grudge  against  his uncle,  without
knowing  just what he was blaming  him for. But, at the same time,
he knew he could not hold him to blame,  and that if the poverty,
the inrmities,  the elemental  need in which  all his family  lived did
not excuse everything,  in any case they made it impossi ble to pass
judgment on those who were its victims.
They  hurt  each  other  without  wanting  to,  just  because  each
represented  to the others  the cruel and demanding  necessity  of their
lives. And, in any event,  he could not doubt  his uncle’s  animal-like
devotion  rst  of  all  to  the  grandmother  and  then  to  Jacques’s
mother  and her children.  He had felt that devotion  to himself  the
o day  of  the  accident  at  the  cooperage.   Jacques  went  to  the
cooperage  every Thursday.  If he had any homework,  he would  dash
it o   rapidly,  and then run very fast to the workshop,  going as gaily
as he would  on  other days when he went to meet his playmates  of
the streets. The barrel  works  was near the parade  ground s. It was a
yard cluttered  with rubbish,  old hoops,  slag, and extinguished  res.
At one side had been erected  a sort of roof of bricks  supported  at
regular  intervals  by pillars  made of rubble.  The ve  or six artisans
worked  under  that roof. Each one was supposed  to have his own

area: a workbe nch against  the wall and in front of it a space where
the barrels and wine casks could be assembled,  and, separating  it
from the next area, a sort of bench  with a rather  large slot cut in it
into which the barrelhead  was slid and then shaped  by hand with a
† tool that resembled  a chopping  knife,  but with the sharp side facing
the man who held it by its two handles.  Actually  this layout was not
evident  at rst  glance.  Certainly  that was how it had been originally
designed,  but little by little the benches  were moved  around,  hoops
piled  up  between  the  workbenches,  cases  of  rivets  lay  here  and
there,  and it took lengthy  observation  or, which  amounted  to the
same thing, a long stay to see that everything  each artisan  did took
place in his separate  area. Before  he reached  the shop carrying  his
uncle’s  snack,  Jacques  could recognize  the sound  of hammering  on
the hoop-drive rs that drove the metal hoops  down around  the barrel
after the staves had been put in place,  and the worker  pounded  one
end of the driver  while deftly  moving  its other end all around  the
hoop—or  else  Jacques  would  guess  from  a  louder,  less  frequent
sound  that someone  was riveting a hoop fastened  in the shop’s  vise.
When  he  arrived  in  the  midst  of  the  hammering  racket,  he  was
greeted  joyfully  and  the  dance  of  the  hammers  would  resume.
Ernest,  dressed  in old patched  blue pants,  espadrilles  covered  with
sawdust,  a sleeveless  gray annel  shirt, and a faded  old tarboosh
that protected  his handsome  hair from dust and shavings,  would
embrace  him  and  suggest  that  he  help  out.  Sometimes  Jacques
would  hold the hoop in place on the anvil where  it was wedged
while  his uncle would  drive the rivets  in with mighty  blows.  The
hoop  vibrated  in  Jacques’s   hands,  and  with  each  blow  of  the
hammer  would  dig  into  his  palms—or  else  while  Ernest  seated
himself  astride  one end of the bench,  Jacques  sat the same way at
the other end, holding  the bottom  of the barrel  while Ernest  shaped
it. But what he liked best was bringing  the staves  out to the middle
of the yard for Ernest  to assemble  roughly,  keeping  them in place
with a hoop. In this barrel,  open at both ends, Ernest  would place a
pile of shavings  that it was Jacques’s  responsibility  to set on re.
The re  caused  the iron to expand  more than the wood,  and Ernest
would  take advantage  of that to drive the hoop down  with great

blows  of his hammer  and driver, while the smoke  brought  tears to
their eyes. When  the hoop had been driven  in place,  Jacques  would
bring big wooden buckets  he had lled  with water  at the pump  at
the end of the yard, then move aside while Ernest  threw  the water
hard against the barrel,  thus chilling  the hoop, which  shrank  so it
bit deeper into the wood,  softened  by the water,  all amidst  a great
p blowing of steam.
At the break they left things  as they were to have their snack, and
the  workers  would  gather,  in  winter  around  a  re  of  wood  and
shavings,  in summer  in the shade  of the roof. There  was Abder,  the
Arab laborer who wore Arab pantaloons,  the seat hanging  in folds
and the legs ending in mid-calf,  a tarboosh,  and an old jacket  over a
tattered  sweater,  and  who  in  an  odd  accent  called  Jacques  “my
colleague”  because when he helped  his uncle he was doing the same
3 work as the Arab. The boss, M. [],  was actually  an old barrelmaker
who with his helpers  lled  orders  for a bigger,  nameless  cooperage.
An Italian  worker  who was always  sad and always  had a cold. And
especially  the joyful  Daniel,  who always  took Jacques  aside to joke
and play with him. Jacques  would make his escape,  wander  around
the shop—his  black apron  covered  with sawdust,  bare feet in worn-
out sandals  if it was hot, covered  with earth and shavings —savoring
the smell of sawdust,  the fresher  smell of the shavings,  then come
back to the re  to smack  his lips over its delicious  smoke, or else
cautiously  to try out the tool used to edge the barrel  bottoms on a
piece of wood he wedged  in the vise, and he would  delight  in his
manual skill, for which the workers would praise him.
It was during  one of these breaks that he foolishly  stood up on the
bench  with  wet  soles.  Suddenly  he  slid  forward  while  the  bench
tipped  over backwards,  and he fell with all his weight  on the bench,
his right hand squeezed  under it. Immediately  he felt a dull pain in
his hand, but he stood up laughing  for the workers  who had come
running  over.  But  even  before  he  had  stopped  laughing  Ernest
rushed  to him, picked  him up in his arms, and dashed  out of the
shop,  running   as  fast  he  could  and  stammering:  “To  doctor,  to
doctor.”  Then Jacques  saw the middle  nger  of his right hand had
been completely  squashed  at the end into a shapeless  dirty pulp that

was dripping  blood.  His heart skipped  a beat and he fainted.  Five
minutes  later they were at the Arab doctor’s  who lived across  the
street  from  their  home.  “It’s  nothing,  Doctor,  nothing,   eh?”  said
Ernest, white as a sheet.
“Go wait next door,”  the doctor  said. “He’s going to be brave.” He
had to be; his strangely  patched-up  nger  bore witness  to that even
today.  But once the staples  were inserted  and it was bandaged,  the
doctor  gave  him  a  sweet  drink  and  awarded  him  a  badge  for
courage.  Even so, Ernest  wanted  to carry him across  the street and,
in the stairs of their building,  he embraced  the child,  sobbing  and
hugging him close till it hurt.
“ Maman ,” Jacques said, “someone’s knocking at the door.”
“It’s Ernest,” his mother  said. “Go open it for him. I lock it now
because of the bandits.”
When  he  discovered  Jacques  on  the  doorstep,  Ernest  gave  an
exclamation  of  surprise,  something  that  sounded  like  the  English
“how,”  and he straightened  up and embraced  him. Despite  hair that
was  now  entirely  white,  his  face  was  surprisingly  youthful,  his
features  still  regular  and  harmonious.  But  he  was  even  more
bowlegged,  his  shoulders  completely  rounded,  and  he  walked
swinging wide his arms and legs.
“How are you?” Jacques said.
Not so good,  he had stitche s, rheumatisms,  it was going  badly;
and Jacques?  Yes, all was well, he was in good shape,  she (and he
pointed  to Catherine)  was glad to see him. Since the grandmother
had died and the children  had left home,  brother  and sister had
been  living  together  and  could  not  do  without  each  other.  He
needed  someon e to look after him, and from that standpoint  she was
his wife, preparing  meals,  doing his laundry,  caring  for him when
necessary.  What she needed  was not money,  for her sons paid for
her  needs,  but  a  man’s  companionship,  and  Ernest  had  been
watching  over  her  in  his  fashion  for  the  years  they  had  lived
together;  yes, like man and wife, not in the esh  but in the blood,
helping  each other to survive  when  their handicaps  made  life so

dicult,  carrying on a mute dialogue  lit up from time to time by
scraps  of sentences,  but more connected  and better  informed  about
each other than many normal couples.
“Yes, yes,” said Ernest. “Jacques, Jacques, always she’s saying.”
“Well,  here I am,” said Jacques.  And here he was indeed,  he was
with the two of them as he used to be; he  was never able to talk to
them and he had never stopped  loving  them, them above  all, and he
cherished  them all the more for his ability  to love them when he
had failed to love so many who deserved it.
“And Daniel?”
“He’s all right, he’s old like me. Pierrot his brother in prison.”
“What for?”
“He  says  the  union.  Me,  I  think  he’s  with  the  Arabs.”  And
suddenly worried: “Say, the bandits, that’s all right?”
“No,” said Jacques, “the other Arabs yes, the bandits no.”
“Right,  I said to your mother  the bosses  too tough.  It’s crazy but
bandits too much.”
“That’s  it,”  said  Jacques.  “But  we  have  to  do  something  for
Pierrot.”
“Good, I’ll tell Daniel.”
“And Donat?” (That was the man at the gasworks who boxed.)
“He’s dead. Cancer. We’re all old.”
Yes, Donat was dead. And Aunt Marguerite,  his mother ’s sister,
was  dead;  that  was  where  his  grandmother  would  drag  him  on
Sunday  afterno ons, and he was horribly  bored,  except  when Uncle
Michel,  a teamster—who  was also bored  by these conversations  in
the dark dining  room,  over bowls  of black coee  on the oilcloth
table covering—would  take him to his nearby  stable,  and there,  in
the shadowy light, while  the afternoon  sun was still warming  the
streets  outside ,  rst   Jacques  would  smell  the  good  smell  of
horsehair,  of  straw  and  manure,  hear  the  harness  chains  rattle
against  the  wooden  manger,  the  horses  turning  their  long-lashed
eyes  to  him,  and  Uncle  Michel,  tall  and  spare  with  a  long
moustache,  who himself  smelled  of straw,  would  lift him onto one
of  the  horses  that  would  placidly  plunge  his  nose  back  into  the
manger  and crunch  his oats, while  his uncle gave the child some

carobs,  which  he chewed  and sucked  with delight,  full of friendship
for this uncle who in his mind was always  associated  with horses,
and it was with him that they went with the whole  family  on Easter
Monday  for a mouna  treat to the Sidi-Ferruch  forest,  and Michel
rented  one of those horse-drawn  trams that ran between  the district
where  they lived and downtown  Algiers,  a big sort of latticework
cage equipped  with back-to-back  benches,  to which  the horses  were
harnessed,  the  lead  horse  chosen  by  Michel  from  his  stable,  and
early in the morning  they loaded  the tram with big laundry  baskets
lled  with  the  coarse  brioches  called  “mounas”  and  the  light
crumbly  pastries called  “oriellettes”  that all the women  of the house
made  at  Aunt  Marguerite’s  over  the  two  days  before  the  outing,
attening  out the dough  with a rolling  pin on the oilcloth  dusted
with o ur till it covered  almost  the entire  cloth, then, with a small
boxwood  cutter,  cutting  out  the  pastries  that  the  children  would
carry on plates to be droppe d into big copper  basins  full of boiling
oil, then to be carefully  set in rows in the big laundry  baskets,  from
which  would  come the exquisite  odor of vanilla  that accompanied
them all the way to Sidi-Ferruch,  mingling  with the smell of the surf
that rose from the  sea to the shore road, vigorously  inhaled  by the
q four  horses  over  which  Michel   would  crack  his  whip,  which  he
handed  occasionally  to Jacques  beside  him. Jacques  was fascinated
by the four enormous  rumps  rocking  before  him with a great noise
of bells or else opening  as the tail went up and he would  see the
savory  dung  form  then  drop  to  the  ground  while  the  horseshoes
sparked  and the bells rang faster as the horses  tossed  their heads.  In
the forest,  while the others  settled the baskets  and dishtowels  under
the trees, Jacques  helped  Michel  rub down  the horses  and fasten
around  their necks the gray-brown  canvas  nose bags, in which  the
horses  chomped  their  jaws,  opening  and  closing  their  large
brotherly  eyes or chasing  away a y  with an impatient  hoof. The
forest was full of people;  they ate side by side while here and there
people  were dancing  to the sound  of an accordion  or a guitar, and
the sea was rumbling  nearby—it  was never hot enough  to swim,  but
always  enough  to go barefoo t in the shallowest  waves—while  others
were taking  their siesta,  and the imperceptible  softening  of the light

made the reaches  of the sky still more vast, so vast that the child felt
tears coming  to his eyes along with a great cry of joy and gratitude
for this wonderful  life. But Aunt Marguerite  was dead, she was so
beautiful,  and always  stylish—too  coquettish,  people  said—but  she
had  not  been  wrong,  for  diabetes  would  soon  nail  her  to  her
armchair,  and  she  would  begin  to  swell  up  in  that  neglected
apartment  until she was so enormous,  so bloated  she could hardly
breathe,  so  ugly  it  was  frightening,  and  around  her  were  her
daughters  and her lame son who was a cobbler,  all watching  sick at
r s heart to see whether  her breath  would  fail her.    She grew fatter
t still, stued with insulin, and at the end her breath did give out.
But Aunt Jeanne  was dead too, the grandmother’s  sister, the one
who attended  the Sunday  afternoon  concerts  and who held out for a
long  time  in  her  whitewas hed  farmhouse  with  her  three  war-
widowed  daughters,  always  talking  about  her  husband,  who  had
u died long since.  Uncle Joseph,  who only spoke the Mahon  dialect
and  whom  Jacques  admired  for  the  white  hair  topping  his
handsome  pink face and the black sombrero  he wore,  even at the
dinner  table, with an inimitably  noble air, a real peasant  patriarch,
who nonetheless  would  occasionally  lift himself  slightly  during  the
meal  to  let  loose  an  incongruous  sound,  for  which  he  would
courteously  excuse  himself  in  response  to  his  wife’s  resigned
reproaches.  And  his  grandmother’s  neighbors,  the  Massons,  they
were all dead, the old woman  rst  and then the older sister, the tall
4 Alexandra  and []  the  brother  with the ears that stuck out, who was
a contortionist  and sang at the matinées  at the Alcazar  movie  house.
All of them,  yes, even the youngest  daughter,  Marthe,  whom  his
brother Henri had courted and more than courted.
No one ever talked about them.  Neither  his mother  nor his uncle
ever spoke of the departed  relatives.  Nor of the father  whose  traces
he was seeking , nor of the others.  They went on living  in poverty,
though  they were no longer  in need, but they were set in their ways,
and they looked on life with a resigned  suspicion;  they loved it as
animals  do, but they knew from experience  that it would  regularly
give birth to disaster  without even showing  any sign that it was
v carrying  it.  And then, the way these two were with him, silent and

drawn  in on themselves,  empty  of memories  and only holding on to
a few blurred  images;  they lived now in proximity  to death—that  is
always  in the present.  Never would  he learn from them who his
father  had  been,  and  even  though  by  their  presence  alone  they
reopened  springs  within  him reaching  back to his poor and happy
childhood,  he could not be sure whether  these very rich memories
gushing  out of him were really  faithful  to the child he had been. It
was far more certain,  on the contrary,  that he was left with two or
three favorite  pictures  that joined him to them,  made him one with
them, that blotted out what he had tried to be for so many years  and
reduced  him to the blind anonymous  being that for so many years
had survived through his family and that made him truly distinctive.
The picture, for example,  of those hot evenings  when after dinner
the whole  family  would  take chairs  down to the sidewalk  in front of
the door to the building,  where  the air coming  down from the dust-
covered  cus  trees  was  hot  and  dusty,  while  the  people  of  the
w neighborhood  came and went in front of them,  and Jacques,  with
his head on his mother’s  thin shoulder,  leaning  back a little in his
chair,  would  gaze  up  through  the  branches  at  the  stars  of  the
summer  sky;  or  that  other  picture  of  the  Christmas  night  when,
coming  home from Aunt Marguerite’s  after midnight  without  Ernest,
they saw a man lying in front of the restaurant  near their door, with
another  man dancing  around  him. The two men had been drinking
and had wanted to drink some more. The owner,  a frail young  blond
man, had told them to leave.  They had kicked  his pregnant  wife.
And the owner red  a shot. The bullet  lodged  in the man’s  right
temple.  Now on the sidewalk  that head was resting  on the wound.
Drunk  on  alcohol  and  fright,  the  other  man  had  started  dancing
around  him,  and  while  the  restaurant  closed  up,  everyone  ed
before  the police  arrived.  And in that out-of-the-way  corner  of the
neighborhood  where  they stood squeezed  together,  the two women
holding  the  children  tight  against  them,  a  rare  beam  of  light
gleaming  on the street slick with recent  rainfall,  the long wet tracks
of cars, the occasional  arrival of the noisy brightly  lit trolleys  full of
joyous  travelers  indierent  to this scene  from another  world—all
this engraved  on Jacques’s  terried  heart an image  that until now

had  survived  all  others:  the  sweet  and  persistent  image  of  the
neighborhood  where  he reigned  all day long, innocent  and eager,
but which the ending  of the days would  turn suddenly  mysterious
and disturbing,  when  the streets  would  begin  to be peopled  with
shadows—or  rather,  a single anonymous  shadow  would  sometimes
emerge,  accompanied  by soft footsteps  and the indistinc t sound  of
voices,  and be bathed  in the blood-red  splendor  of a pharmacy’s
globe light, and the child would  be suddenly  lled  with dread  and
would run to his wretched home to be back among his own.
1 .  Sometimes  named  Ernest,  sometimes  Étienne,  it  is  always  the  same  person:
Jacques’s uncle.
a . 9 years
b . the money he’d set aside and gave to Jacques.
c . Of medium  height, a bit bowlegged,  his shoulders  somewhat  stooped  under  a thick
shell of muscle,  he gave the impression  despite  his slender  build of an extraordinarily
virile  strength.  And  yet  his  face  was  and  for  a  long  time  would  remain  that  of  an
adolescent,  delicate  regular  features,  a bit [] [a word crossed  out— Ed .] with his sister’s
beautiful  chestnut  eyes, a very straight  nose, bare eyebrows,  regular  chin, and beautiful
thick hair—no, a little wavy.  His physical  beauty  in itself was why despite  his handicap
he had had several  adventures  with women,  which  could not lead to marriage  and were
necessarily  brief, but at times had the appearance  of what is usually  called  love, like that
aair   he’d had with a married  shopkee per in the neighborhood,  and sometimes  he would
take Jacques  to the Saturday  night concert in Bresson  Square  that looked  out on the sea,
and the military  orchestra  on the bandstand  played  The  Bells  of Corneville  or tunes from
Lakmé , while  in the midst  of the crowd  that was moving  around  the [], Ernest  in his
Sunday  best would  make sure his path crossed  that of the café owner’s  wife dressed  in
raw silk, and they would  exchange  smiles  of friendship,  the husband  occasio nally saying
a few amicable words to Ernest, whom he surely never saw as a potential rival.
d . the la mouna laundry [words circled by the author— Ed .]
e . the beach pieces  of bleached  wood,  corks, sea-worn  fragments  of glass ... reeds from
cork trees.
f . the hunt? could be cut.
g . the book should be heavy with things and esh.

h . careful, change the names.
i . Tolstoy  or Gorki (I)  The  Father  From that background  came Dostoevs ky (II)  The  Son
which returning to its origins gives the writer of the period (III)  The Mother
j .  M.  Germain—the  lycée —religion—death  of  the  grandmother—End  with  Ernest’s
hand?
k . microtragedies
2 . Protagonist of Molière’s  The Miser—Trans .
l . The household of Ernest, Catherine after the death of the grandmother.
*  tears of helpless love
m . bring on much earlier—ght not Lucien.
n . for old age would  come—at  the time Jacques  thought  his mother  was old and she
was barely  the age he was now, but youth  is above  all a collection  of possibilities,  and
for him to whom life had been generous ... [passage crossed out— Ed .]
o . put cooperage before rages and maybe even at beginning prole Ernest.
†  look up the name of the tool
p . nish the barrel
3 . An illegible name.
q . bring Michel back during the Orléansville earthquake.
r . Book six in the second part.
s . And Francis was dead too (see latest notes)
t . Denise leaves  home at eighteen  to be a prostitute—Comes  back rich at twenty-one,
sells her jewels, does over her father’s whole stable—killed by an epidemic
u . the daughters?
4 . Illegible name.
v . but are they after all aliens? (no, he was the a.)
w . humble and proud sovereign of the beauty of the night.

1 6 A   :   S c h o o l
a This  man  had  never  known  his  father,  but  he  often  spoke  to
Jacques  of him in a rather  mythological  way, and in any case at a
critical  time he knew how to take the father’s  role. That is why
Jacques  had never forgotten  him, as if, having  never really felt the
lack  of  a  father  he  had  never  known,  he  had  nonetheless
subconsciously  recognized,  rst  as a child,  then during  the rest of
his life, the one paternal  act—both  well thought  out and crucial—
that had aected  his life as a child. For M. Bernard,  his teacher  for
2 the year of the  certicat  d’étud es ,  had at a given moment  used all
his weight as a man to change  the destiny  of this child in his charge,
and he had in fact changed it.
Right now M. Bernard  was facing Jacques  in his small  apartment
in  the  winding  streets  of  the  Rovigo,  almost  at  the  foot  of  the
Casbah,  a district  that overlooked  the city and the sea, occupied  by
small shopkee pers of all races and all religions,  where  the homes
smelled  at once of spices  and of poverty.  He was there,  grown  old,
his hair more sparse,  old-age  splotches  under  the now glassy tissue
of his cheeks and hands,  moving  more slowly  than in the old days,
and visibly  glad when he could sit back down in his rattan  armchair,
by the window  that faced the street of shops,  where  a canary  was
chirping;  age had also softened him and he let his feelings  show,
which  he  had  not  done  before,  but  he  was  still  erect,  his  voice
strong  and rm , as it had been back when,  standing  before his class,
he would say: “In line two by two. By two! I didn’t say by ve!”  And
the scrambling  would  stop; the pupils,  who both feared  and adored
M. Bernard, would  line up along the wall outside  the classroom,  in
the second-oor  corridor,  until, when the rows were at last still and
straight,  and  the  children  quiet,  a  “Come  in  now,  you  bunch  of

tramousses ” would liberate  them and give them the signal  to move
but at a more subdued  pace, which  M. Bernard,  robust,  elegantly
dressed,  his strong  face with its regular  features  crowned  by hair
that was thinning  but still smooth,  smelling  of cologne,  would  watch
over with good-natured strictness.
The  school  was  located  in  a  relatively  new  part  of  that  old
neighborhood,  among  two-  and  three-story  houses  built  not  long
after the war of 1870 and more recent  warehouses  that eventually
connected  the  main  street  of  the  neighborhood,  where  Jacques’s
home  was, to the inner harbor and the coaling  docks.  So Jacques
went on foot twice a day to that building  he had begun  attending  at
the age of four, when he went to nursery  school,  about  which  he
remembered  nothing  except  a dark stone lavatory  that took up one
whole  end  of  the  covered  playground  where  he  landed  one  day
headrst,  got up all bloody  with a cut eyebrow,  amidst  the panic of
teachers,  and  it  was  then  he  became  acquainted  with  medical
staples  and, in fact, his had hardly been removed  when they had to
put one on his other eyebrow,  his brother  having  conceive d the idea
of dressing  him up at home in an old bowler  that blinded him and
an old coat that hobbled  his feet, with the result that he wound  up
with his head hitting  a loose tile and was covered  with blood  once
again.  But now he was going to nursery  school  with Pierre,  who was
a year or almost so older,  who lived in a nearby  street  with his
mother,  also a war widow  and now working  in the post oce,  and
two of his uncles  who worked on the railroad.  Their families were
vaguely  friends,  or—the  way people  are in these neighborhoods—
they valued  one another  but hardly  ever exchanged  visits,  and they
were rmly resolved  to help each other out but almost  never  had
the occasion to do so. Only the children  had really become  friends,
from that rst  day when Jacques  was still wearing  a dress and was
entrusted  to Pierre,  who was aware  that he was wearing  pants and
had responsibilities  as the older boy, the two children  went together
to nursery school.  They then went through  every grade together  up
to the year of the  certicat  d’étud es , which Jacques  entered  at the
age of nine. For ve  years they made the same journey  four times a
day, one blond,  the other  brown-haired,  one placid,  the other hot-

blooded,  destined from the beginning  to be friends,  good students
both and also tireless  at play. Jacques  shone  more in some subjects,
but  his  conduct,  his  ightiness,  and  his  desire  to  show  o   were
forever  leading  him into all sorts of foolish  behavior,  and this gave
the advantage  back to the more sober and discreet  Pierre.  So they
alternated  at the head of the class, but, in contrast  to their families,
they  did  not  think  to  take  pride  in  this.  Their  pleasures  were
dierent.  Each morning,  Jacques would  wait for Pierre  outside  his
house.  They would  leave before  the passage  of the scavengers—or
more precisely  a cart drawn  by a broken-kneed  horse driven by an
old Arab.  The sidewalk  was still moist  from the humidity of the
night,  the  air  coming  from  the  sea  tasted  of  salt.  Pierre’s  street,
which  led  to  the  market,  was  dotted  with  garbage  cans  that
famished  Arabs  or Moors,  or sometimes  an old Spanish  tramp,  had
pried  open  at  dawn  to  see  if  there  was  still  something  to  be
retrieved  from what poor and thrifty  families  had so disdained  they
would  throw  it away.  The lids of these cans were usually  o,   and by
this hour of the morning  the neighborhood’s  thin vigorou s cats had
taken  the  place  of  the  ragged  people.  The  idea  was  for  the  two
children  to  creep  up  to  the  garbage  can  so  noiselessly  that  they
could suddenly  slap the lid down on the cat inside.  This exploit  was
not easy, for cats born and raised in a poor district  were as vigilant
and  agile  as  animals  used  to  ghting  for  their  right  to  live.  But
sometimes,  hypnotized  by  an  appetizing  nd  that  was  hard  to
extract  from the pile of garbage,  a cat would  let itself be caught
unawares.  The lid would  slam  noisily  down,  the cat would  give a
terried  howl, convulsively  arch its back and claws,  and manage  to
raise the roof of its zinc prison, then scramble  out, its hair standing
on end with fear, and tear o   as if there were a pack of hounds  at its
heels—to  bursts  of laughter  from its tormentors,  who were hardly
b aware of their cruelty.
To tell the truth, these tormentors  were also inconsistent,  for they
3 directed  their  hatred  at  the  dogcatcher,  nicknamed  “Galoufa”
(which  in Spanish  ...) by the neighborhood  children.  This municipal
employee  operated  at about  this same time of day, but if necessary
he would  also come around  in the afternoon.  He was an Arab in

European  dress who was usually  stationed  at the rear of a strange
cart drawn by two horses  and driven  by an impassive  old Arab. The
body of this cart consisted  of a kind of cube made of wood, with a
double  row of cages with strong bars installed  along  each side. It
included  a total of sixteen  cages that could  each hold a dog, that
would  then n d itself squeezed  between  the bars and the back of the
cage. Since the dogcatcher  was perched  on a little running  board  at
the back of the cart, his nose was even with the roof of the cages
and  thus  he  would  survey  his  hunting  grounds.  The  cart  rolled
slowly  through  wet streets  that were beginning  to be peopled  by
children  on  their  way  to  school,  housewives  in  annelette
housecoats  decorated  with garish owers  going  for their bread  or
milk, and Arab peddlers  returning to the market,  their little folded
stands  over  one  shoulder,  holding  in  the  other  hand  enormous
hampers  of  braided  straw  that  contained  their  merchandise.  And
suddenly,  at a word from the dogcatcher,  the old Arab would  pull
back  on  the  reins  and  the  cart  would  stop.  The  dogcatcher  had
spotted  one of his wretched  victims  digging  feverishly  in a garbage
can, glancing  back franticall y at regular  intervals,  or else trotting
rapidly  along  a  wall  with  the  hurried  and  anxious  look  of  an
undernourished  dog. Galoufa  then seized  from the top of the cart a
leather  rod with a chain that ran through  a ring down the handle.
He moved toward  the animal  at the supple,  rapid,  and silent pace of
a trapper, and when he had caught  up with the beast,  if it was not
wearing  the  collar  that  proves  membership  in  a  good  family,  he
would  run at it, in a sudden  burst of astonishing  speed,  and put his
weapon  around  the  dog’s  neck,  so  that  it  served  as  an  iron  and
leather  lasso. Suddenly  strangled,  the animal  struggled  wildly  while
making  inarticulate  groans.  But the man quickly  dragged  [it] to the
cart, opened  one of the cage doors,  lifted the dog, strangling  it more
and  more,  and  shoved  it  into  the  cage,  making  sure  to  put  the
handle  of his lasso through  the bars. Once the dog was captured,  he
loosened  the iron chain and freed the neck of the now imprisoned
animal.  At least that is how things  happened  when the dog was not
under the protection  of the neighborhood  children.  For they were all
in league against  Galoufa.  They knew the captured  dogs were taken

to the municipal  pound,  kept for three days, after which,  if no one
claimed  them,  the  animals  were put to death.  And if they had not
known  it, the pitiful  spectacle  of that death  cart returning after a
fruitful  journey,  loaded  with  wretched  animals  of  all  colors  and
sizes, terried  behind  their bars and leaving  behind  the vehicle  a
trail of cries and mortal  howls,  would  have been enough  to rouse
the children’s  indignation.  So, as soon as the prison  van appeared  in
the area, the children  would  alert each other.  They would  scatter
throughout  the streets  of the neighborhood,  they too hunting  down
the dogs, but in order to chase them o   to other parts of the city, far
from the terrible  lasso. If despite these precautions  the dogcatcher
found  a stray dog in their presence,  as happened  several  times to
Pierre  and Jacques,  their tactics were always  the same.  Before  the
dogcatcher  could get close enough  to his quarry,  Jacques  and Pierre
would  start screaming  “Galou fa! Galoufa!”  in voices  so piercing  and
so terrifying that the dog would  ee  as fast as he could and would
soon be out of reach.  Now it was the children’s  turn to prove their
skill  as  sprinters,  for  the  unfortunate  Galoufa,  who  was  paid  a
bounty  for each dog he caught,  was wild with anger,  and he would
chase  them  brandishing  his  leather  rod.  The  grown-ups  usually
helped  them escape,  either  by hindering  Galoufa  or by stopping  him
outright  and telling  him to stick to his dogs. The workingmen  of the
neighborhood  were all hunters and as a rule liked dogs; they had no
respect  for this strange  occupation.  As Uncle  Ernest  would  say: “He
loafer!”  The  old  Arab  who  drove  the  cart  presided  silent  and
impassive  over all the fuss, or, if the arguments  stretched  out, would
calmly  start rolling  a cigarette.  Whether  they had captured  cats or
saved  dogs, the children  would  then hasten—wearing  short capes
for  the  wind  if  it  was  winter,  their  leather  sandals  (known  as
“mevas”)  apping  if  it  was  summer—toward  school  and  work.
While  crossing  the market,  they would  glance  quickly  at the displays
of fruit, mountains of oranges  and tangerines,  of medlars,  apricots,
4 peaches,  tangerines,  melons, and watermelons  rushing  past them,
of which they would  get to taste only the least expensive,  and that
in small quantities;  two or three turns at jousting  on the broad shiny
rim of the basin at the waterspout,  and they would  go alongside  the

warehouses  on Boulevard  Thiers, where  they would  be hit in the
face with the smell of oranges  coming  from factories  that peeled
them to make liqueurs  with their rinds; up a small street of gardens
and villas, and they would  come out nally  on rue Aumerat into a
swarm  of children  who, while chattering  away at each other,  were
waiting for the doors to open.
Then  came  class.  With  M.  Bernard,  this  class  was  always
interesting  for  the  simple  reason  that  he  loved  his  work  with  a
passion.  Outside,  the sun might  blare on the tawny  walls while the
heat  crackled  in  the  classroom  itself,  though  it  was  shaded  by
awnings  with big yellow  and white stripes.  Or the rain might  fall, as
it does in Algeria,  in endless  deluges,  making  a wet dark well of the
street,  but the class was hardly distracted.  Only the ies  during  a
storm  could sometimes  divert  the children’s  attention.  They would
be captured  and grounded  in the inkwells,  where  they suered  a
hideous  death, drowned  in the purple  ink that lled  the little cone-
shaped  wells that were set in holes in the table.  But M. Bernard’s
method,  which  consisted  of strict control  on behavior  while at the
same time making  his teaching lively and entertaining,  would  win
out over even the ies.  He always  knew the right moment  to bring
from his treasure  chest the mineral  collection,  the herbarium,  the
mounted  butteries  and insects,  the maps or ... to revive  his pupils’
agging  interest.  He  was  the  only  person  in  the  school  to  have
obtained  a  magic  lantern,  and  twice  a  month  he  would  do
projections  on  some  subject  in  natural  history  or  geography.  In
arithmetic,  he instituted  a contest  in mental  calculation  that forced
the students to think quickly.  He would  put forth a problem  to the
class,  all  sitting  with  their  arms  folded,  in  division,  or
multiplication,  or  sometimes  a  somewhat  complex  addition.  How
much is 1,267  + 691? The rst  one to give the correct  answer  was
awarded  a plus that counted  toward  the monthly  ranking.  Besides,
he used the textbooks  with competence  and accuracy  ... The texts
were always those used in France.  And these children,  who knew
only the sirocco,  the dust, the short torrential  cloudbursts,  the sand
of  the  beaches,  and  the  sea  in  ames  under  the  sun,  would
assiduously  read—accenting  the commas  and periods—s tories  that

to them were mythical,  where  children  in hoods  and muers,  their
feet in wooden  shoes,  would come home dragging  bundles  of sticks
along  snowy  paths  until  they  saw  the  snow-covered  roof  of  the
house  where  the  smoking  chimney  told  them  the  pea  soup  was
cooking  in the hearth.  For Jacques,  these stories  were as exotic  as
they  could  possibly  be.  He  dreamed  about  them,  lled  his
compositions  with descriptions  of a world  he had never seen, and
was forever  questioning  his grandmother  about  a snowfall  lasting
one  hour  that  had  taken  place  in  the  Algiers  area  twenty  years
earlier.  For him these stories  were part of the powerful  poetry  of
school,  which  was nourished  also by the smell of varnished  rulers
and pen cases;  the delicious  taste of the strap on his satchel that he
would  chew on at length  while laboring  over his lessons;  the sharp
bitter smell of purple  ink, especially  when his turn came to ll  the
inkwells  from a huge dark bottle  with a cork through  which  a bent
glass tube had been pushed , and Jacques  would  happily  sni    the
opening  of  the  tube;  the  soft  feel  of  the  smooth  glossy  pages  in
certain  books,  which  also gave o   the good smell of print and glue;
and, n ally, on rainy days, the smell of wet wool that emanated
from the wool coats at the back of the classroom  and seemed  to be a
harbinger  of that Garden  of Eden where  children  in wooden  shoes
and woolen hoods ran through the snow to their warm homes.
Only school  gave Jacques  and Pierre  these joys. And no doubt
what they so passionately  loved in school  was that they were not at
home,  where want and ignorance  made life harder  and more bleak,
as if closed in on itself; poverty is a fortress without drawbridges.
But it was not just that, for Jacques  considered  himself  the most
unfortunate  of children  when,  to get rid of this tireless  brat during
vacations,  his grandmother  would  send him to a holiday  camp,  with
fty  or so other children  and a handful  of counselors,  at Miliana  in
the  Zaccar  Mountains;  there  they  lived  in  a  school  that  had
dormitories,  ate and slept comfortably,  played  or wandered  around
all day long, watched  over by some nice nurses,  and despite  all that,
when  evening  came—when  shadows  rose  so  rapidly  on  the
mountain  slopes and from the neighboring  barracks  the bugle began
to throw the melancholy  notes of curfew  into the enormous  silence

of this small town lost in the mountains,  a hundred  kilometers  from
any really traveled  location— the child felt a limitless  despair  rising
in him and in silence  he cried for the destitute  home of his entire
c childhood.
No, school did not just provide them an escape  from family  life.
At least in M. Bernard’s  class, it fed a hunger  in them more basic
even  to  the  child  than  to  the  man,  and  that  is  the  hunger  for
discovery.  No doubt  they were taught  many  things  in their other
classes,  but it was somewhat  the way geese are stued : food was
presented  to them and they were asked to please  swallow it. In M.
5 Germain’s  class, they felt for the rst  time that they existed  and
that they were the objects  of the highest  regard:  they were judged
worthy  to discover  the world. And even their teacher  did not devote
himself  just to what he was paid to teach them;  he welcomed  them
with simplicity  into his personal  life, he lived that life with them,
told  them  about  his  childhood  and  the  lives  of  children  he  had
known,  shared  with them his philosophy  but not his opinions,  for
though  he was for example  anti-clerical,  like many of his colleagues,
he never said a word against  religion  in class, nor against  anything
that  could  be  the  object  of  a  choice  or  a  belief,  but  he  would
condemn  with all the more vigor those evils over which  there could
be no argument—theft, betrayal, rudeness, dirtiness.
But most of all he talked  to them about  the war that was still
recent,  which  he had fought  for four years,  and about  the suering
of the soldiers,  their courage  and their endurance,  and the joy of the
armistice.  At the end of each term, before  sending  them home  for
vacation,  and from time to time when the schedule  allowed  him to,
d he would read them long excerpts from Dorgelès’s  Les  Croix  de  Bois .
For Jacques  these readings  again opened  the door to the exotic,  but
this time an exotic world  stalked  by fear and misfortune,  although
he never made any but a theoretical  connection  with the father  he
never  knew.  He just listened  with all his heart to a story that his
teacher  read with all  his  heart and that spoke to him again of snow
and his cherish ed winter,  but also of a special  kind of men, dressed
in heavy  cloth sti    with mud, who spoke  a strange  language  and
lived in holes under  a ceiling  of shells and ares  and bullets.  Pierre

and he awaited  each reading  with ever-increasing  impatience.  That
war everyone was still talking  about (and Jacques  listened  silent but
with ears wide open when  Daniel  would  tell in his own way about
the Battle  of the Marne,  where he fought  and he still did not know
how he had come out alive when they, the Zouaves,  he said, they
were put out in front and then at the charge  down  a ravine they
charged  and  there  was  no  one  ahead  of  them  and  they  were
advancing  and all of a sudden  the machine  gunners  when they were
halfway  down they were dropping  one on top of the other and the
bed  of  the  ravine  was  all  full  of  blood  and  the  ones  crying  for
maman  it was awful)  that the survivors could  not forget  and that
cast its shadow  over everything  in the children’s  world  and shaped
all the ideas they had for fascinating  stories  more extraordinary  than
the  fairy  tales  read  in  other  classes,  and  that  would  have
disappointed  and bored  them if M. Bernard  had taken  it into his
head to change  his curriculum.  But he went on with it, funny scenes
alternating  with  terrifying  descriptions,  and  little  by  little  the
African  children  made the acquaintance  ... of x y z, who became
part of their world;  they talked about  them among  themselves  as if
they were old friends  who were right there and so much alive that
Jacques  at least could not for a moment  imagine  that though  they
were living  in the war, there was any chance  they could be victims
of it. And on the day at the end of the year when,  as they arrived  at
* the end of the book,  M. Bernard  read them the death  of D. in a
subdued  voice,  when he closed  the book in silence,  facing his own
memories  and  emotions,  then  raised  his  eyes  to  his  silent,
overwhelmed  class, he saw Jacques  in the rst  row staring  at him
with his face bathed  in tears and shaking  with sobs that seemed  as if
they would  never  end. “Come come,  child,”  M. Bernard  said in a
barely  audible  voice,  and he stood up to return  the book to the case,
his back to the class.
“Wait  a minute,  kiddo,”  M. Bernard  said. Now he stood up with
diculty,  ran his index nger  over the bars of the cage, so that the
canary  chirped  all  the  more:  “Ah!  Casimir,  we’re  hungry,  we’re

asking  our father,”  and [got himself]  to his little schoolbo y’s desk on
the other side of the room,  near the replace.  He rummaged  in a
drawer,  closed it, opened  another, pulled  out something.  “Here,”  he
said, “this is for you.” Jacques received  a book bound  in grocery-
store paper with no writing  on its cover.  Before  he even opened  it,
he knew it was  Les  Croix  de  Bois , the very copy M. Bernard  had read
to the class.
“No, no,” he said, “it’s ...” He wanted  to say: “it’s too beautiful.”
He could not nd the words.
M.  Bernard  shook  his  old  head.  “You  cried  that  last  day,  you
remember?  Since  that  day  the  book’s  belonged  to  you.”  And  he
turned  away  to  hide  his  suddenly  reddened  eyes.  He  went  back
again to his desk, turned  to Jacques  with his hands  behind  his back,
† then,  brandishing  a  short  solid  red  ruler   in  his  face,  he  said,
laughing, “You remember the ‘sugar cane’?”
“Oh, M. Bernard,”  said Jacques,  “so you kept it! You know  it’s
forbidden now.”
“Pooh,  it was forbidden  then too. But you’re  a witness  that I used
it!”
Jacques  was  indeed  a  witness,  for  M.  Bernard  was  in  favor  of
corporal  punishment.  True, the everyday  punishment  only consisted
of minus  marks  that he would deduct  at the end of the month  from
the number  of points  accumulated  by the pupil,  thus bringing  him
down in his overall  ranking.  But in more serious  cases M. Bernard
did not bother  to send the oender  to the principal’s  o ce, as did
many of his colleagues.  He followed  an unalterable  ritual. “My poor
Robert,”  he would  say, calmly  and still with good humor , “we shall
have to resort  to the ‘sugar  cane.’  ” No one in the class reacted
(except  to snicker  behind  his hand, according  to the eternal rule of
the human heart that the punishment  of one is felt by the others  as
e pleasure).  The child would stand,  pale but in most cases trying  to
put a good face on it (some  were already  swallowing  their tears
when  they  left  their  table  and  headed  toward  the  desk  that  M.
Bernard  was  standing  beside,  in  front  of  the  blackbo ard).  Still
conforming  to  the  ritual,  and  here  there  was  a  touch  of  sadism,

Robert  or Joseph  had to go to the desk himself  to get the “sugar
cane” and present it to the sacricer.
The “sugar  cane”  was a red wood ruler, short and thick, spotted
with ink, marred  with nicks and slashes,  that M. Bernard  had long
ago conscated  from some forgotten  pupil; the boy would  now hand
it to M. Bernard,  who usually  received  it with a mocking  air, then
held his legs apart.  The child had to put his head between  the knees
of the teacher,  who by tightening his thighs  would  hold him rmly.
And on the buttocks  thus presented,  M. Bernard  would  inict  some
solid  blows  with  the  ruler,  the  number  varying  accord ing  to  the
oense  and equally  divided  between  the two cheeks.  Reactions  to
this  punishment  diered  according  to  the  pupil.  Some  began
sobbing  even  before  being  hit,  and  the  unfazed  teacher  would
observe  that they were getting ahead  of themselves;  others  would
naively  try  to  protect  their  bottom  with  their  hands,  which  M.
Bernard  would slap aside with a casual  blow. Still others, smarting
under  the blows  of the ruler, would  buck desperately.  There  were
also  those,  among  them  Jacques,  who  took  the  blows  without  a
word, shivering,  and returned  to their places  holding  back a ood  of
tears.  On  the  whole,  however,  this  punishment  was  accepted
without  bitterness:  rst,  because  almost  all  these  children  were
beaten  at  home  and  so  physical  punishment  seemed  to  them  a
natural  method  of  upbringing;  then  too  because  the  teacher  was
absolutely  fair, they all knew in advance  which  infractions,  always
the  same  ones,  would  result  in  the  ceremony  of  atonement,  and
those who went beyond  the limit of actions  that resulted  only in
minus  points  knew the chance they were taking;  and na lly because
the  sentence  was  imposed  with  hearty  impartiality  on  the  best
students  as well as the worst.  Jacques,  whom  M. Bernard  obviously
loved  very  much,  suered  it  like  the  rest,  and  he  even  had  to
undergo  it  the  day  after  M.  Bernard  had  publicly  shown  his
preference  for him. When  Jacques  at the blackboard  had given  a
good answer  and M. Bernard  had patted  his cheek and a voice in the
classroom  whispered,  “teacher’s  pet,” M. Bernard  had pulled  him
close  and  said  with  a  kind  of  solemnity:  “Yes,  I  am  partial  to
Connery  as I am to all those among  you who lost their fathers in the

war. I fought  the war with their fathers  and I survived.  I try at least
here to take the place of my dead comrades.  And now if someone
wants  to  say  I  have  ‘pets,’  let  him  speak  up!”  This  speech  was
received  in absolute  silence.  At the end of the day, Jacques asked
who had called  him “teacher ’s pet.” To take such an insult without
responding would have meant a loss of honor.
“I did,” said Munoz,  a big blond  boy, rather  abby  and insipid,
who  though  undemonstrative  had  always  shown  his  antipathy  to
Jacques.
f “All right,”  said Jacques.  “Then  your mother’s  a whore.”  That too
was  a  ritual  insult  that  led  immediately  to  battle,  for  to  insult
mothers  and the dead had been from time immemorial  the most
serious  of aronts  known  to the shores  of the Mediterranean.  Even
so, Munoz hesitated.  But a ritual is a ritual,  and others  spoke  for
him: “Come on, it’s the green eld.”  The green eld  was a sort of
vacant  lot,  not  far  from  the  school,  where  sickly  grass  grew  in
scabby  bunches,  littered  with  old  hoops,  tin  cans,  and  rotting
barrels.  This  was where  the  donnades  took place.  A  donnade  was just
a duel, with the st  taking  the place of the sword,  but obeying  the
same  ceremon ial  rules,  at  least  in  spirit.  Its  aim  was  to  settle  a
quarrel  where  the  honor  of  one  of  the  adversaries  was  at  stake,
either  because  someone  had insulted  his parents  or his ancestors,  or
had belittled  his nationality  or his race, or had been informed  on or
had accused  another  of informing,  had stolen  or been accused of it,
or else for the more obscure  reasons  that come up every day in a
society  of  children.  When  a  pupil  reckoned,  or  especially  when
others  reckoned  for him (and he was aware  of it), that he had been
insulted  in such a way that the oense  must be compen sated,  the
ritual  statement  was: “Four  o’clock,  at the green  eld.”  Once the
declaration  had been made,  provocation  ceased  and all discussion
ended.  The  two  adversaries  withdrew,  followed  by  their  friends.
During  the classes  that followed,  the news sped from bench to bench
with  the  names  of  the  principals,  whom  their  classmates  would
watch  out of the corner  of their eyes and who therefore  aected  the
calm and resolution  appropri ate to manliness.  Inside  it was another
story,  and  even  the  most  courageous  were  distracted  from  their

work by the dread of seeing  the moment  approach  when they would
have to face violence.  But the members  of the enemy  camp must not
be given cause to snicker  and to accuse  the protagonist,  according  to
the time-honored expression, of being “scared shitless.”
Jacques,  having  done his duty as a man by challenging  Munoz,
was certainly scared enough,  as he was every time he put himself  in
a situation  where  he had to  face violence  and to deal it out. But he
had  made  his  decision,  and  in  his  mind  there  was  never  for  an
instant  any question  of backing  out. This was the nature of things,
and he knew also that the touch of nausea  that would  grip his heart
beforehand  would vanish  at the moment  of combat,  swept  away by
his own violence,  which  in any event would  hurt him tactically  as
6 much as it helped him ... and had earned him at
On  the  afternoon  of  the  ght  with  Munoz  everything  took  place
according  to ritual.  The ght ers were the rst  to arrive  at the green
eld,  followed  by their supporters  turned  into seconds  and already
carrying  the principals’  satchels, and they in turn were followed  by
all  those  attracted  to  the  ght,  who  closed  a  circle  around  the
adversaries  on  the  battleeld.  The  principals  took  o   their  short
capes  and  jackets  and  handed  them  to  their  seconds.  This  time
Jacques’s  impetuousness  worked  to his advantage.  He attacked  rst,
not very condently,  forcing  Munoz  to retreat;  Munoz  backed  up in
confusion,  clumsily  parrying  his  antagonist’s  sts,  then  landed  a
painful  blow on Jacques’s  cheek  that aroused  a blind rage in him
intensied  by the shouts,  the laughter,  the encouragement  of the
crowd.  He hurled  himself  at Munoz,  rained  blows  on him with his
sts,  bewildering  him, and was lucky enough  to land a furious  hook
on the right eye of his unfortunate  opponent,  who, complete ly o
balance,  fell pitifully  on his back, one eye weeping  and the other
immediately  swelling.  The black eye, a crowning  blow much sought
after because  for several  days it would  visibly  conrm  the winner’s
triumph,  brought  a  roar  from  the  audience  worthy  of  the  Sioux.
Munoz  did not get to his feet immediately,  and Pierre, Jacques’s
closest  friend,   quickly  stepped  in  and  authoritatively  declared

Jacques  the winner,  then helped  him on with his jacket  and put his
cape on his shoulders,  and led him away surrounded  by a retinue  of
admirers,  while Munoz  got up, still crying,  and dressed  in his small
circle of dismayed  supporter s. Jacques,  dizzy with the rapidity  of a
victory  he had not even hoped  would  be so complete,  could hardly
hear the congratulations  around  him and the already  embellished
accounts  of  the  ght.  He  wanted  to  be  glad,  and  he  was  glad,
somewhere  in the vanity  of his ego, and yet, when he looked back at
Munoz  as he was leaving  the green eld,  a bleak sadness  suddenly
seized  his heart at the sight of the crestfallen  face of the boy he had
struck.  And then he knew that war is no good, because  vanquishing
a man is as bitter as being vanquished.
To round  out his education,  he was taught  without  delay that the
7 Tarpeian  Rock is near the Capitol.  The next day, in fact, he thought
he should  swagger  and show o   in response  to the backslapping
admiration  of  his  classmates.  When,  at  the  beginning  of  class,
Munoz  did not answer  to his name,  Jacques’s  neighbors  commen ted
on his absence  with ironic  snickers  and winks  to the victor,  and
Jacques  gave in to temptation,  pued  out his cheeks,  and showed
the others  a half-closed  eye; without  realizing  that M. Bernard  was
watching  him,  he  was  indulging  in  a  grotesque  mimicry  that
vanished  in  the  blink  of  an  eyelid  when  the  master’s  voice
resounded  in the suddenly  still classroom:  “My poor teacher’s  pet,”
he  said,  deadpan,  “you  have  as  much  right  as  the  others  to  the
‘sugar  cane.’  ” The conqueror  had to stand up, fetch the instrument
of torture, and, amidst  the fresh smell of cologne  that surrounded  M.
Bernard, assume the ignominious position to be punished.
The  Munoz  aair  was  not  to  end  on  this  lesson  in  applied
philosophy.  The  boy’s  absence  lasted  two  days,  and  Jacques  was
vaguely  worrie d despite  his swaggering  air when,  on the third day,
an older student came in the room to inform  M. Bernar d that the
principal  was  asking  for  the  pupil  Cormery.  They  were  only
summoned  to the principal’s  oce   in serious  cases, and the teacher,
raising  his bushy  eyebrows,  simply  said: “Hurry  up, kiddo. I hope
you  haven’t  done  anything  foolish.”  Jacques,  his  legs  unsteady
under  him, followed  the older pupil down the length  of the corridor

over the cement courtyard  with its ornamental  peppertre es that the
dappled  shade did not protect  from the torrid heat, to the principal’s
oce   at the other end of the corridor.  The rst  thing he saw as he
entered,  in front of the principal’s  desk, was Munoz  anked  by a
scowling  woman and man. Although  his classmate  was disgured  by
an  eye that was swollen  and completely  shut, Jacques  was relieved
to nd him still alive. But he did not have time to enjoy that relief.
“Was it you who hit your classmate?”  asked the principal,  a small
bald man with a pink face and an energetic voice.
“Yes,” Jacques said in a toneless voice.
“I  told  you  so,  Monsieur, ”  said  the  woman.  “André  is  no
hooligan.”
“We had a ght,” said Jacques.
“I don’t need to know about  it,” said the principal.  “You know I
forbid  all ghting,  even outside  school.  You injured  your classmate
and could have injured  him even more severely.  By way of a rst
warning,  you will stand in the corner  at every recess  for a week.  If
you do it again,  you will be expelled.  I will inform  your parents  of
your  punishment.  You  may  return  to  your  class.”  Jacques,
thunderstruck, did not move. “Go on.”
“Well,  Fantomâs?”  said M. Bernard  when Jacques  returned  to his
8 class.  Jacques  was weeping.  “Go ahead,  I’m listening.”  With a catch
in his voice,  the child rst  announced  the punishment,  then that
Munoz’s  parents  had complained  and he had told about  the ght.
“Why did you ght?”
“He called me ‘teacher’s pet’.”
“Again?”
“No, here, during class.”
“Ah!  He  was  the  one.  And  you  thought  I  hadn’t  su ciently
defended you.”
Jacques  gave M. Bernard  a heartfelt  look. “Oh no, oh no! You ...”
And he burst out in real sobs.
“Go sit down,” said M. Bernard.
“It’s not fair,” said the child through his tears.
9 “Yes, it is,” gently told him

The next day, at recess,  Jacques took his place in the corner  at the
end of the playground,  his back turned  to the yard and to the happy
cries of his classmates.  He shifted  his weight  from one leg to the
g other;  he was dying to run around  with them. From time to time he
glanced  back and saw M. Bernard  strolling  in a corner  of the yard
with his colleagues  and not looking  at Jacques.  But, the second  day,
he did not see M. Bernard  come up behind  him and tap him lightly
on the back of his neck: “Why such a long face, shrimp?  Munoz  is in
the corner  too. Here, I give you permission  to look.”  Munoz was
indeed  on  the  other  side  of  the  playground,  alone  and  morose.
“Your  accomp lices  refuse  to  play  with  him  for  the  whole  week
you’re  in the corner.”  M. Bernard laughed.  “So you see, you’re both
being punished.  That’s  the way it should  be.” And he leaned  over
the child to say to him, with an aectionate  laugh that caused  the
heart of the convict  to overow  with love: “You know,  moustique , to
look at you, you wouldn’t think you could throw such a punch!”
This man who today  was talking to his canary  and who called
Jacques  “kiddo”  though  he was forty years old—Jacques  had never
stopped  loving him, even when the years,  distance,  and nally  the
Second  World  War had partly, then completely  cut him o   from his
teacher,  of whom  he had no news,  and he was as happy  as a child
when in 1945 an elderly  Territorial  in a soldier’s  greatcoat  rang his
doorbell  in Paris,  and it was M. Bernard,  who had enlisted again:
“Not for the war,” he said, “but against  Hitler,  and you too, kiddo,
you  fought—o h  I  knew  you  were  made  of  the  right  stu,    you
haven’t  forgotten  your  mother  either  I  hope,  that’s  good,  your
mother’s  the best thing in the world—and  now I’m going  back to
Algiers,  come see me,” and Jacques  had been going to see him for
fteen  years,  and  each  time  it  was  the  same:  before  leaving  he
would  embrace  the deeply  moved  old man who clung to his hand on
the  doorstep,  and  this  man  had  launched  Jacques  in  the  world,
taking  on himself  alone the responsibility  for uprooting  him so that
h he could go on to still greater discoveries.
The  school  year  was  drawing  to  a  close  when  M.  Bernard
summoned  Jacques,  Pierre,  Fleury,  a  kind  of  prodigy   who  did
equally  well  in  all  subjects —“he  has  a  polytechnic  brain,”  the

teacher  said—and  Santiago,  a handsome  boy who was less gifted but
succeeded  by virtue  of diligence: “Now,”  said M. Bernard  when the
classroom  was  empty.  “You’re  my  best  students.  I’ve  decided  to
nominate  you  for  secondary-school  scholarships.  If  you  pass  the
examination,  you’ll  have scholarships  and you can continue  your
studies  at the  lycée  through  the baccalaureate.  Elementary  school  is
the best of schools.  But it leads to nothing.  The  lycée  opens all doors.
And I would  rather  see poor boys like you go through  those doors.
But for that, I need your parents’ authorization. O with you!”
They left in amazement  and did not even discuss  it before  they
parted.  Jacques  found  his grandmother  at home alone picking  over
lentils  on the oilcloth  cover of the dining-room  table. He hesitated,
then decided to wait for his mother  to arrive.  She came home visibly
tired, put on an apron,  and came to help the grandmother  sort the
lentils.  Jacques  oered  to help, and they gave him the thick white
porcelain  bowl where  it was easier  to separate  the pebble s from the
good lentils. Staring into his plate, he announced his news.
“What’s  this all about?”  said the grandmother.  “At what age do
you do this baccalaureate?”
“In six years.”
His grandmother  pushed  her plate away.  “Did you hear that?”  she
asked Catherine Cormery.
She had not heard. Jacques  slowly  repeated  the news.  “Ah!”  she
said. “It’s because you’re intelligent.”
“Intelligent  or not, we were going  to apprentice  him next year.
You know perfectly  well we have no money.  He’ll bring home  his
pay.”
“That’s true,” said Catherine.
Outside,  the day and the heat were beginning  to fade. At that time
of day, with the factories  all working,  the  neighborhood  was empty
and silent.  Jacques  gazed out at the street.  He did not know what he
wanted,  only that he wanted  to obey M. Bernard.  But, at nine, he
could  not  disobey  his  grandmother,  nor  would  he  know  how  to.
Still,  she  was  obviously  hesitating.  “What  would  you  do
afterwards?”
“I don’t know. Maybe be a teacher, like M. Bernard.”

“Yes—in  six years!”  She was sorting  the lentils  more slowly.  “Ah!”
she said. “No, after all, we’re too poor. You tell M. Bernard  we can’t
do it.”
The  next  day  the  three  others  told  Jacques  their  families  had
agreed. “How about you?”
“I don’t know,”  he said, and the thought  that he was even poorer
than his friends left him sick at heart.
The four of them stayed  after school.  Pierre,  Fleury,  and Santiago
gave their answers. “And you,  moustique? ”
“I don’t know.”
M. Bernard  gazed  at him. “All right,”  he said to the others.  “But
you’ll have to work with me afternoons  after school.  I’ll arrange  it,
you  can  go.”  When  they  had  left,  M.  Bernard  sat  himself  in  his
armchair and drew Jacques close. “Well?”
“My grandmother  says we’re too poor and that I have to go to
work next year.”
“And your mother?”
“It’s my grandmother who decides.”
“I know,”  said M. Bernard.  He thought  a moment,  then put his
arm around  Jacques.  “Listen:  you can’t blame  her. Life is hard for
her. The two of them alone,  they’ve  brought  you up, your brother
and you, and  made you the good boys you are. So she’s bound  to be
afraid.  You’ll  need a little money besides  the scholarship,  and in any
case  you  won’t  bring  home  any  money  for  six  years.  Can  you
understand  her?”  Jacques  nodded  without  looking  at his teacher.
“Good.  But maybe  we can explain  it to her. Get your satchel,  I’m
coming with you!”
“To our place?” said Jacques.
“Yes, it will be a pleasure to see your mother again.”
Minutes  later M. Bernard  was knocking  on their door in front of a
bewildered  Jacques.  The grandmother  came to the door, wiping  her
hands  on her apron;  the strings  were tied too tightly,  making  her old
woman’s  paunch  protrude.  When she saw the teacher,  she made a
gesture  as  if  to  comb  her  hair.  “So  it’s  the  grandmom,”  said  M.
Bernard,  “hard at work as usual?  Ah! You’re  a worthy  woman.”  The
grandmother  invited  him into the room that you had to cross to get

to the dining  room,  seated  him near the table, brought  out glasses
and a bottle  of anisette.  “Don’t put yourself  out, I came to have a
little talk with you.” He began by asking  about  her children, then
her life on the farm, her husband; he talked  about his own children.
At that moment  Catherine  Cormery  came in, panicked,  called  M.
Bernard  “Monsieur  le Maître,”  went to her room to comb her hair
and put on a clean apron,  and returned  to perch  on the edge of a
chair  a  little  away  from  the  table.  “You,”  M.  Bernard  said  to
Jacques,  “go out on the street and see if I’m there. You understand,”
he said to the grandmother,  “I’m going to speak well of him and he’s
liable to think it’s the truth.” Jacques  left, dashed  down the stairs,
and  stationed  himself by the door to the building.  He was still there
an hour later, and the street was already  coming  to life, the sky
through  the  cus  trees  was  turning  green,  when  M.  Bernard
emerged  from the stairs at his back. He scratched  Jacques’s  head.
“Well!”  he said. “It’s all settled. Your grandmother’s  a good woman.
As for your mother ... Ah!” he said. “Don’t you ever forget her.”
“Monsieur,”  the grandmother  suddenly  said. She was coming  out
of the hall. She was holding  her apron  in her hand and wiping  her
eyes.  “I  forgot  ...  you  told  me  you  would  give  Jacques  extra
lessons.”
“Of course,” said M. Bernard.  “And it won’t be any picnic  for him,
believe me.”
“But we won’t be able to pay you.”
M. Bernard studied  her carefully.  He was holding  Jacques  by his
shoulders.  “Don’t  worry  about that,” he said, shaking  Jacques.  “He’s
already paid me.”
Then he was gone, and the grandmother  took Jacques  by the hand
to go back to the apartment,  and for the rst  time she squeezed  his
hand, very hard, with a kind of hopeless  love. “My child,”  she said.
“My dear child.”
For a month  M. Bernard  kept the four children  after school  every
day and made them work for two hours.  Jacques  would  go home
both tired and exhilarated,  and then have to start on his homework.
His grandmother would look at him with mingled pride and sadness.

“He got a good head,”  Ernest said with conviction,  tapping  his
own head with his st.
“Yes,”  the grandmother  would say. “But what’s  to  become  of us?”
One evening  she gave a start: “What  about  his First Communion?”
10 Actually  religion  had no part in their lives.  No one went to Mass,
no one invoked  or taught  the Ten Commandments,  nor did anyone
refer  to  the  rewards  and  punishments  of  the  hereafter.  When
someone’s  death  was  reported  in  the  grandmother’s   presence,
“Well,”  she would  say, “he’ll fart no more.”  If it was someone  for
whom  she was deemed  to have at least some liking,  “Poor man,”  she
would  say, “he was still young,” even if the deceased  had long since
been old enough  to die. It was not a matter  of ignorance  on her part.
For she had seen many  die around  her. Two of her children,  her
husband,  her son-in-law,  and all her nephews  in the war. But that
was just it: she was as familiar with death as she was with work or
poverty,  she did not think about  it but in some sense lived it, and
besides,  the needs  of the moment  were even more urgent  for her
than they were for Algerians  as a whole,  who by their daily cares
and their common  lot were denied the funerary  piety that ourishes
i in civilizations  at their height.  Death for them was an ordeal to be
faced,  as they had faced those that preceded  it, which  they never
spoke of, where  they tried to show the courage  that for them was a
man’s  principal  virtue;  but meanwhile  one tried to forget  it or push
it  aside.  (Hence  the  comic  air  that  all  interments  would  assume.
Cousin  Mauric e?) If to that general  inclination  is added  the  harsh
work  and  struggle  of  daily  life,  not  to  mention,  in  the  case  of
Jacques’s  family, the awful  wear and tear of poverty,  it becomes
hard to nd  a place for religion.  For Uncle Ernest,  who lived by his
senses,  religion  was what he saw; that is, the priest and the ritual.
Calling  on his gift for comedy,  he never  missed  an opportunity  to
mimic  the  ceremony  of  the  Mass,  accompanying  it  with  a
[sustained]  onomatopoeia  to  represent  the  Latin  words,  and  to
conclude  he would  play both the faithful  bowing  their heads  at the
sound  of the bells and the priest seizing  the opportunity  oered  by
their bowed heads  to take a surreptitious  drink of the Communion
wine. As for Catherine  Cormery,  only she with her gentleness  might

have suggested  faith, but in fact that gentleness  was her faith. She
neither  dissented  nor agreed,  laughed  a little at her brother’s  jokes,
but would  call the priests  she met “Monsieur  Curé.”  She never spoke
of  God.  In  fact,  that  was  a  word  Jacques  never  heard  spoken
throughout  his childhood,  nor did he trouble  himself  about  it. Life,
so vivid and mysterious, was enough to occupy his entire being.
With all that, if a civil burial  was mentioned  in the family, it was
not unusual for his grandmother  or even his uncle paradoxically  to
deplore  the absence  of a priest:  “like a dog,” they would  say. This
because  for them,  as for most Algerians,  religion  was part of their
civic life and that alone.  They were Catholic  as they were French;  it
entailed  a certain  number  of rituals.  Actually  those rituals  numbered
exactly  four:  baptism,  First  Communion,  marriage  (if  they  were
married),  and  funeral  rites.  Between  these  ceremoni es,  which
necessarily  were far apart in time, they were occupied  with other
things, and most of all with surviving.
So it was taken for granted  that Jacques  would  make his First
Communion  like Henri,  who had kept a most unpleasant  memory
not  of  the  ceremony  itself  but  of  its  social  consequences  and
especially  the visits he was obliged  to make over several  days, the
armband  on his arm, to friends  and relatives,  who had to present
him with a small amount  of cash, which  the child was embarrassed
to take; the grandmother  would then appropriate  the entire  sum,
returning  only  a  very  small  proportion  to  Henri,  because
Communion  “cost  good  money.”  But  this  ceremony  did  not  take
place until around  the child’s twelfth  year, after he had spent two
years  being  taught  the  catechism.  So  Jacques  would  not  have  to
make  his  First  Communion  until  his  second  or  third  year  at  the
lycée . But it was that prospect  that caused  the grandmother  to give a
start. She had a dark and somewhat  frightening  picture  of the  lycée
as  a  place  where  you  had  to  work  ten  times  as  much  as  at  the
neighborhood  school,  because  these studies  led to better  jobs and
because,  to  her  way  of  thinking,  no  improvement  in  material
circumstances  could be gotten  except  by more work. She wished  for
Jacques  to succeed  with all her heart on account  of the sacrices  she
had  just  agreed  to  in  advance,  and  she  calculated  that  the  time

taken  by catechism  would  be subtracted  from the time for work.
“No,”  she said, “you can’t be in the  lycée  and at catechism  at the
same time.”
“Fine.  I won’t make my First Communion,”  said Jacques,  who was
hoping  above  all to escape  the ordeal  of the visits and what for him
was the unbearable humiliation of accepting money.
The grandmother  stared  at him. “Why?  It can be arranged.  Get
dressed.  We’re going to see the priest.”  She stood up and went with
a resolute  air into her bedroom. When  she returned,  she had taken
o   her camiso le and her work skirt, had put on her one going-out
11 dress []  buttoned to the neck, and she had knotted  her black silk
scarf around her head. The strands  of white hair at the edge of her
scarf, her sharp eyes and rm  mouth  made her the very picture  of
determination.
At the sacristy  of the church  of Saint-Charles,  a dreadfu l pile of
modern  Gothic , she seated  herself,  holding  Jacques’s  hand while he
stood beside  her, before  the parish  priest,  a fat sixty-year -old with a
round,  rather  soft face, a big nose, and a good smile on his thick
lips, under  a crown  of silvery  hair; he was clasping  his hands  on his
robe stretched  by his parted  knees.  “I want this child to make his
First Communion,” said the grandmother.
“Very well, Madame,  we’ll make a good Christian  of him. How old
is he?”
“Nine.”
“You’re  right to have him start the catechism  very early. In three
years he’ll be perfectly prepared for the big day.”
“No,” the grandmother said curtly. “He must do it right away.”
“Right  away?  But the Communions  will be a month  from now,
and  he  can  only  approach  the  altar  after  at  least  two  years  of
catechism.”
The grandmother  explained  their situation.  But the priest was not
at all convinced  that it was impossible  to take religious  instruction
while doing  secondary-school  studies.  With patience  and kindness,
he cited his own experience,  gave examples  ... The grandmother
stood up. “In that case he won’t make his First Communion.  Come,
Jacques,” and she pulled the child toward the exit.

But the priest  hurried  after them. “Wait,  Madame,  wait.”  He led
her gently back to her seat, tried to reason with her.
But the grandmother  shook  her head like a stubborn  old mule.
“It’s right away or he’ll do without it.”
At last the priest gave in. It was agreed  that Jacques  would  make
his First Communion  in one month  after an accelerated  course  of
religious  instruction.  And the priest,  shaking  his head, accompanied
them  to  the  door,  where  he  patted  the  child’s  cheek.  “Listen
carefully  to what you’re  told,” he said. And he looked  at him with a
sort of sadness.
So  Jacques  added  the  catechism  classes  on  Thursdays  and
Saturday  afternoons  to his supplementary  lessons  with M. Bernard.
The examination  for the scholarship  and the First Communion  were
both drawing  near, and his days were overloaded,  leaving  no time
for  play,  even  and  especiall y  on  Sundays,  when,  if  he  could  put
down his notebooks,  his grandmother  would  impose  domestic  tasks
and  errands  on  him,  citing  the  future  sacrices  the  family  had
agreed  to for his education  and the many years thereafte r when he
would no longer do anything for the household.
“But,”  said Jacques, “I might  fail. The exam is hard.”  And in a
certain  sense he sometimes  would wish for just that, nding  that his
young  pride could not bear the weight  of the sacrices  they were
always talking to him about.
His grandmoth er looked  at him in astonishment.  She had never
thought  of that possibility.  Then she shrugged  and, not worrying
about  the  contradiction,  “Go  ahead  and  fail,”  she  said.  “And  I’ll
warm  your ass for you.” The catechism  course  was given  by the
second  priest  of the parish:  tall, almost  endlessly  so in his black
robe, thin, with hollow  cheeks  and a nose like an eagle’s  beak, as
hard as the old priest was gentle and good. His method  of teaching
was recitation,  and, though  it was primitive,  it was perhaps  the only
method  suited  to the rough,  obdurate  children  to whom  it was his
mission  to  give  their  spiritual  training.  They  had  to  learn  the
j questions  and  responses:  “Who  is  God?”   ...  These  words  meant
absolutely  nothing  to  the  young  catechumens,  and  Jacques,  who
had an excellent  memory,  recited  them imperturbably  without  ever

understanding  them.  When  another  child was reciting,  he would  let
his thoughts  wander,  daydrea m, or make faces with the others.  One
day  the  tall  priest  caught  him  making  one  of  those  faces,  and,
believing  the grimace  was  aimed  at him, thought  it right to enforce
respect  for the sacred  charac ter of his oce;  he called  Jacques  up
before  the  whole  assembly  of  children,  and  there,  with  his  long
bony  hand,  without  further   explanation,  he  hit  him  with  all  his
strength.  Jacques almost  fell under  the force of the blow. “Now  go
back to your place,”  the priest said. The child stared  at him, without
a tear (and for all his life it would  be kindness  and love that made
him  cry,  never  pain  or  persecution,  which  on  the  contrary  only
reinforced  his spirit and his resolution),  and returned  to his bench.
The left side of his face was smarting,  the taste of blood was in his
mouth.  With the tip of his tongue,  he discovered  the inside  of his
cheek  was  cut  by  the  blow  and  was  bleeding.  He  swallowed  his
blood.
Throughout  the rest of the sacramental  preparation,  his mind was
elsewhere,  and  he  was  looking  quietly  at  the  priest,  without
reproach  as without  friendship  when  he spoke  to him, awlessly
reciting  the questions  and responses  about  the divine  nature  and
sacrice  of  Christ;  and,  a  hundred  leagues  away  from  the  place
where  he was reciting,  he was dreaming  of that double  examination
that now had come to seem a single  one. Immersed  in his work as
he  was  in  that  persisting  dream,  he  was  moved  only,  and  in  an
obscure  way, by the evening  Masses,  more and more of them in that
dreadful  cold church,  but the organ  made him listen to a music  he
was hearing  for the rst  time, having  until then heard  nothing  but
stupid  tunes;  dreaming  richer,  deeper  dreams  featuring  sacerdotal
objects  and vestments  glistening  in the semi-darkness,  to meet at
last the mystery,  but it was a nameless  mystery where  the divine
personages  named  and rigorously  dened  in the catechism  played
no  role  at  all,  they  were  simply  an  extension  of  the  bare  world
where  he lived; but the warm, inward,  and ambiguous  mystery  that
now  bathed  him  only  deepened  the  everyday  mystery  of  his
mother’s  silence or her small smile when he entered  the dining  room
at evening  and, alone in the apartment,  she had not lit the kerosene

lamp,  letting  the  night  invade  the  room  step  by  step,  herself  a
darker  denser  form gazing  pensively  out the window,  watching  the
brisk—but,  for  her,  silent—activity  of  the  street;  and  the  child
would  stop on the doorsill,  his heart heavy,  full of a despairing  love
for his mother,  and for something  in his mother  that did not belong
or no longer  belonged  to the world  and to the triviality  of the days.
Then it was the First Communion,  of which  Jacques  remembered
little except confession  the day before,  when he had admitted  the
only acts he had been told were sinful—very  few, that is—and  to
“Have  you had sinful thoughts?”  he said, “Yes, Father,”  at a guess,
though  he did not know how a thought  could be sinful,  and till the
next day he lived in fear that he would  unwittingly  let out a sinful
thought  or, and this was clearer to him, one of those objectionable
words  that  populated  his  schoolboy  vocabulary,  and  as  best  he
could  he  held  back  the  words  at  least  until  the  morning  of  the
ceremony  when, dressed  in a sailor suit with an armband , equipped
with  a  small  prayerbook  and  a  chaplet  of  little  white  beads,  all
supplied  by the least poor among  their relatives  (Aunt  Marguerite,
etc.), holding  a taper in the center  aisle in a line of other children
carrying  tapers  under  the ecstatic  eyes of their families  standing  in
the pews,  and the thunder  of the music  that exploded  now chilled
him,  lled  him  with  dread  and  with  an  extraordinary  exaltation
where  for the rst  time he could  feel his strength,  his boundless
ability  to prevail  and to live, an exaltation  that stayed  with him
throughout  the  ceremony,  taking  him  away  from  everything  that
was  happening,  including  the  instant  of  Communion,  and  lasting
through  their return  home and the meal to which  their relatives  had
been invited,  around  a [richer] than usual table, and which bit by
bit  excited  the  guests  who  were  accustomed  to  eat  and  drink
sparingly,  so  that  an  enormous  gaiety  gradually  lled  the  room,
destroying  Jacques’s  elation  and so shaking  him that when dessert
came,  at the peak of the general  excitement,  he burst out sobbing.
“What’s the matter with you?” his grandmother said.
“I don’t know, I don’t.”
And his exasperated  grandmother  slapped  him. “That  way you’ll
know why you’re crying,” she said.

But in truth he did know why when he looked  across  the table at
his mother, who was giving him her small sad smile.
“That’s  well over with,”  said M. Bernard.  “Well,  now we get to
work.”  A few more days of hard work,  with the last lessons  at M.
Bernard’s  (describe the apartment?),  and then, one morning  at the
trolley  stop  near  Jacques’s  home,  the  four  pupils  were  grouped
around  M. Bernard,  each equipped  with writing  pad, ruler, and pen
case, and Jacques  could  see his mother  and grandmother  waving
energetically to them from their balcony.
The  lycée  where  the examination  was given was all the way across
town, at the other end of the arc the city makes  around  the bay, in a
district  that had once been rich and dull, but, thanks  to Spanish
immigrants,  had become  one of the most crowded  and lively parts
of  Algiers.  The  lycée   itself  was  a  huge  square  building  that
dominated  the street.  You entered it by steps at either  side and, in
front,  large  monumental  steps  anked  on  both  sides  by  meager
12 gardens  planted  with  banana  trees  and   protected  from  student
vandalism  by  wire  fencing.   The  central  steps  led  to  an  arcade
connecting  the steps at the two sides; from the arcade  opened  the
monumental  door used on major occasions,  to one side of which,  for
everyday  use, was a much  smaller  door that led to the glassed-in
cabin of the concierge.
It was in that arcade—among  the rst  students  to arrive,  who on
the  whole  were  able  to  hide  their  nervousness  under  a  casual
manner,  except  a  few  whose  anxiety  was  betrayed  by  their  pale
countenances  and  their  silence—that  M.  Bernard  and  his  pupils
were waiting in front of the closed  door, in the early morning  when
the air was still cool and the street still damp before  the sun covered
it with dust. They were a good half hour early,  huddled silently
around  their teacher,  who found nothing  to say to them and then
left, saying he would  return.  Indeed  they saw him come back in a
few minutes,  elegant  in the felt hat and spats he had put on for the
occasion,  holding in each hand a package  of tissue  paper wrapped
and twisted  at the top to make a handle,  and as he approa ched, they
saw  that  the  paper  was  spotted  with  grease.  “Here  are  some
croissants,”  said M. Bernard.  “Eat one now and save the other for

ten o’clock.”  They thanked  him and ate, but the heavy  dough  once
chewed  was dicult  to swallow. “Don’t  lose your head,”  the teacher
kept saying. “Carefully  read the wording  of the problem  and the
subject  of  the  composition.  Read  them  over  several  times.  You’ll
have time.”  Yes, they would read it over several  times,  they would
obey him, with him there were no obstacles  in life, it was enough  to
let themselves  be guided  by him. Now there was a hubbub  by the
smaller  door. The students,  numbering  about  sixty, headed in that
direction.  An attendant  had opened  the door and was reading  a list.
Jacques’s  name  was  one  of  the  rst  to  be  read.  He  clutched  his
teacher’s  hand,  he  hesitated.  “Go,  my  son,”  said  M.  Bernard.
Jacques,  trembling, went to the door, and, as he was going through
it, he turned  back to his teacher. He was there,  big, solid; he was
k smiling calmly at Jacques and nodding reassuringly.
At  noon  M.  Bernard  was  waiting  for  them  at  the  exit.  They
showed  him their work papers.  Santiago  was the only one who had
made a mistake  in a problem.  “Your  composition  is very good,”  he
said tersely  to Jacques.  At one o’clock  he accompan ied them back.
At four o’clock  he was still there,  and he looked  over their work.
“Come  on,” he said, “we have to wait.”  Two days later the ve  of
them were again  in front of the small door at ten o’clock  in the
morning.  The door opened  and the attendant  again  read a list of
names,  this one much  shorter,  of the successful  candidates.  In the
clamor  Jacques  did not hear his name.  But he received  a joyful  slap
on the back and heard  M. Bernard  say to him, “Bravo,  moustique .
You passed.”
Only the nice Santiago  had failed,  and they gazed  at him with a
sort  of  absentminded  sadness.  “It  doesn’t  matter,”  he  said,  “it
doesn’t matter.”
And  Jacques  no  longer  knew  where  he  was,  or  what  was
happening,  they were coming  back all four on the trolley;  “I’ll go
see  your  parents,”  M.  Bernard  said,  “I’ll  go  to  Cormery’s  rst
because  he’s the closest,”  and in the poor dining  room full now of
women—there  were his grandmother,  his mother,  who had taken
the day o   for the occasion  (?), and their neighbors  the Masson
women—he  stayed  close  to  his  teacher’s  side,  breathing  one  last

time the odor of cologne,  pressing against  the hearty  warmth  of that
solid  body,  while  the  grandmother  beamed  in  front  of  her
neighbors.  “Thank  you, M. Bernard,  thank  you,” she said, and he
patted the child’s head.
“You don’t need me anymore,”  he said, “you’ll  have teachers  who
know more. But you know where  I am, come see me if you need me
to help you.” He went out, and Jacques  was left alone,  lost among
the women;  then he dashed  to the window  and looked  out at his
teacher,  who waved at him one last time and who was leaving  him
alone  henceforth,  and,  instead  of  the  joy  of  success,  a  child’s
immense  anguish wrung  his heart, as if he knew in advance  that this
success  had just uprooted  him from the warm and innocen t world  of
the poor—a  world  closed  in on itself like an island  in the society,
where  poverty  took  the  place  of  family  and  community—to  be
hurtled  into a strange  world, one no longer  his, where  he could not
believe  the teachers  were more learned  than the one whose  heart
was  all-knowi ng,  and  from  now  on  he  would  have  to  learn,  to
understand  without  help, and become  a man without  the aid of the
one man who had rescued  him; would  have to grow up and bring
himself up alone, and it would be at the highest cost.
1 . See appendix,  sheet II, pp. 286–87,  that the author  inserted  between  pages 68 and
69 of the manuscript.
a . Transition from 6?
2 . The last year of elementary  school,  and at the time the last year of compulsory
public education— Trans .
b . Exoticism pea soup.
3 . The name originated  with the rst  person  to take this position  and who was in fact
named Galoufa.
4 .  sic
c . stretch out and exalt secular school.
5 . Here the author uses the teacher’s real name.
d . see the book. [A novel of the First World War— Trans .]

*  novel
†  The punishments.
e . or, what punishes one makes the others rejoice.
f . and your ancestors are whores.
6 . The sentence ends there.
7 . In Rome,  traitors  were thrown  to their death from the Tarpeian  Rock. The meaning
is: Pride goeth before a fall— Trans .
8 . Fantomâs was the masked hero of a series of pulp novels— Trans .
9 . The sentence ends there.
g . M’sieur he tripped me
h . The scholarship
10 . Three illegible lines in the margin.
i .  La Mort en Algérie .
11 . An illegible word.
j . See catechism
12 . No word appears here in the manuscript.
k . check scholarship program.

7 :   M o n d o v i :   T h e   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   t h e   F a t h e r
a Now he was grown  up ... On the road from Bône to Mondovi  the
car that J. Cormery  was in passed  slow-moving  jeeps bristling with
guns ...
“M. Veillard?”
“Yes.”
Framed  in the doorway  of his small farmhouse,  the man gazing  at
Jacques  Cormery  was  short  but  stocky,  with  rounded  shoulders.
With his left hand he held the door open, with his right he rmly
gripped  the jamb, so that while opening  the way to his house he was
at the same time barring  the way. He must have been about  forty,
judging  by the sparse  graying  hair that gave him a Roman  look. But
his tanned face with its regular features  and bright  eyes, his legs in
khaki pants,  a bit sti   but without  fat or belly, his sandals  and blue
shirt  with  pockets  made  him  seem  much  younger.  He  stood  still
listening  to Jacques’s  explan ation.  Then:  “Come  in,” he  said, and
stepped  aside.  As  Jacques  went  along  the  small  whitewashed
hallway,  furnished  with only a brown  chest and a curved  wooden
umbrella  stand,  he heard  the farmer  laugh  behind  him. “So it’s a
pilgrimage! Well, frankly, you’re just in time.”
“Why?” asked Jacques.
“Come  into  the  dining  room,”  the  farmer  answered.  “It’s  the
coolest room.”
The dining room was half veranda,  with blinds  of pliable  straw,
all but one of them lowered.  Except  for the table and buet,  both of
blond  wood  and  modern  in  style,  the  room  was  furnished  with
rattan  chairs  and deck chairs.  When  he turned  around,  Jacques  saw
that he was alone.  He went to the veranda,  and, through  the space
between  the  blinds,  he  saw  a  yard  planted  with  ornamental

peppertrees  among which  glittered  two bright-red  tractors. Beyond
that, under  a sun that at eleven was still bearable,  began  the rows of
the vineyard.  A moment  later the farmer  returned  with a tray on
which  he had lined up a bottle  of anisette,  glasses,  and a bottle  of
ice water.
The farmer raised  his glass of milky  liquid.  “If you’d waited  any
longer,  you might  have found nothing  here. And in any case not a
single Frenchman to tell you about it.”
“It’s the old doctor  who told me your farm is the one where I was
born.”
“Yes,  it  was  part  of  the  Saint-Apôtre  property,  but  my  parents
bought  it  after  the  war.”  Jacques  looked  around.  “You  were
certainly  not  born  here,”  Veillard  said.  “My  parents  rebuilt
everything.”
“Did they know my father before the war?”
“I don’t believe  so. They had settled  right by the Tunisian  border,
then they wanted  to move closer to civilization.  For them Solférino
was civilization.”
“They didn’t hear about the former manager?”
“No.  Since  you’re  from  here,  you  know  how  it  is.  We  don’t
preserve  anything  here. We tear down  and we rebuild.  We think
about the future and forget the rest.”
“Well,” said Jacques, “I took your time for nothing.”
“No,” the other man said, “it’s a pleasure.” And he smiled at him.
Jacques  nish ed  his  drink.  “Did  your  parents  remain  near  the
border?”
“No, it’s the forbidden  zone. Near the dam. And it’s obvious  you
don’t know my father.”  He too swallowed  the rest of his drink,  and,
as if he found  an extra stimulus in it, he burst out laughing:  “He’s a
real  settler.  Of  the  old  school.  You  know,  the  ones  they’re  bad-
mouthing  in Paris. And it’s true he’s always  been a hard man. Sixty
years old. But long and thin like a puritan  with his [horse’s] head. A
kind of patriarch,  you see. He sweated  his Arab workers,  and, in all
fairness,  his sons also. Then, last year, when they had to evacuate,  it
was a real free-for-all.  Life in that region  had become  intolerable.

You had to sleep with a gun. When  the Raskil  farm was attacked,
you remember?”
“No,” said Jacques.
“Yes, the father and his two sons had their throats  cut, the mother
and daughter  raped  over and over, then killed  ... In short ... The
prefect  was unfortunate  enough  to tell a meeting  of farmers  that
they would  have to reconsider  [colonial]  issues,  how they treated
the Arabs,  and that now a new day had come.  Then he had to listen
to the old man tell him no one on earth was going to lay down the
law about  his property.  But from that day on he didn’t  open his
mouth.  Someti mes at night he would  get up and go out. My mother
would  watch  him  through  the  blinds  and  she’d  see  him  walking
around  his land. When  the order to evacuate  came,  he said nothing.
His grape harvest  was over, his wine was in the vats. He opened  the
vats, and he went to a spring of brackish  water  that he’d diverted
long  ago,  and  he  turned  it  back  to  run  into  his  elds,  and  he
equipped  a tractor  with a trench  plow. For three days, at the wheel,
bareheaded,  saying  not a word,  he uprooted  the vines all over his
property.  Think  of it, that skinny  old man bouncing  around on his
tractor,  pushin g the accelerator  lever when the plow wasn’t getting
a vine that was bigger  than the others,  not stopping  even to eat, my
mother  bringing  him bread,  cheese,  and [ sobrasada ], which  he ate
calmly,  the way he had done everything,  throwing  away the last
chunk  of bread and accelerat ing some more,  all this from sunrise  to
sunset,  without  even looking  at the mountains  on the horizon,  nor
at the Arabs  who’d  soon found  out and were watching  him from a
distance—they  weren’t  saying  anything  either.  And when a young
captain,  informed  by who knows  who, arrived  and demanded  an
explanation,  he said to him, ‘Young  man, since what we made here
is a crime,  it has to be wiped out.’ When  it was all nished,  he
headed  toward  the  farmhou se,  crossed  the  yard  that  was  soaked
with wine pouring  out of the vats, and began  to pack his bags. The
Arab workers  were waiting  for him in the yard. (There  was also a
patrol  the  captain  had  sent,  no  one  knew  just  why,  with  a  nice
lieutenant who was waiting for orders.)
“ ‘Boss, what are we going to do?’ ”

“  ‘If  I  were  in  your  shoes,’   the  old  man  said,  ‘I’d  go  join  the
guerrillas. They’re going to win. There’re no men left in France.’ ”
The farmer laughed: “That was blunt, eh?”
“Are they with you?”
“No,  he  didn’t  want  to  hear  a  word  about  Algeria.  He’s  in
Marseilles,  in  a  modern  apartment  ...  Maman   writes  me  that  he
walks around his room in circles.”
“And you?”
“Oh,  me,  I’m  staying,  and  to  the  end.  Whatever  happens,  I’m
staying.  I’ve sent my family  to Algiers,  and I’ll croak  here. They
don’t understand  that in Paris. Besides  us, you know who’re the only
ones who can understand it?”
“The Arabs.”
“Exactly.  We  were  made  to  understand  each  other.  Fools  and
brutes  like us, but with the same blood of men. We’ll kill each other
for a little longer, cut o   each other’s  balls and torture  each other a
bit. And then we’ll go back to living  as men together.  The country
wants it that way. An anisette?”
“Light,” said Jacques.
A  little  later  they  went  out.  Jacques  had  asked  if  there  was
anyone  left in the area who might  have known  his parents.  No, said
Veillard;  besides  the old doctor  who  had brought  him into the world
and who had retired  right there in Solférino,  there was no one. The
Saint-Apôtre  property  had changed  hands  twice,  many of the Arab
workers  had  died  in  the  two  wars,  many  others  had  been  born.
“Everything  changes  here,”  Veillard  kept saying.  “It happens  fast,
very  fast,  and  people  forget.”  But  maybe  old  Tamzal  ...  He  was
caretaker  for one of the Saint-Apôtre  farms.  In 1913 he must have
been around twenty.  In any case, Jacques  would  see the place where
he was born.
Except  to  the  north,  the  country  was  surrounded  by  distant
mountains,  their outlines  fuzzy in the noonday  heat, like enormous
blocks  of stone and luminous  fog, with the once-swampy  Seybouse
plain extending  between  them north to the sea under  a sky white
with  heat,  its  vineyards  in  straight  lines,  the  leaves  bluish  from
copper  sulfate  and the grapes  already  dark, interrupted  occasionally

by  a  row  of  cypresses  or  clumps  of  eucalyptus  trees  sheltering
houses  with their shade.  They were following  a farm path where
each of their steps kicked  up red dust. Ahead  of them, all the way to
the  mountains,  the  air  was  quivering  and  the  sunlight  was
throbbing.  By  the  time  they  arrived  at  a  small  house  behind  a
cluster  of  plane  trees,  they  were  dripping  sweat.  An  unseen  dog
greeted them with angry barking.
The  mulberry-wood  door  of  the  rather  dilapidated  house  was
carefully  closed. Veillard  knocked.  The dog barked  twice as hard.
The sound seemed to come from a small enclosed  yard on the other
side of the house.  But  no one stirred.  “See how trusting  we all are,”
the farmer said. “They’re there. But they’re waiting.
“Tamzal!” he shouted. “It’s Veillard.
“Six months ago they came to get his son-in-law,  they wanted  to
know if he was supplying  the guerrillas.  They never heard  another
word about him. A month  ago they told Tamzal  that probably  he’d
been killed trying to escape.”
“Ah,” said Jacques. “And was he supplying the guerrillas?”
“Maybe  yes,  maybe  not.  What  can  you  expect,  it’s  war.  But  it
explains why doors are slow to open in this land of hospitality.”
1 Just then the door opened.  Tamzal,  small,  with []  hair, a wide-
brimmed  straw  hat  on  his  head,  wearing  patched  blue  overalls,
smiled at Veillard, looked at Jacques.
“He’s a friend. He was born here.”
“Come in,” said Tamzal. “You will drink tea.”
Tamzal  did not remember  anything.  Yes, perhaps.  He had heard
one  of  his  uncles  talk  about  a  manager  who  had  stayed  a  few
months, it was after the war.
“Before,” said Jacques.
Or before,  that was possible,  he was very young  at the time, and
2 what became  of his father?  He was killed  in the war. “ Mektoub ,”
said Tamzal. “But war is bad.”
“There’s  always been war,” said Veillard.  “But people  quickly  get
accustomed  to peace.  So they think it’s normal.  No, war is what’s
b normal.”

“Men are crazy in wartime,”  said Tamzal  as he went to take a
platter  of tea from the hands  of a woman  in the next room,  who had
turned  her head away.  They drank  the scorching  tea, thanked him,
and went back along the stiing hot path through the vineyards.
“I’m going  back to Solférino  with my taxi,” said Jacques.  “The
doctor invited me for lunch.”
“I’m inviting myself along. Wait a moment. I’ll get some food.”
Later, on the plane taking  him back to Algiers,  Jacques  was trying
to sort out the information  he had collected.  Actually  he had only
gotten  a little, and nothing  that directly  concerned  his father.  The
night  seemed  strangely  to  rise  from  the  earth  at  an  almost
measurable  speed  until  at  last  it  swallowed  the  plane  that  was
pushing  straight  ahead,  steadily,  like  a  screw  driven  into  the
thickness  of the night.  But the night added  to Jacques’s  discomfort,
for he felt himself  doubly  conned,  by the plane and by the dark,
and he was breathing  with diculty.  Again  he saw the register  of
births  and the names  of the two witnesses,  real French  names  like
those [you] see on signs in Paris,  and the old doctor,  after telling
him the story of his father’s  arrival  and his own birth, had said the
witnesses  were  local  shopkeepers,  the  rst  to  happen   by,  who
agreed  to do his father  a  favor;  they had names  from the outskirts  of
Paris, yes, but that was no surprise,  since Solférino  was founded  by
1 “forty-eighters.”
“Oh yes,” Veillard  had said, “my great-grandparents  were among
them. That’s  why my old man had revolution  in his genes.”  He went
on to say that the rst  of his great-grandparents  to come were a
carpenter  from  Faubourg  Saint-Denis  and  a  ne-linen  laundress.
There was a lot of unemployment  in Paris, there was unrest,  and the
Constituent  Assembly  had voted fty  million  francs  to send a colony
c of settlers.  They promised  everyone  a house  and 2 to 10 hectares.
“You can imagine  how they applied.  More than a thousan d. And all
of them dreaming  of the Promised  Land.  Especially  the men. The
women,  they were afraid  of the unknown.  Not the men! They hadn’t
made the revolution  for nothing. They were the kind who believe  in
Santa Claus. And their Santa Claus wore a burnoose.  Well, they got

some kind of Santa Claus.  They left in ’49, and the rst  house  was
built in the summer of ’54. Meanwhile ...”
Jacques  was breathing  more easily  now. The rst  darkness  had
nished  owin g; it had ebbed like a tide, leaving  behind  it a cloud
of  stars,  and  now  the  sky  was  lled  with  stars.  Now  only  the
deafening  sound  of  the  motors  was  oppressing  him.  He  tried  to
summon  the face of the old dealer  in carob  and fodder  who had
known  his  father,  who  vaguely  remembered  him,  and  kept
repeating:  “No talker,  he was no talker.”  But he was stupeed  by the
noise,  it plunged  him into a nasty sort of torpor  where  he tried in
vain to evoke  his father,  to imagine  him, but he disappea red behind
this  immense  and  hostile  land,  he  melted  into  the  anonymous
history  of the village  and the plain.  Details  from their conversation
at the doctor’s  came back to him on the same wave as those barges
that, according  to the doctor,  had brought  the Parisian  settlers  to
Solférino.  On the same wave,  and there was no train at the time, no,
no—yes,  but it only went to Lyon. Then, six barges  hauled  by draft
horses,  with  the  “Marseilla ise”  and  the  “Chant  du  Départ,”  of
course,  played  by the city’s brass band, and the benedict ion by the
clergy  on  the  banks  of  the  Seine  with  a  ag  on  which  was
embroidered  the name of the village  that did not yet exist but which
the passengers  would  create  by magic.  The barge was already  under
way,  Paris  was  slipping  away,  becoming  uid,  was  going  to
disappear—may  God  bless  your  undertaking—and  even  the
strongest  of spirits,  the tough ones from the barricades,  they fell
silent,  sick at heart, their frightened  wives clinging  to their strength,
and in the hold they had to sleep on rustling  straw with the dirty
water at eye level, but rst  the women  undressed  behind  bedsheets
that they held up in turn. Where  was his father  in all this? Nowhere,
and yet those barges  hauled  a hundred  years ago along the canals  at
the  end  of  autumn,  drifting  for  a  month  on  streams  and  rivers
covered  with  the  last  dead  leaves,  escorted  by  hazel  trees  and
willows,  bare under  the gray sky, greeted  in the towns  by ocial
fanfare  and sent on their way with a  cargo of new vagrants  toward  a
strange  country—they  taught  him more about  the young dead man
of Saint-Brieuc  than the [senile]  and disordered  recollectio ns that he

had  gone  to  seek.  The  motors  now  changed  speed.  Those  dark
masses,  those sharp-edged  dislocated  chunks  of the night,  that was
Kabylia,  the wild and bloody  part of the country—it  had long been
wild and bloody;  that was where they were headed  a hundred years
ago, the workers  of ’48 piled up in a paddlewheeler.  “The  Labrador ,”
said the old doctor,  “that was its name;  can you imagine  that, the
Labrador   to  go  to  the  mosquitoes  and  the  sun?”  Anyway,  the
Labrador  with all its blades  paddling,  churning  the icy water that the
mistral  was whipping  up in a storm,  its decks  swept  for ve  days
and ve  nights  by a polar wind, and the conquerors  at the bottom  of
the hold, deathly  ill, vomiting on each other and wanting to die,
until they arrived  at the port of Bône, with the whole  population  on
the docks  to greet the greenish  adventurers  with music;  they had
come so far, having  left the capital  of Europe  with their wives  and
children  and  possessions  to  stagger  ashore,  after  ve  weeks  of
wandering,  on this land with its distant  bluish  background,  where
they encountered  uneasily  its strange  odor compounded  of fertilizer,
1 spices, and [].
Jacques  turned  in his seat; he was half asleep.  He saw his father,
whom  he had never  seen, whose  very height  he did not know,  he
saw  him  on  the  dock  at  Bône  among  the  emigrants,  while  the
pulleys  hoisted  o   the  poor  possessions  that  had  survived  the
voyage  and disputes  broke  out about  those that were lost. He was
there,  resolute,  somber,  teeth clenched,  and, after all, was this not
the same road he had taken  from Bône to Solférino,  almost  forty
years earlier,  on the wagon,  under  the same autumn  sky? But the
road did not exist for the migrants:  the women  and children piled
onto  the  army’s  gun  carriages,  the  men  on  foot,  cutting  by
guesswork  across the swampy  plain or the spiny brush,  under  the
hostile  eyes of occasional  groups  of Arabs  watching  them from a
distance,  accompanied  almost  constantly  by  a  howling  pack  of
Kabyle  dogs,  until  at  the  end  of  the  day  they  reached  the  same
country  his  father  had  forty  years  earlier—at,  surrounded  by
distant  heights,  without  a  dwelling,  without  a  single  plot  of
cultivated  land, only a handful  of earth-colored  military  tents on it,
nothing  but bare empty  space;  to them it was the end of the world,

* between  the deserted  sky and the dangerous  land,  and then the
women  cried  into  the  night,  from  exhaustion,  and  fear,  and
disappointment.
The same arrival  by night in a wretched  hostile  place,  the same
men, and then, and then ... Oh! Jacques  did not know about  his
father,  but  for  the  rest,  that  was  how  it  was,  they  had  to  pull
themselves  together  in front of the laughing  soldiers  and settle into
their tents. The houses  would  come later, they would  be built and
the land would  be portioned  out, and work,  blessed  work,  would
save them all. “But they couldn’t  have it right away,  that work ...”
said  Veillard.  The  rain,  the  Algerian  rain,  enormous,  brutal,
unending,  had fallen  for eight days; the Seybouse  had overowed.
The water came up to the tents, and they could not go out, brother-
enemies  in the lthy  promiscuity  of the great tents resonating  under
the interminable  downpour,  and to escape  the stench  they cut pieces
of hollow reed so they could urinate  from the inside  out, and as
soon as the rain stopped,  they at last went to work building imsy
huts under the orders of the carpenter.
“Ah! Those  good people,”  said Veillard,  laughing.  “They  nished
their  little  shacks  in  the  spring,  and  then  they  were  entitled  to
cholera.  If I can believe  my old man, that’s how our ancestor  the
carpenter  lost  his  daughter  and  his  wife—they  were  right  to  be
reluctant about the journey.”
“Well yes,” said the old doctor, striding  up and down,  still erect
and proud  in his leggings;  he could  not sit still. “They  died ten a
day. The hot season  came early, they were roasting  in the huts. And
as  for  hygiene   ...  In  short,  ten  of  them  would  die  a  day.”  His
colleagues  in the military  were overwhelmed.  Peculiar  colleagues,
incidentally.  They had exhausted  all their remedies.  Then they had
an idea. You had to dance  to stir up the blood.  And every night after
work the settlers would  dance  between  two burials  to the sound  of a
violin.  Well, it was not so badly thought  out. With the heat those
good  people  sweated  out  everything  they  had,  and  the  epidemic
stopped.  “It’s an idea to explore.”  Yes, it was an idea. In the hot
humid  night—between  the huts  where  the sick were sleeping,  the
violinist  sitting on a crate,  a lantern  by him with mosquitoes  and

insects  buzzing  around  it—the  conquerors  in  long  dresses  and
wearing  sheets would  dance,  sedately  sweating  around  a big re  of
branches,  while  at  the  four  corners  of  the  encampment  sentinels
were on watch  to defend  the besieged  people  against  black-maned
lions, cattle thieves,  Arab bands,  and sometimes  also raids by other
French  settlers  who were in need of distraction  or supplies.  Later on,
they nally  gave them land, scattered  plots far from the shantytown.
Later on, they built the village with earthen  walls.  But two-thirds  of
the emigrants  were dead, there as everywhere  in Algeria,  without
having  laid  hands  on  a  spade  or  a  plow.  The  others  remained
Parisian  in the elds,  plowing  in top hats, gun on the shoulder,  a
pipe between  their teeth—an d only pipes with covers  were allowed,
never  cigarettes,  because  of  res—and  quinine  in  their  pockets,
quinine  sold in the cafés in Bône and in the canteen  in Mondovi  as
an ordinary  drink,  to your health,  accompanied  by their wives  in
silk dresses.  But always  the gun and the soldiers  around,  and even to
do the laundry  in the Seybouse  an escort  was needed  for those who
in the old days would  hold a peaceful  salon while working  at the
washhouse  in the rue des Archives;  and the village  itself was often
attacked  at  night,  as  in  ’51  during  one  of  the  uprisings  when
hundreds  of cavalrymen  in burnooses  circling  the walls ed  seeing
the  stovepipes   the  besieged  people  aimed  at  them  to  simulate
cannons,  building  and working in an enemy  land that refused  to be
occupied  and took its revenge  on whatever  it found,  and why was
Jacques  thinking about  his mother  while  the plane  rose and now
was coming down?  Picturing  that wagon  bogged  down on the road
from Bône, where  the settlers  had left a pregnant  woman  to go for
help and found her with her belly slit and her breasts cut o.
“It was war,” said Veillard.
“Let’s be fair,” added  the old doctor.  “We shut them up in caves
with their whole  brood,  yes indeed,  yes indeed,  and they cut the
balls o   the r st Berbers,  who themselves  ... and so on all the way
back to the rst  criminal—you  know,  his name was Cain—and  since
then it’s been war; men are abominable,  especially  under a ferocious
sun.”

And after lunch  they had walked through  the village,  similar  to
hundreds  of other villages  all over the country,  a few hundred  small
houses  in the simple style of the end of the nineteenth  century,  laid
out  on  several  streets  that  met  at  right  angles  where  the  larger
buildings  were—the  cooperative,  the farm bank, the recreation  hall
—and  everything  led to the metal-framed  bandstand,  looking  like a
carousel  or a large Métro  entrance,  where  for years the village  men’s
choir or the military  band had given  concerts  on holidays,  while
couples  in their Sunday  best strolled  around  it, in the heat and the
dust,  shelling  peanuts.  Today  was  also  a  Sunday,  but  the  army’s
psychological  warfare  branch  had  installed  loudspeakers  in  the
bandstand,  the crowd  was mostly  Arab, and they were not strolling
around  the square;  they were standing  still and listening  to the Arab
music  that alternated  with speeches,  and the French  people  lost in
the crowd all had the same look,  somber  and turned  to the future,
like those who long ago had come here on the  Labrador , or those
who landed  other places  in the same circumstances,  with the same
suering,  eeing  poverty  or persecution,  nding  sorrow  and stone.
Such were the Spaniards  of Mahon,  ancestors  of Jacques’s  mother,
or those Alsatians who in ’71 had rejected  German  rule and chosen
France,  and they were given the land of the Arab rebels  of ’71, who
were dead or imprisoned—dissidents  taking  the places  kept warm
by  insurgents,  persecuted-persecutors  from  whom  his  father
descended,  who, forty years later, arrived  in this place,  with the
same  somber  and  determined  manner,  his  thoughts  only  on  the
future,  like those who have no love for their past and renounce  it;
an emigrant  himself  like those who lived and had lived on this land
without  leaving a trace except  on the worn and greened -over slabs
in the small settler  cemeteries  such as the one Jacques  had visited
with the old doctor  at the end of the day after Veillard  had left. On
one side, hideous  new construction  in the latest funerary  fashion,
embellished  by the cheap  religious  art on which  contemporary  piety
is expended. On the other,  under the old cypresses,  between  paths
covered  with pine needles  and cypress  cones,  or else by damp walls
with  the  oxalis  and  its  yellow  owers  growing  at  their  feet,  old

tombstones,  hardly  distinguishable  from the earth,  that had become
illegible.
Whole  mobs had been coming here for more than a century,  had
plowed,  dug furrows,  deeper  and deeper  in some places,  shakier  and
shakier  in others,  until the dusty earth covered  them over and the
place went back  to its wild vegetation;  and they had procreated,
then disappeared.  And so it was with their sons. And the sons and
grandsons  of these found  themselves  on this land as he himself  had,
with no past, without  ethics,  without  guidance,  without  religion,  but
glad to be so and to be in the light, fearful  in the face of night and
death.  All  those  generations ,  all  those  men  come  from  so  many
nations,  under  this  magnicent  sky  where  the  rst  portent  of
twilight  was already  rising,  had disappeared  without  a trace, locked
within  themselves.  An  enormous  oblivion  spread  over  them,  and
actually  that was what this land gave out, what fell from the sky
with the night over the three men returning  to the village, their
hearts  made  anxious  by  the  approach  of  night,  lled  with  that
† dread   that  seizes  all  men  in  Africa  when  the  sudden  evening
descends  on the sea, on the rough  mountains  and the high plateaus,
the  same  holy  dread  that  has  the  same  eect  on  the  slopes  of
Delphi’s  mountain, where  it makes  temples  and altars emerge. But
on the land of Africa  the temples have been destroyed,  and all that
is left is this soft unbearabl e burden  on the heart.  Yes, how they
died!  How  they  were  still  dying!  In  silence  and  away  from
everything,  as his father  had died in an incomprehensible  tragedy
far from his native  land, after a life without  a single  free choice—
from the orphanage  to the hospital,  the inevitable  marriage along
the way, a life that grew around  him, in spite of him; until the war
killed and buried  him; from then and forever  unknown  to his people
and his son, he too was returned to that immense  oblivion  that was
the  ultimate  homeland  of  the  men  of  his  people,  the  nal
destination  of a life that began without  roots—and  so many reports
in  the  libraries  of  the  time  about  the  use  of  foundlings  for  this
country’s  settlement, yes, all these found and lost children  who built
transient  towns  in order to die forever  in themselves  and in others.
As if the history  of men, that history  that kept on plodding across

one of its oldest  territories  while  leaving  so few traces  on it, was
evaporating  under  the constant sun with the memory  of those who
made it, reduced  to paroxysm s of violence  and murder,  to blazes  of
hatred,  to torrents  of blood,  quickly  swollen  and quickly  dried up,
like the seasonal  streams  of the country.  Now the night was rising
from the land itself and began to engulf  everything,  the dead and
the living, under  the marvelous  and ever-present  sky. No, he would
never know his father,  who would  continue  to sleep over there,  his
face forever  lost in the ashes.  There was a mystery  about that man, a
mystery  he had wanted  to penetrate.  But after all there was only the
mystery  of poverty  that creates beings  without  names  and without  a
past, that sends them into the vast throng  of the nameless  dead who
made the world  while they themselves  were destroyed  forever.  For
it was just that that his father had in common  with the men of the
Labrador . The Mahon  people of the Sahel, the Alsatians  on the high
plateaus,  with this immense  island  between  sand and sea, which  the
enormous  silence  was  now  beginning  to  envelop:  the  silence  of
anonymity;  it enveloped  blood  and courage  and work and instinct,  it
was at once cruel and compassionate.  And he who had wanted  to
escape  from the country  without name,  from the crowd  and from a
family  without  name,  but in whom  something  had gone on craving
darkness  and  anonymity—he  too  was  a  member  of  the  tribe,
marching  blindly  into  the  night  near  the  old  doctor  who  was
panting  at his right, listening  to the gusts of music  coming  from the
square,  seeing  once more the hard inscrutable  faces of the Arabs
around  the bandstands,  Veillard’s  laughter  and his stubborn  face—
also seeing with a sweetness  and a sorrow  that wrung  his heart the
deathly  look  on  his  mother ’s  face  at  the  time  of  the  bombing—
wandering  through the night of the years in the land of oblivion
where  each one is the rst  man, where  he had to bring himself  up,
without  a father,  having  never known  those moments  when a father
would  call  his  son,  after  waiting  for  him  to  reach  the  age  of
listening,  to tell him the family’s secret,  or a sorrow  of long ago, or
the experience  of his life, those moments  when even the ridiculous
and  hateful  Polonius  all  of  a  sudden  becomes  great  when  he  is
speaking  to Laertes;  and he was sixteen,  then he was twenty,  and no

one had spoken  to him, and he had to learn by himself,  to grow
alone,  in fortitude,  in strength,  nd  his own morality  and truth,  at
last to be born as a man and then to be born in a harder  childbirth,
which  consists  of being born in relation  to others,  to women,  like all
the men born in this country  who, one by one, try to learn to live
without  roots  and  without  faith,  and  today  all  of  them  are
threatened  with  eternal  anonymity  and  the  loss  of  the  only
consecrated  traces of their passage  on this earth,  the illegible slabs
in the cemeter y that the night has now covered  over; they had to
learn how to live in relation  to others,  to the immense  host of the
conquerors,  now dispossessed , who had preceded  them on this land
and in whom  they now had to recognize  the brotherhood  of race
and destiny.
Now the plane was descend ing to Algiers.  Jacques  was thinking
about  the little cemetery  of Saint-Brieuc  where  the soldiers’  graves
‡ were  better  kept  than  those  in  Mondovi.   The  Mediterranean
separates  two worlds  in me, one where  memories  and names  are
preserved  in measured  spaces, the other where  the wind and sand
erases  all trace of men on the open ranges.  He had tried to escape
from anonymit y, from a life that was poor, ignorant,  and mulish;  he
could  not live that life of blind patience,  without  words, with no
thought  beyond  the  present.  He  had  traveled  far  and  wide,  had
built, had created,  had loved people  and abandoned  them,  his days
had been full to overowing.  And yet now he knew from the bottom
of  his  heart  that  Saint-Brieuc  and  what  it  represented  had  never
been  anything  to  him,  and  he  thought  of  the  worn  and  green-
encrusted  gravestones  he  had  just  left,  acknowledging  with  a
strange  sort  of  pleasure  that  death  would  return  him  to  his  true
homeland  and,  with  its  immense  oblivion,  would  obliterate  the
memory  of that alien and ordinary  man who had  grown  up, had
built in poverty,  without  help or deliverance,  on a fortunate  shore
and in the light of the rst  mornings  of the world,  and then alone,
without  memories  and without  faith, he had entered  the world  of
the men of his time and its dreadful and exalted history.

a . Horse-drawn vehicle train ship plane.
1 . Two illegible words.
2 . In Arabic: “It was written” (in his destiny).
b . to develop
1 . Veterans of the Revolution of 1848— Trans .
c . 48 [numerals circled by the author— Ed .]
1 . An illegible word.
*  unknown
†  anxiety
‡  Algiers

PART TWO
The Son or The First Man

1 :   L y c é e
a b When,  on October  1st of that year, Jacques  Cormery —unsteady  on
his thick new shoes,  bundle d up in a new shirt that still had its
stiening  in it, weighed  down with a satchel  that smelled  of varnish
and leather—s aw the motorman,  next to whom  Pierre  and he were
standing  at the front of the motorcar,  pull his crank  back to rst
gear and the heavy  vehicle  leave the Belcourt  stop, he turned back
to try to catch a glimpse  of, a few meters  away,  his mother  and
grandmother  still leaning  out the window  to keep him company  for
a  bit  longer  on  this  rst  journey  to  the  mysterious  lycée ,  but  he
could not see them because  the man next to him was reading  the
inside  pages of  La  Dépêche  Algérienne . So he turned  to the front and
gazed  at the steel rails that the  motorcar  was steadily  swallowing
and  above  them  the  trolley  wires  vibrating  in  the  cool  of  the
morning,  turning his back, his heart somewhat  heavy,  on his home,
on the old neighborhood  that he had never really  left except  for a
few  expeditions  (they  said  “go  to  Algiers”  when  they  went
downtown),  traveling  faster  and  faster  now  and,  despite  Pierre’s
brotherly  shoulder  practically  glued to his, with a sense of solitude,
uneasy  about a strange  world where  he did not know how he would
have to behave.
Actually  no  one  could  have  given  them  advice.  Pierre  and  he
realized  very soon that they were on their own. M. Bernard  himself,
whom  they  in  any  case  would  not  dare  disturb,  could  tell  them
nothing  about  this  lycée  he did not know.  At home  ignorance  was
still more complete.  For Jacques’s  family,  Latin,  for example,  was a
word that had absolutely  no meaning.  That there had been (besides
primitive  times,  which  they on the other hand could imagine)  times
when no one spoke  French,  that civilizations  (and the word itself

meant  nothing  to  them)  had  succeeded  each  other  with  such
dierent  customs  and  languages—these  truths  had  not  reached
them.  Neither  the images,  nor things  written,  nor word of mouth,
nor  the  veneer  of  culture  acquired  in  everyday  conversation  had
reached  them.  In this home where  there were no newspapers,  nor,
until Jacques  brought  them in, any books,  no radio either,  where
there  were  only  objects  of  immediate  utility,  where  no  one  but
relatives  visited, a home they rarely  left and then only to meet other
members  of the same ignorant  family—what  Jacques  brought  home
from  the  lycée   could  not  be  assimilated,  and  the  silence  grew
between  him and his family.  At the  lycée  itself, he could not speak of
his  family;  he  sensed  their  peculiarity  without  being  able  to
articulate  it,  even  if  he  could  have  overcome  the  insuperable
reticence that sealed his lips on the subject.
It was not even dierences  of class that set them apart.  In this
country  of immigration,  of quick fortunes  and spectacular  collapses,
the  boundaries  between  classes  were  less  clear-cut  than  between
races.  If the children  had been Arab, their feeling  would  have been
more painful  and bitter.  Besides,  though  they had Arab classmates
in school,  there were few in the  lycée , and they were always  sons of
wealthy  notables.  No, what set them apart,  and Jacques  even more
than Pierre, because  their peculiarity  was more pronoun ced in his
home than in Pierre’s  family, was that it was impossible  for him to
connect  his  family  to  traditional  values  and  stereotypes.  To  the
questions  asked  at the beginning  of the year, he could  of course
answer  that his father  was killed  in the war, that after all was a
1 position  in society,  and that he was a “pupil  of the nation.”  which
everyone  understood.  But  after  that  the  diculties  began.  In  the
printed  forms  they were given, he did not know what to put under
“parents’  occupation.”  At rst  he put “home-maker”  while Pierre  put
“post  oce  employee.”  Pierre  explained  to  him  that  homemaker
was not an occupation  but was said of a woman  who kept her own
home and did her own housework.
“No,”  said  Jacques,  “she  takes  care  of  other  people’s  houses,
especially the shopkeeper across the street.”

“Well,”  Pierre  said  hesitant ly,  “I  think  you  have  to  put  down
‘domestic.’ ”
That idea had never  occurred  to Jacques,  for the simple  reason
that this all-too-rare  word was never spoken  in his home—and  this
for  the  reason  that  no  one  there  had  the  feeling  that  she  was
working  for others;  she was working  rst  of all for her children.
Jacques  started  to write the word,  stopped,  and all at once he knew
1 shame and all at once  the shame of having been ashamed.
A child is nothing by himself;  it is his parents  who represent him.
It is through  them that he denes  himself,  that he is de ned in the
eyes of the world. He feels it is through  them that he is truly judged
—judged,  that is, without  right of appeal,  and this judgment by the
world  was  what  he  had  just  discovered,  and,  with  it,  his  own
judgment  on the hard heart that was his. He could not know that
once become a man, one is less deserving  for not recogn izing these
evil feelings. For one is judged,  for better  or for worse,  by what one
is and much  less on one’s family,  since it even happens  that the
family  is judged  in its turn by the child become  a man. But it would
have taken a heart of rare and heroic  pureness  for Jacques  not to
suer  from the discovery  he had just made,  just as it would have
taken  an impossible  humility  for him not to react with anger  and
shame  to  what  his  suering  had  revealed  to  him  about  his  own
nature.  He  had none of those qualities;  instead  there was a hard and
nasty arrogance  that helped  him at least on this occasion,  making
him write the word “domest ic” on the form with a rm  hand and
take it, his face expressionless,  to the monitor,  who did not even
notice  it. Along  with all that, Jacques  had not the slightest  desire  to
have a dieren t family  or station  in life, and his mother  as she was
remained  what he loved most in the world,  even if that love was
hopeless.  Besides, how can it be made clear that a poor child can
sometimes be ashamed without ever being envious?
On  another  occasion,  when  he  was  asked  his  religion,  he
answered:  “Catholic.”  Asked  if he should  be enrolled  in the course  in
religious  instruction,  and remembering  his grandmother’ s fears, he
said  no.  “In  short,”  the  monitor  said  deadpan,  “you  are  a  non-
practicing  Catholic.” Jacques  could explain  nothing  of what went on

in his home, nor could he say the bizarre  way his people  dealt with
religion.  So he rmly  answered, “Yes,”  which  made  people  laugh
and won him a reputation  for stubbornness  at the very moment  he
felt himself most at sea.
Another  day,  the  literature  teacher,  having  handed  out  to  the
students  a  form  concerning  some  internal  matter,  asked  them  to
bring it back signed by their parents.  The form, which  enumerated
the things  students  were forbidden  to bring to school,  from weapons
to  magazines  and  including   playing  cards,  was  written  in  such
choice  language  that Jacque s had to summarize  it in simple  terms
for his mother  and grandmot her. His mother  was the only one able
c to put a crude signature  at  the bottom of the form.  Because, after
* her husband’s  death,  she received  her war widow’s  pension  every
quarter,  and because  the government,  in this case the Treasury—but
Catherine  Cormery just said she was going to the treasure , for to her
it was just a name,  void of any meaning;  to the children,  on the
other  hand,  it  suggested  a  mythic  place  with  limitless  resources
where  their mother  was admitted  from time to time to draw small
amounts  of money—asked  for her signature  each time, after the rst
time when she had problems,  a neighbor  (?) had taught  her to copy
1 a sample of the signature  “Widow  Camus.”  and she managed  to do
this more or less well, but anyway it was always  accepted.  However,
the next morning  Jacques  discovered  that his mother,  who left long
before  him to clean a store that opened  early, had forgotten  to sign
the form. His grandmother  did not know how to sign. She managed
to  keep  her  accounts  with  a  system  of  circles  that,  according  to
whether  they were crossed  once or twice,  represented  ones, tens,
and hundreds.  Jacques  had to return  the form unsigned,  saying  that
his mother  had forgotten,  was asked  if no one in his home  could
sign, answered  no, and discovered  from the teacher’s  surprised  look
that this circumstance was more unusual than he had believed.
He was even more disconcerted  by the French  boys  brought  to
Algiers  by the vagaries  of their father’s  careers.  The one who gave
d him the most to think about was Georges  Didier;  their common
liking  for French  classes  and reading  drew them into a very close
friendship,  of which  Pierre  moreover  was jealous.  Didier  was the

son of a very devout Catholi c. His mother  “made  music,”  his sister
(whom  Jacque s never saw, but he dreamed  delightfully  about  her)
did embroidery,  and Didier,  according  to what he said, intended  to
enter the priesthood.  Extremely  intelligent,  he was uncom promising
on  questions  of  faith  and  of  morals,  where  his  convictions  were
dogmatic.  He was never heard to utter a dirty word,  nor to refer, as
other  children  did  with  endless  self-satisfaction,  to  the  body’s
natural  functions  or  to  those  of  reproduction,  which  in  any  case
were not as clear in their minds as they liked to say. The rst  thing
he sought  from Jacques,  once their friendship  was established,  was
that he give up dirty words.  Jacques  had no diculty  giving  them
up with him. But with others those words  would  easily  slip back
into his conversation.  (Already taking  shape  in him was the many-
faceted  nature  that would  make so many things  easy for him, would
make him adept  at talking  anyone’s  language,  at getting  along  in
any  surroundi ngs,  at  playing  any  role,  except  ...)  With  Didier,
Jacques  understood  what it was to be a middle-class  French  family.
His friend  had a family  home in France  where  he went on vacations;
he was forever  talking  or writing  to Jacques  about  it, that house
with an attic full of old trunks, where  they saved the family’s letters,
souvenirs,  photos. He knew the history  of his grandparents  and his
great-grandparents,  also an ancestor  who was a sailor at Trafalgar,
and this long history,  vivid in his imagination,  also provided  him
with examples  and precepts  for everyday  behavior.  “My grandfather
would  say ... Papa thinks  that ...” and in that way he would justify
his sternness,  his imperious  purity.  When  he spoke  of France,  he
would  say “our country”  and he accepted  in advance  the sacrices
that country might  demand  (“your  father  died for our country,”  he
would  say to Jacques  ...), whereas  this notion  of country had no
meaning  to  Jacques,  who  knew  he  was  French,  and  that  this
entailed  a certain  number  of duties,  but for whom  France was an
abstraction  that people  called upon and that sometimes  laid claim to
you, a bit like that God he had heard  about  outside  his home, who
evidently  was the sovereign  dispenser  of good things  and bad, who
could  not  be  inuenced,  but  who  on  the  other  hand  could  do
anything  with the people’s  destiny.  And this impression  of his was

even stronger  among  the women who lived with him. “ Maman , what
e is our country?”  he asked one day.
She  looked  frightened  as  she  did  each  time  she  did  not
understand. “I don’t know,” she said. “No.”
“It’s France.”
“Oh, yes.” And she seemed relieved.
Whereas  Didier  did  know  what  it  was;  the  family  through  its
generations  was a potent  presence  to him, and the country  where  he
was  born  through  its  history—he  called  Joan  of  Arc  by  her  rst
name—and  so were good and evil dened  for him as was his present
and  future  destiny.  Jacques ,  and  Pierre  also,  though  to  a  lesser
degree,  felt themselves  to be of another  species,  with no past, no
family  home, no attic full of letters  and photos,  citizens  in theory  of
a  nebulous  nation  where  snow  covered  the  roofs  while  they
themselves  grew up under  an eternal  and savage  sun, equipped  with
a most elemen tary morality  that, for example,  forbade  them to steal,
enjoined  them to protect  their mothers  and women,  but was silent
on a great number  of questions  concerning  women,  and relations
with their superiors  ... (etc.)—children,  in short,  unknown to and
ignorant  of  God,  unable  to  imagine  a  future  life  when  this  life
seemed  so  inexhaustible  each  day  under  the  protection  of  the
indierent  deities  of  sun,  of  sea,  or  of  poverty.  And  in  truth,  if
Jacques  was so devoted  to Didier,  no doubt  it was because  of the
boy’s heart that was so smitten with the absolute,  so utterly loyal to
his passions  (the rst  time Jacques heard the word “loyalty,”  which
he had read a hundred  times,  was from Didier)  and capable  of a
charming  tenderness,  but it was also because  he was so dierent,  in
Jacques’s  eyes, his charm  being truly exotic,  and attracting  him all
the more, just as Jacques  later on, when he was grown,  would  feel
himself  irresistibly  drawn  to foreign  women.  The child of the family,
of  tradition,  and  of  religion  had  the  allure  for  Jacques  of  some
tanned  advent urers who return  from  the tropics guarding a strange
and incomprehensible secret.
But the Kabyle  shepherd  who, on his mountain  that the sun has
scaled  and eroded,  watches  the storks  go by while dreaming of the
North from which  they came after a long voyage—he  may dream  all

day long, in the evening  he still goes back to the dish of mastic
leaves,  to the family in long robes, to the wretched  hut where  he has
his roots. In the same way, while Jacques  might  be intoxicated  with
the foreign  potions  of bourgeois  (?) tradition,  he remained  devoted
to  the  one  who  was  most  like  him,  and  that  was  Pierre.  Every
morning  at quarter  after six (except  Sunday  and Thursday),  Jacques
would  go down the stairs of his building  four at a time, running  in
the mugginess  of the hot season  or the violent  rain of winter  that
made his short cape swell up like a sponge;  then at the fountain  he
would  turn in to Pierre’s  street,  and, still on the run, climb the two
stories  to  knock  softly  at  the  door.  Pierre’s  mother,  a  handsome
woman  with an ample  build,  would  open the door that led directly
to the sparsely  furnished  dining  room.  At the other end of the dining
room  a  door  on  either  side  led  to  a  bedroom.  One  was  Pierre’s,
which  he shared  with his mother,  the other was his two uncles’,
rough  railroad  men who smiled  a lot and said little. As you entered
the dining  room,  to the right was a room without  air or light that
served  as both kitchen  and bathroom.  Pierre  was chronically  late.
He would be sitting at the table with its oilcloth  cover,  the kerosene
lamp lit if it was winter,  holding  a big brown  bowl of glazed clay in
both hands,  and trying  to swallow  the scorching  coee  his mother
had  just  poured  him  without  burning  himself.  “Blow  on  it,”  she
would  say. He blew on it, he sucked  it in and smacked  his lips, and
f Jacques  shifted  his weight  from foot to foot while he watched  him.
When  Pierre had nished,  he still had to go to the candle lit kitchen,
where,  at the zinc sink, a glass of water  awaited  him and, lying
across  it, a toothbrush  spread  with a thick ribbon  of a special  kind
of toothpaste,  for he suered  from pyorrhea.  He slipped  on his short
cape, his cap, and his satchel,  and, all rigged  out, gave his teeth a
long  and  vigorous  brushing ,  then  spat  loudly  in  the  sink.  The
pharmaceutical  odor of the toothpaste  mingled  with the smell of the
coee.  Jacques,  a  bit  disgusted  and  at  the  same  time  impatient,
would  let that be known,  and it was not unusual  for this to result in
one of those sulks that are the cement  of a friendship.  Then they
would  go down the stairs to the street in silence  and walk unsmiling
to the trolley  stop. But other times they would  chase  each other,

laughing,  or while running  they would  pass one of the satchels  back
and forth like a rugby ball. At the stop they waited,  watching  for the
red trolley  to see with which  of two or three motormen  they were
going to ride.
For they always scorned  the two trailer  cars and climbed  up into
the motorcar  to work their way to the front, with diculty,  since
the  trolley  was  packed  with  workers  going  downtown  and  their
satchels  hindered  their progress.  At the front, they took advantage
of each  departing  passenger  to press closer  to the motorman’s  iron
and  glass  cab  and  the  high  narrow  controller,  on  the  at  top  of
which  a gearshift  handle  moved  around  a circle  with a big steel
notch to mark neutral,  three other marks  for the forward  gears,  and
a fth  for reverse.  Only the motormen  had the right to work the
gearshift,  and they enjoyed  the prestige  of demigods  in the eyes of
the children,  who were forbidden  by a sign overhead  to speak  to
them.  They  wore  an  almost  military  uniform,  with  a  cap  with
molded  leather  visor, except  the Arab drivers,  who wore a tarboosh.
The children told them apart by their appearance.  There  was the
“nice little young  one,” who looked  like a leading  man and had thin
shoulders;  the “brown  bear,”  a big sturdy  Arab with thick features
who always stared  straight  ahead;  the “friend  of the animals,”  an
old Italian with clear eyes in a drab face, all bent over his gearshift,
who owed his nickname  to the fact that he once almost  stopped  his
trolley  to avoid  hitting  an absentminded  dog and another  time to
avoid  a dog that was nonchalantly  relieving  himself  between  the
rails; and “Zorro,” a tall fellow with the face and small moustache  of
g Douglas  Fairbanks.   The  friend  of  the  animals  was  dear  to  the
children’s  hearts.  But  they  ardently  admired  the  brown  bear;
imperturbable,  solidly  xed  on his legs, he would  drive his noisy
vehicle  at  top  speed,  holding  the  wooden  handle  rmly  in  his
enormous  left hand and pushing it into third gear as soon as trac
permitted,  his  right  hand  vigilant  on  the  big  brake  wheel  to  the
right of the gearbox,  ready  to give the wheel  a few vigorous turns
while  he  moved  his  gearshift  to  neutral,  and  then  the  motorcar
would  skid heavily on the rails. It was with the brown  bear that, on
curves  or switches,  the trolley pole attached  with a spiral spring  to

the roof of the motorcar  was most likely to leave the electric  wire
overhead,  which  it was tted  to by a small wheel  with a hollow  rim,
and then stand straight  up with a great racket  of vibrating  wires and
ying  sparks.  The conductor  would  jump down from the motorcar,
seize the long trolley-catcher  wire, attached  to the end of the pole
that was automatically  unrolled  from a cast-iron  box at the back of
the  vehicle,  and,  pulling  with  all  his  strength  to  overcome  the
resistance  of the steel spring,  would  bring the trolley  pole back and,
letting  it up slowly,  try to insert the wire once more into the hollow
rim of the wheel, all in the midst of aring  sparks.  Leaning out of
the motorcar,  or, if it was winter,  with their noses pressed against
the  windows,  the  children  followed  the  action,  and  when  it  was
crowned  with success,  they would  announce  it in a stage whisper  to
inform  the motorman  without  committing  the infraction  of speaking
directly  to  him.  But  the  brown  bear  was  unmoved:  he  waited,
according  to regulation,  until the conductor  gave him the departure
signal  by pulling  on the cord that hung at the back of the motorcar
and activated  a bell at the front. He would  then set the trolley  in
motion  again,  without  further  precaution.  Clustered  together  in
front, the children  would  watch the metallic  tracks  race past under
and over them, on a rainy or sparkling  morning,  rejoicing  when the
trolley,  going full speed,  would pass a horse-drawn  cart or for a time
would  keep  pace  with  a  wheezing  automobile.  At  each  stop  the
trolley  would  unload  part of its cargo of Arab and French  workmen,
take on a clientele  that got better  dressed  the closer  they were to
downtown,  then start o   again at the clang of the bell and so would
travel from one end to the other of the arc along which  the city lay,
until the moment  when they suddenly  emerged  at the port before
the immense  space  of the bay that stretched  out to the big blue
mountains  at the end of the horizon.  Three  stops more and it was
the end of the line, the place du Gouvernement,  where  the children
got o.   This square,  bordered  on three sides by trees and buildings
with arcades,  opened  out to the white  mosque  and, beyond it, the
expanse  of the port. In its center stood the statue  of the Duke of
Orléans  on a prancing  horse,  all verdigris  under  the dazzling  sky;
but in bad weather  the bronze  turned  black and dripped  rainwater

(and  they  told  the  inevitable  story  that  the  sculptor  committed
suicide,  having  forgotten  to put a curb chain on the harness),  while
from the horse’s  tail water  trickled  endlessly  into the little garden
protected  by the railing  that framed  the monument.  The rest of the
square  was  surfaced  with  small  shiny  paving  stones,  which  the
children,  jumping  o   the trolley,  would  ing  themselves  across,  in
long skids, toward the rue Bab-Azoun  that brought  them to the  lycée
in ve minutes.
Bab-Azoun  was a narrow  street  made  still more narrow  by the
arcades  on both sides that stood on enormous  square  pillars,  leaving
just enough  room for the  trolley  tracks,  used by another company,
that connected  this area to the higher  districts  of the city. On hot
days the thick blue sky lay over the street like a steamin g lid, and
the  shade  was  cool  under  the  arcades.  On  rainy  days  the  whole
street was nothing but a deep trench  of wet shiny stone. Under  the
arcades  were rows of shops:  wholesale  textile  dealers,  their façades
painted  in dark colors,  piles of light-colored  cloth glowin g softly in
the shade;  groceries  that smelled  of clove and coee;  small shops
where  Arab tradesmen  sold pastries  dripping  with oil and honey;
dark deep-set  cafés where  the coeemakers  were percolating  at that
time of day (whereas  in the evening,  lit up by glaring  lamps, they
were full of noise and voices,  a crowd  of men trampling  the sawdust
on  the  oor,  pushing  up  to  the  bar  where  there  were  glasses  of
opalescent  liquid  and little saucersful  of lupines,  anchovies,  cut-up
celery,  olives,  fries, and peanuts);  and, nally,  bazaars  for tourists
where  they  sold  hideous  Eastern  glass  trinkets,  displayed  in
windows  framed  by postcards  in rotating  racks,  and Moorish  scarves
in garish colors.
One of these bazaars,  in the middle  of the arcades,  was run by a
fat man who was always  sitting  behind  his windows,  in the shade or
under  an electric  light; he was huge and pale, with bulging  eyes,
like those creatures you nd  by lifting  stones  or in old tree trunks,
and, above  all, he was absolutely bald. Because  of this feature  the
lycée   studen ts  nicknamed  him  “the  ies’  skating  rink”  and  “the
mosquitoes’  bicycle  racetrack,”  and they would  claim that when the
insects  traveled  across  the bare surface  of that skull, they would

miss  the  turn  and  be  unable  to  keep  their  balance.  Often  in  the
evening  the  children  would  dash  by  his  shop  like  a  ight  of
starlings,  shouting  the unfortunate  man’s  nicknames  and imitating
the ies ’ supposed  skids with a sound  of “zzzzz.”  The fat shopkeeper
cursed  them;  once or twice he was presumptuous  enough  to try to
chase  them, but had to give it up. Then all at once he remained
silent  before  the  volley  of  shouts  and  scong,  and  for  several
evenings  he let the children  grow bolder,  until they came right up
and  yelled  in  his  face.  And  suddenly,  one  evening,  some  young
Arabs,  paid  by  the  shopkeeper,  emerged  from  behind  the  pillars
where  they had been hiding  and set out in pursuit  of the children.
That evening  Jacques  and Pierre  escaped  punishment  only because
of their exceptional  speed.  Jacques  took a single blow on the back of
his head, then, once recovere d from his surprise,  was able to outrun
his adversary.  But two or three of their schoolmates  took a severe
beating.  The  students  plotted  to  sack  the  shop  and  physically
destroy  its owner,  but the fact is they never  acted on their dark
plans;  they stopped  persecut ing their victim,  and they adopted  the
habit of passing by angelically on the other side of the street.
“We chickened out,” Jacques said bitterly.
“After all,” Pierre answered, “we were in the wrong.”
“We were in the wrong and we were afraid of being beaten up.”
Later on, he would  remember  that incident  when he came (truly)
to understand  that men pretend  to abide  by what is right and never
h yield  except  to  force.   Halfway  up  the  rue  Bab-Azoun  the  street
widened  and  on  one  side  the  arcade  gave  way  to  the  church  of
Sainte-Victoire.  This little church occupied  the site of a vanished
mosque.  A kind of oertory  (?), always  full of owers,  had been
carved  in its whitewashed  façade. Flower  sellers  had set up on the
open sidewalk  and were already  displaying  their wares  by the time
the  children  passed  by;  they  oered  enormous  bunches  of  iris,
carnations,  roses,  or anemon es, according  to the season,  set in tall
tin cans, the rims always  rusted  by the water that was always being
sprinkled  on the owers.  On the same side of the street there was
also  a  little  shop  selling  Arab  fritters;  it  was  really  a  nook  that
would  hardly hold three men. A replace  had been dug out at one

side  of  this  nook.  Its  sides  were  lined  with  blue-and-white
earthenware,  and a huge basin of boiling  oil was bubbling  on its
surface.  A strange  person  sat cross-legged  in front of the replace.
He  wore  Arab  pantaloons,  his  chest  was  half  naked  during  the
summer  and  in  the  heat  of  the  day;  on  other  days  he  wore  a
European  jacket closed  at the top of the lapel with a safety  pin; and
with his shaved  head, thin face, and toothless  mouth  he looked  like
a Gandhi without  glasses.  With a red enamel  skimmer  in his hand,
he  watched  over  the  cooking  of  the  fritters  browning  in  the  oil.
When  a  fritter  was  ready—that  is,  when  the  outside  was  golden
while  the very ne  dough  inside  had become  both translucent  and
crisp  (like  a  transparent  fried  potato)—he  would  carefully  reach
under  the fritter  with his ladle and lift it deftly  out of the oil, drain
it over the basin by shaking  the ladle three or four times,  then put it
in front of him in a glassed-in  stand with several  perforated  shelves
on which already  prepared  fritters  were lined up, on one side the
i long honey fritters,  on the other,  at  and round,  the plain fritters.
Pierre  and Jacques  were mad about these pastries,  and on those rare
occasions  when one or the other had a bit of money,  they took a
moment  to  stop  and  get  a  plain  fritter  on  a  piece  of  paper
immediately  made transparent  by the oil, or the long fritter  that the
seller before giving it to them had dipped  in a nearby  jar, alongside
the  stove,  full  of  dark  honey  speckled  with  fritter  crumbs.  The
children  would  take these splendid  things  and bite into them as they
ran to the  lycée , head and shoulders  bent over to avoid dirtying  their
clothes.
The departure  of the swallows  took place each year, soon after the
opening  of  school,  in  front  of  the  church  of  Sainte-Victoire.
Electrical  wires and even high-power  lines, used at one time to drive
the trolleys,  now abandoned  but never taken down,  stretched  over
j the street where  it had been widened.  The swallows  usually ew
over the waterfront  boulevards,  on the square  in front of the  lycée ,
or in the sky over the poor neighborhoods,  sometimes  picking with
piercing  cries  at  a  cus  fruit,  some  oating  garbage,  or  fresh
manure;  but  at  the  rst  cold  weather—only  relatively  cold  since
there was never  a frost; still you could  feel it after the enormous

weight  of the hot months—the  swallows  would  appear  one by one
in the corridor  of rue Bab-Azoun,  ying  low toward  a trolley,  then
abruptly  veering  up  to  disappear  in  the  sky  over  the  houses.
Suddenly  one morning  they appeared  by the thousands  on all the
lines over the little square  at Sainte-Victoire,  on top of the houses,
squeezed  in next to each other,  nodding  their heads over their little
black-and-white  necks,  shaking  their tails and moving  their feet a
bit to make room for a newcomer,  covering  the sidewalk  with their
tiny  ashlike  droppings,  all  together  making  what  was  a  single
constant  chirp,  punctuated  with  brief  cackles,  a  continuing
condential  dialogue  that had been going  on above  the street  all
morning,  and  would  get  gradually  louder  and  become  almost
deafening  by  evening,  when  the  children  were  running  to  the
homeward-bound  trolleys;  then the chirp would  stop suddenly,  on
an invisible  command,  and thousands  of sleeping  birds would  bow
their little heads  and their black-and-white  tails. For two or three
days, coming from every corner  of the Sahel,  and sometimes  even
farther,  they  would  arrive  in  feathery  little  bands,  trying  to  nd
room between  the rst  arrivals,  and, little by little, they would  settle
on all the cornices  along the street on both sides of the main place
of assembly,  the sound  of their wings  beating  and their chirping
over  the  passersby  growing  louder  and  louder  until  it  became
deafening.  And then one morning,  just as abruptl y, the street  was
empty.  In the night,  just before  dawn,  the birds had left all together
for the South.  For the children  that was when winter  began,  well
before  its date, since they had never known  a summer  without  the
shriek of the swallows in the still warm sky of evening.
The rue Bab-Azoun ended  at a big square  where  the  lycée , on the
left, faced the barracks  on the right. The steep damp streets  of the
Arab city began  their uphill climb  behind  the  lycée . The barracks
faced  away  from  the  sea.  Beyond  the  lycée   was  the  Marengo
gardens;  beyond  the barracks,  the poor, half-Spanish  Bab-el-Oued
district.  A few minutes  past quarter  after seven,  Pierre  and Jacques,
having  climbed  the stairs at full speed,  would  enter with a ood  of
children  through  the  concierge’s  small  entrance  next  to  the
monumental  door. They started  up the main stairs,  with the honor

rolls posted  on either  side, still running  at top speed,  and arrived  at
the main oor,  where  the stairs to the upper  oors  began  on the
left;  it  was  separated  from  the  main  courtyard  by  a  glassed-in
arcade.  There,  behind  one of the main oor  columns,  they spotted
the  Rhinoceros  watching  for  latecomers.  (The  Rhinoceros  was  a
chief supervisor,  a small nervous  Corsican  who owed his nickname
to his curled moustache.) Another life began.
Pierre  and Jacques  had received  scholarships  that included  half-
board  because  of their “family  situation.”  So they spent all day at
the  lycée  and had their lunch  in the dining  hall. Classes  began  at
eight or nine o’clock,  according to the day, but breakfast for the
boarding  students  was served at 7:15, and the half-boarders  were
entitled  to it. The families  of the two children  could  not imagine
that anyone  would  give up anything  to which  he was entitled,  they
who were entitled  to so little; thus Jacques  and Pierre  were among
the  few  half-boarders  to  arrive  at  7:15  in  the  big  white  circular
dining  hall, where  sleepy  boarding  students  were already  seating
themselves  at long zinc-covered  tables,  before  big bowls and huge
baskets  with thick slices of dry bread,  while the waiters  swaddled  in
long aprons  made of crude canvas,  most of whom  were Arab, went
along the rows carrying  big coeepots  with curved  spouts that had
once been shiny,  and poured  into the bowls  a boiling  liquid  that
contained  more chicory  than coee.  Having  used their prerogative,
the children could go a quarter of an hour later to the study hall,
where,  preside d  over  by  a  monitor  who  was  himself  a  boarding
student, they could review their homework before classes began.
The great dierence  here from the neighborhood  school  was the
number  of  teachers.  M.  Bernard  knew  everything  and  taught
everything  he  knew  in  the  same  way.  At  the  lycée ,  the  teacher
k changed  with the subject,  and the method  changed  with the man.
Now you could compare;  you had to choose,  that is, between  those
you liked and those you did not. From this point of view a teacher
in the school  is more like a father:  he takes over his role almost
entirely;  he is as inevitable  and he is part of what is necessary  in
your life. So the question  of loving  or not loving  him does not really
arise. Usually  you love him because  you are absolutely  dependent

on him. But if it happens  that the child likes him little or not at all,
dependence  and  necessity  remain,  and  that  is  not  far  from
resembling  love. At the  lycée , on the other hand, the teachers  were
like those uncles  you are entitled  to choose  among.  That is, you
could dislike them, and so there was a certain  physics  teacher,  who
was very elegant in his attire, authoritarian  and crude in his speech,
whom  neither  Jacques  nor Pierre could stomach,  though  they had
him two or three times over the years.  The literature  teacher,  whom
the  children  saw  more  often  than  the  others,  was  the  one  they
would  have been most likely to love, and in fact Jacques  and Pierre
l clung to him in almost  all those classes  without however  being able
to depend on him, since he knew nothing  about  them and since,
once class was over, he went o   to a dierent  life and so did they,
leaving  for that distant  neighborhood  where  there was no possibility
a  lycée  teacher  would settle,  so die  rent that they never met anyone,
neither  teachers nor students,  on their trolley  line—only  red cars
served  the lower  districts  (the C.F.R.A.),  while  the upper  sections,
reputed  to be more elegant,  were served  by a line with green cars,
the T.A. Furthermore,  the T.A. went right to the  lycée , whereas the
1 C.F.R.A.  line ended  at the place du Gouvernement,  you []  the  lycée
from below. So it was that when their  day was over, the children
felt their separateness  at the very door to the  lycée , or only a bit
farther,  at  the  place  du  Gouvernement,  when,  leaving  the  merry
group  of their schoolmates,  they headed  toward  the red trolleys  that
went  to  the  poorest  neighborhoods.  And  it  was  just  their
separateness  they felt, not inferiority.  They were from somewhere
else, that was all.
During  the  school  day,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  no  such
dierence.  Their  smocks  might  be  more  or  less  elegant,  they  all
looked  alike. The only rivalries were those of intelligence  in class
and physical agility in sports.  In these two sorts of competitions,  the
two children  were far from being the last. The solid instruction  they
had  received  in  the  neighborhood  school  had  given  them  an
advantage  that, from the rst  year, put them in the top group of the
class.  Their  sure  spelling,  their  reliable  arithmetic,  their  trained
1 memory,  and most of all the respect[]  inculcated  in them for all

kinds of knowledge  were major assets,  at least at the beginning  of
their  studies.  If  Jacques  had  not  been  so  rambunctious,  which
repeatedly  kept him o   the honor  roll, and if Pierre  had taken more
to Latin, their success  would  have been complete.  At any rate, they
were encouraged  by their teachers  and they were respected.  As for
sports,  it was above  all soccer,  and from the rst  recesses  Jacques
found  what would  be his love for so many  years.  Their matches
were played during the recess  after lunch at the dining  hall and the
one-hour  recess  that,  for  boarders  and  half-boarders  and  day
students  in detention,  came before  the last class at four o’clock.  An
hour recess  at that time gave the children  the opportu nity to eat
their  snack  and  relax  before  the  two-hour  study  hall,  when  they
m could  do  their  homework  for  the  following  day.   For  Jacques  a
snack was out of the question.  Obsessed  with soccer,  he would  dash
out to the cement courtyard,  which  was surrounded  on its four sides
by arcades  supported  by thick pillars  (under  which  the studious  and
well-behaved  boys  strolled  and  chatted),  with  four  or  ve  green
benches  at its sides, and big cus  trees protected  by an iron railing.
Two teams  took their sides of the yard, the goalies  assumed their
positions  between the pillars  at each end, and a big foam-rubber  ball
was  placed  at  the  center.  No  referee,  and  at  the  rst  kick  the
shouting  and sprinting  began. It was on this eld  that Jacques, who
already  could  meet the best students  in the class on equal terms,
made himself  respected  and liked also by the worst,  some of whom
fate had endow ed, for want of a strong  mind,  with sturdy  legs and
inexhaustible  lungs.  This  was  where  for  the  rst  time  he  parted
company  with Pierre,  who did not play, though  he was naturally
well coordinated;  he had become  more frail, growing  faster  than
Jacques,  and becoming  more blond,  as if being transplanted  had not
n worked  as  well  with  him.   Jacques’s  growth  was  delayed,  which
earned  him the delightful  nicknames  “shrimp”  and “short-ass,”  but
he paid no attention,  and running  madly,  dribbling  the ball between
his feet, dodging  rst  a tree and then an opponent,  he felt himself
king of the eld  and king of the world.  When  the drum sounded  the
end of recess  and the beginn ing of study hall, he really fell from the
sky, stopped  short on the cement, panting  and sweating,  furious  that

the hours were so short;  then bit by bit he returned  to the present,
hurried  to line up with the others,  mopped  the sweat  o   his face
with both his sleeves—and  suddenly  took fright  at the thought  of
the wear on the studs in the soles of his shoes,  which  he anxiously
examined  at  the  beginning  of  study  hall,  trying  to  evaluate  the
dierence  in  their  shininess  from  the  previous  day,  and  was
reassured  by the very dicul ty he had in discerning  how worn they
were.  Except  when some irreparable  damage—a  detached  sole, or
torn upper,  or twisted  heel—left  no doubt  as to how he would  be
received  when he went home, and then he would  swallow  his saliva,
his stomach  queasy,  during  the two hours of the study hall, trying  to
redeem  his sin by devoting  himself  more strenuously  to his work,
from which however,  and despite  his best eorts,  he was inevitably
distracted  by the fear of being beaten.  This last study hall was also
the one that seemed  the longest.  To begin with, it lasted  two hours.
And besides it took place at night or when night was falling.  The
high  windows   looked  out  on  the  Marengo  gardens.  The  students
around  Jacque s and Pierre,  sitting  side by side, were quieter than
usual,  tired from work and play, absorbed  in their last assignments.
Especially  at the end of the year, night would  fall on the big trees,
the ower  beds,  and the clusters  of banana  trees in the park. The
sky became greener and greener;  it seemed  to swell as the sounds  of
the city grew fainter  and more distant.  When  it was very hot and
one of the windows was half open, they heard  the cries of the last
swallows  over the little garden, and the scent of seringas  and of the
big magnolias  came in to drown the more acid and bitter smells  of
ink and ruler. Jacques  would daydream,  his heart strangely  heavy,
until he was called  to order by the young  monitor,  who was himself
doing  his assignments  for the University.  They had to wait for the
last drum.
o At seven o’clock  came the rush out of the  lycée;  they ran in noisy
groups  the length  of the rue Bab-Azoun,  where  all the stores were lit
up  and  the  sidewalk  under  the  arcades  was  so  crowded  that
sometimes  they had to run in the street  itself,  between  the rails,
until a trolley  came in sight and they had to dash back under  the
arcades;  then at last the place du Gouvernement  opened  up before

them,  its periphery  illuminat ed by the stalls and stands  of the Arab
peddlers  lit  by  acetylene  lamps  giving  o   a  smell  the  children
inhaled  with delight.  The red trolleys  were waiting,  already  jammed
—whereas  in  the  morning  there  were  fewer  passen gers—and
sometimes  they had to stand on the running  board  of a trailer  car,
which  was both forbidden  and tolerated,  until some passengers  got
o   at a stop, and then the two boys would  press into the human
mass, separated,  unable  in any case to talk to each other,  and  could
only work their way slowly  with elbows  and bodies  to get to one of
the railings where they could see the dark port with its big steamers
outlined  by lights that seemed,  in the night of the sea and the sky,
like  skeletons  of  burned-out  buildings  where  the  re  had  left  its
embers.  The big brightly  lit trolleys  rode with a great racket  over
the water, then forged  a bit inland  and passed  between  poorer and
poorer  houses  to the Belcourt  district,  where  the children  had to
part company  and Jacques  climbed  the never lighted  stairs toward
the circle of the kerosene  lamp that lit the oilcloth  table cover and
the chairs  around  the table,  leaving  in the shadow  the rest of the
room,  where  Catherine  Cormery  was  occupied  at  the  buet
preparing  to set the table, while his grandmother  was in the kitchen
reheating  the  stew  from  lunch  and  his  older  brother  was  at  the
corner  of the table reading  an adventure  novel.  Sometime s he had to
go  to  the  Mzabite  grocer  for  the  salt  or  quarter-pound  of  butter
needed  at the last minute,  or go get Uncle  Ernest,  who was holding
forth at Gaby’s  café. Dinner  was at eight,  in silence  unless  Uncle
Ernest  recounted  an incomprehensible  adventure  that sent him into
gales of laughter,  but in any event  there was no mention  of the
lycée , except if his grandmother  would  ask if he had gotten  good
grades,  and he said yes and no one said any more about it, and his
mother  asked him nothing,  shaking her head and gazing  at him with
her gentle eyes when he confessed to good grades,  but always  silent
and a bit distracted; “Sit still,” she would  say to her mother,  “I’ll get
the cheese,”  then nothing  till the meal was over, when she stood up
to clear the table.  “Help  your mother,”  his grandmother  would  say,
because  he had picked  up  Pardaillan  and was avidly reading  it. He
helped  out and came back to the lamp, putting  the big volume  that

told of duels and courage  on the slick bare surface  of the oilcloth,
while his mother,  pulling  a chair away from the lamplight,  would
seat herself by the window  in winter,  or in summer  on the balcony,
and watch  the trac  of trolleys,  cars, and passersby  as it gradually
p diminished.  It was, again, his grandmother  who told Jacques  he
had to go to bed because  he would  get up at ve-thirty  the next
morning,  and he kissed  her rst,  then his uncle,  and last his mother,
who gave him a tender,  absentminded  kiss, then assumed  once more
her motionless  position,  in the shadowy  half-light,  her gaze lost in
the street  and the current  of life that owed  endlessly  below  the
riverbank  where  she  sat,  endlessly,  while  her  son,  endlessly,
watched  her in the shadows  with a lump in his throat,  staring  at her
thin bent back, lled  with an obscure  anxiety  in the presence  of
adversity he could not understand.
a . Begin  either  by going  to school  and the rest in order,  or else by introducing  the
adult alien and then return to the period from going to school to the illness.
b . physical description of the child.
1 . Children  of men killed in the war, who were entitled  to a small stipend  for school
supplies— Trans .
1 .  sic
c . the reminder.
*  collect
1 .  sic
d . come back to him at his death.
e . discovery of the Fatherland in 1940.
f . schoolboy’s cap.
g . The cord and the bell.
h . himself like the rest.
i . Zlabias, Makroud.
j . See the sparrows of Algeria mentioned by Grenier.

k . M. Bernard  was loved and admired.  At best the  lycée  teacher could only be admired
and you did not dare love him.
l . say which? and develop?
1 . An illegible word.
1 . An illegible word.
m . the yard less crowded because the day students were gone.
n . to develop.
o . the homosexual’s assault.
p . Lucien—14 EPS—16 Insurance.

T h e   C h i c k e n   C o o p   a n d   C u t t i n g   t h e   H e n ’ s
T h r o a t
That dread  of death  and the unknown,  which  he always  felt when
coming  home from the  lycée , was already  taking hold of him at the
end of the day, as fast as the darkness  that rapidly  devoured  the
light and the earth,  and would  not cease until his grandmother  lit
the suspension  lamp, setting  the glass chimney  down on the oilcloth,
her [stance] up a bit on the balls of her feet, her thighs  pressed
against  the edge of the table, her body leaning  forward,  her head
twisted  so she could  better  see the burner  of the lamp under  the
shade,  one  hand  holding  the  copper  key  that  regulated  the  wick
under  the lamp, the other scraping the wick with a lit match  until it
stopped  smoldering and gave a beautiful  clear light; and then the
grandmother  would  replace  the  chimney,  which  would  squeak  a
little against  the chiseled  tabs of the copper  gallery  into which  she
pressed  it, and, again standin g erect at the table, one arm raised,  she
adjusted  the wick until the hot yellow  light was cast evenly  on the
table in a large and perfect  circle,  and, as if reected  by the oilcloth,
it lit with a gentler  glow the faces of the  woman  and the child who
was watching  the ritual from the other side of the table—and  his
heart gradually grew easy as the light grew brighter.
It  was  the  same  dread  he  tried  sometimes  to  overcom e  out  of
pride or vanity  when his grandmother  would  on certain  occasions
order  him  to  go  get  a  hen  from  the  yard.  It  was  always  in  the
evening,  before  a  major  holiday—Easter  or  Christmas—or  else
before  a visit from better-o  relatives  whom  they wished  as much to
honor  as to deceive,  for the sake of propriety,  about  the family’s
actual  circums tances.  In  one  of  his  rst  years  at  the  lycée ,  the

grandmother  had asked Uncle Josephin  to bring her some Arab hens
from his Sunday trading  expeditions,  and had drafted  Uncle  Ernest
to build her a crude  chicken  coop on the sticky  damp  earth at the
far end of the yard, where  she kept ve  or six fowls that gave her
their eggs and at times their lives. The family  was at dinner the rst
time  the  grandmother  decided  to  conduct  an  execution ,  and  she
1 asked the older of the boys to go get her the victim.  But Louis  said
he  couldn’t;  he  said  point-blank  that  he  was  afraid.  The
grandmother  sneered,  and railed against  these children  of the rich,
not like those in her time—out  in the depths  of the bush, they were
afraid  of nothing.  “Jacques  is braver  than that, I’m sure of it. Go
ahead,  you.” To tell the truth, Jacques  did not feel at all braver.  But
once it had been said, he could not back down,  and so he went to it
on that rst  evening.  He had  to feel his way in the dark down the
stairs,  turn left in the hall that was always  dark, and nd  the door to
the yard and open it. The night outside  was less dark than the hall.
You could  make out the four slippery  greenish  steps down  to the
yard. To the right, a weak light trickled  through  the blinds  of the
small building  occupied  by the barber  and the Arab family. Across
a the yard he could see the whitish  splotches of the animals  asleep  on
the  ground  or  on  their  manure-splattered  perches.  Once  he  had
reached  the  coop,  as  soon  as  he  touched  the  unsteady  coop,
squatting  with his ngers  above his head in the big mesh of the
cage, a soft cackling  began  to rise with the warm  nauseating  smell
of the droppings.  He opened  the little lattice  door at ground  level,
bent over to reach his hand and arm in, was disgusted  at the touch
of  the  earth  or  of  a  dirty  stick,  and  hastily  withdrew  his  hand,
gripped  with fear as the coop exploded  in a turmoil  of wings  and
feet, the birds uttering  and running  all over the place.  Yet he had
to make up his mind to it, since he had been designated  as the more
courageous  one. But he was horried  by this commotion  among  the
animals  in  the  dark,  in  this  dim  and  lthy  place—it  turned  his
stomach.  He waited,  gazing  up at the immaculate  night above  him,
the  sky  full  of  calm  clean  stars;  then  he  threw  himself  forward,
grabbed  the  rst  claw  within  reach,  dragged  the  crying  terried
animal  to the little door, took hold of the second  foot with his other

hand and roughly  yanked  the hen out of the coop, already  tearing
o   some of its feathers  against  the door-jamb,  while the whole coop
burst  into  piercing  panic-stricken  cackling,  and  the  old  Arab,
vigilant,  appeared  framed  in a sudden  rectangle  of light. “It’s me, M.
Tahar,”  the child said in a toneless  voice.  “I’m getting  a hen for my
grandmother.”
“Oh, it’s you. All right, I thought  it was robbers,”  and he went
back inside, leaving  the yard dark again.  Now Jacques  ran, while
the hen struggled desperately  and he bumped  it against  the wall of
the hallway  or the rungs of the stairs,  sick with fear and disgust  at
the feel of its cold, thick, scaly claws in his hand, ran still faster on
the landing  and in the hall of the building,  and victoriously  entered
the  dining  room.  The  victor  stood  framed  in  the  doorway,  hair
mussed,  knees green from the moss in the yard, holding  the hen as
far as possible  from his body, his face white  with fear. “You see,”
the grandmother  said to the older boy. “He’s younger  than you are,
but he puts you to shame.”  Jacques  waited  to preen  with justied
pride until the grandmother  had taken a rm  grip on the feet of the
hen, which suddenly  grew quiet as if understanding  that from now
on it was in the hands  of the inexorable.  His brother  ate his dessert
without  looking at him, except  to make a scornful  face that made
Jacques  even more satised  with himself.  However,  that satisfaction
was  brief.  Glad  to  have  found  she  had  a  manly  grandson,  his
grandmother  invited  him to the kitchen  to take part in cutting  the
hen’s throat.  She was already wearing  a big blue apron  and, still
holding  the hen’s feet in one hand, she put a deep  earthenware  dish
on  the  oor,  with  the  long  kitchen  knife  that  Uncle  Ernest
sharpened  periodically  on  a  long  black  stone,  so  that  the  blade,
worn till it was very thin and narrow,  was no more than a shining
edge. “You go over there.”  Jacques  went to the designated  place,
across  the  kitchen,  while  the  grandmother  placed  herself  in  the
doorway,  blocking  the exit to the hen as well as to the child.  His
back to the sink, his [left] shoulder  against  the wall, he watched  in
horror  the  sure  movements  of  the  sacricer.  The  grandmother
pushed  the plate just into the light shed by the little kerosene lamp
set  on  a  wooden  table,  to  the  left  of  the  doorway.  She  laid  the

animal  on the oor,  and, putting  her knee to the ground,  trapped
the  hen’s  feet,  pressed  it  at  with  her  hands  to  keep  it  from
struggling,  then seized  the head with her left hand and pulled  it
back over the plate.  With the razor-sharp  knife she slowly cut its
throat  at the place where  a man has his Adam’s  apple,  opening  the
wound  by  twisting  the  head  while  the  knife  cut  with  a  dreadful
sound  more deeply  into the cartilage,  holding  still the animal  that
was  shaking  all  over  with  terrible  twitches  while  the  blood  ran
bright  red  into  the  white  dish;  and  Jacques  watched ,  his  legs
trembling,  as if it were his own blood he felt draining  away.  “Take
the  dish,”  the  grandmother  said  after  an  interminable  time.  The
animal  was no longer  bleeding.  Jacques  carefully  placed  the dish on
the table,  with the blood  already  turning  dark. The grandmother
tossed  the hen down next to the dish; its plumage  was already  dim,
and the round  creased  lid was closing  over its glassy  eye. Jacques
stared  at the motionless  body, the toes of its feet drawn  together
and hanging  limp, the crest faded and accid—death,  in short—then
b he went out to the dining room.
“Me, I can’t watch that,”  his brother  said with suppressed  anger
that rst night. “It’s disgusting.”
“No, it’s not,” Jacques  said uncertainly.  Louis was looking  at him
with  an  expression  that  was  both  hostile  and  inquisitorial.  And
Jacques  straightened  up. He subdued  his fear, the panic that took
hold of him in the face of night and that appalling  death,  and he
found  in pride,  only in pride, a will to courage  that nally  served  as
courage itself. “You’re scared, that’s all,” he said at last.
“Yes,”  said  the  grandmother,  coming  back  in  the  room.  “It’s
Jacques who’ll go to the chicken coop in the future.”
“Good, good,” said Uncle Ernest, beaming, “he got courage.”
Jacques,  rooted  to the spot, looked  at his mother,  who was sitting
a bit apart from the others,  darning  socks stretched  over a wooden
egg. His mother  gazed  at him. “Yes,”  she said, “that’s  good, you’re
brave.”  And  she  turned  back  to  the  street,  and  Jacques,  seeing
nothing  but her, felt unhappiness  swelling  once more in his heavy
heart.

“Go to bed,” said the grandmother.  Jacques,  without  lighting the
small kerosene  lamp,  undressed  in the bedroom  by the light from
the dining room.  He lay down on the side of the double  bed, to
avoid having to touch  his brother, or disturb  him. He went right to
sleep, worn out with fatigue  and emotion,  awakened  at times by his
brother,  who climbed  over him to sleep by the wall because  he got
up later than Jacques,  or by his mother,  who sometimes  bumped
into the wardrobe  while undressing  in the dark, and who climbed
softly into her bed and slept so lightly  you could think she was lying
awake,  and Jacques  did sometimes  think so; he felt like calling  her
but he told himself she would  not hear him anyway,  then forced
himself  to stay awake  as long as she did, just as quietly,  motionless,
and making  no sound,  until sleep overcame  him as it had already
overcome his mother after a hard day of laundry or housework.
1 . Jacques’s brother is sometimes called Henri, sometimes Louis.
a . distorted.
b . The next day, the smell of raw chicken on the re.

T h u r s d a y s   a n d   V a c a t i o n s
Only on Thursdays  and Sundays  could Jacques  and Pierre  get back
to their own world.  (Except  on some Thursdays  when Jacques  was
in detention—as  stated  in a note from the chief monitor’s  oce,
which  Jacques  would  ask his mother  to sign after summarizing  its
contents  with the word “punishment”—and  had to spend  two hours,
from eight to ten o’clock,  sometimes  four in serious  cases, at the
lycée , in a special room with other oenders,  under  the supervision
of a monitor who usually  was furious  at being drafted  on that day,
a doing some particularly  unrewarding  task.)  Pierre, in eight years of
lycée , never suered  detention.  But Jacques  was too rambunctious,
and also too vain, and he played the fool for the sake of showing  o,
and so he collected  detentions.  Try as he might  to explain  to the
grandmother  that these punishments  were for conduct,  she could
not see the dierence  betwee n stupidity  and bad  behavior.  To her, a
good  student  would  of  necessity  be  virtuous  and  well  behaved;
accordingly,  virtue  led  straight  to  knowledge.  So  Thursday’s
punishment  was  made  worse,  at  least  in  the  rst   years,  by
Wednesday’s beating.
On Thursdays  when there was no punishment,  and on Sundays,
mornings  were devoted  to errands  and work around  the home.  And
1 in the afternoon  Pierre  and Jean  could go out together.  During  the
summer  there was the Sablettes beach,  and the parade  grounds,  a
big  vacant  lot  that  included  a  roughly  laid  out  soccer  eld  and
several  areas for  boules  players. Usually  they played  soccer  with a
ball made of rags, and teams of Arab and French  boys that were put
together  on the spot. But during the rest of the year the two children
b went to the Home  for Disabled Veterans  at Kouba,  where Pierre’ s
mother,  who had left the post oce,  was chief laundress.  Kouba  was

c the name of a hill to the east of Algiers,  at the end of a trolley  line.
In fact, the city ended  there,  and the gentle  countryside  of the Sahel
began,  with its symmetrical  knolls,  its relatively  abundant  waters,
meadows  that seemed  practically opulent,  and elds  of savory  red
soil, separated  here and there by hedges  of tall cypress or reeds.
Grapevines,  fruit  trees,  corn  grew  in  abundance  and  without  too
much eort.  Also, for those who came from the city and its damp
and  hot lower districts, the air was bracing  and believed  to be good
for the health.  For those people from Algiers  who, once they had
some wealth  or income,  would ee  the Algiers  summer  for a more
temperate  France,  it was enough  if the air they breathed  someplace
was just slightly  cool, for them to dub it “French  air.” So in Kouba
they breathed  the air of France. The old soldiers’  home,  started  for
crippled  veterans  soon after the war, was ve  minutes  from the end
of the trolley  line. It was a former  convent,  vast, complex  in its
architecture,  and  spread  out  over  several  wings,  with  very  thick
whitewashed  walls, covered  arcades,  and big cool halls with arched
ceilings  where  the dining  rooms  and the various  services  had been
set up. The laundry,  headed  by Mme. Marlon,  Pierre’s  mother,  was
in  one  of  these  big  halls.  That  was  where  she  rst  greeted  the
children,  amidst the smell of hot irons and damp linen, with the two
employees,  one Arab the other French,  who were under  her orders.
She would give them each a piece of bread  and chocolate;  then,
rolling  up the sleeves  on her lovely  arms, so strong  and youthful:
“Put that in your pocket  for four o’clock  and go out in the garden,  I
have work to do.”
First  the  children  would  wander  through  the  arcades  and  the
inside  courtyards,  and most often they ate their snack right away to
be  rid  of  the  cumbersome  bread  and  the  chocolate  that  melted
between  their ngers.  They would  encounter  the disabled  veterans,
some missing  an arm or a leg, others  installed  in little carts with
bicycle  wheels.  There  were  no  disgured  or  blind  men,  only
cripples;  they were neatly  dressed,  often wearing  a  medal,  the sleeve
of  the  shirt  or  jacket,  or  the  pantsleg,  carefully  taken  up  and
fastened  with a safety  pin around  the invisible  stump,  and it was not
gruesome,  there were so many of them. Once past the surprise  of the

rst  day, the children  looked  on them as they did on everything  new
they discovered  and immedia tely incorporated  into their view of the
world.  Mme. Marlon  had explained  to them that these men had lost
an arm or a leg in the war, and as it happened  that the war was part
of  their  universe  and  they  heard  about  it  all  the  time,  it  had
inuenced  so many things  around  them that they had no diculty
understanding  that you could lose an arm or a leg to it, and even
that it could be dened  as a time of life when legs and arms were
lost. That was why this world  of cripples  was in no way sad for the
children.  Some  of  the  men  were  closemouthed  and  somber,  it  is
true,  but  most  were  young,   smiling,  and  even  joked  about  their
disability.  “I only have one leg,” one of them would  say—he  was
blond,  with a strong  square  face, and radiantly  healthy;  they often
saw him prowling  around  the laundry—“but  I can still give you a
kick in the ass,” he would  tell the children.  And, leaning  on the cane
in his right hand with his left hand on the parapet  of the arcade,  he
would  pull himself  erect and swing  his one foot in their direction.
The children laughed  with him, then ed  as fast as they could.  It
seemed  normal  to them that they were the only ones who could run
or  use  both  arms.  On  just  one  occasion  the  thought  occurred  to
Jacques,  who had sprained  his ankle playing  soccer  and was limping
for a few days, that the Thursday cripples  would  for all their lives be
unable,  as he  was now, to run and catch a moving  trolley,  or kick a
ball. Suddenly  he was struck  by the miraculous  nature  of the body’s
mechanics,  along with an unreasoning  fear at the idea that he too
might be mutilated, and then he forgot about it.
* They  would wander  alongside  the dining  halls with their shutters
half closed,  the big tables  entirely  surfaced  with zinc glowing  faintly
in the shade,  then the kitchens  with their huge containers,  caldrons,
and casseroles,  from which  a persistent  smell of meat scraps drifted.
In the last wing they saw bedrooms  with two or three beds covered
with gray blankets, and blond-wood  closets.  Then they went down
an outside stairs to the garden.
The soldiers’  home was surrounded  by a big park that was almost
entirely  neglected. A few residents  had taken on the task of caring
for some clumps  of rosebushes  and ower  beds around  the building,

not to mention  a small vegetable  garden  enclosed  by big hedges  of
dry reeds.  But beyond  that the park, which  had once been superb,
had gone back to nature.  Huge eucalyptuses,  royal palms,  coconut
d palms,  rubber  trees  with great trunks  and low branches  that took
root farther  o,   thus making  a labyrinth  of vegetation  full of shade
and secrets,  thick solid cypresses,  vigorous  orange  trees, clumps  of
extraordinarily  tall pink and white laurels—all  these overshadowed
the secluded  paths where  clay had swallowed  the gravel;  nibbling  at
the  paths’  edges  were  odorous  tangles  of  syringas,  jasmines,
clematis,  passionowers,  bushes  of honeysuckles,  and they in turn
were  invaded  at  ground  level  by  an  energetic  carpet  of  clover,
oxalis,  and wild grasses.  To wander in this fragrant  jungle,  to crawl
in it, to snuggle  your face in the grass,  to cut a passage  through
grown-over  paths with a knife and come out with mud streaked  legs
and water all over your face—this was rapture.
But the manufacture  of frightful  poisons  also took up a large part
of the afternoon.  Under  an old stone bench  that backed  on a section
of wall, the children  had piled up a whole  assortment  of tin aspirin
tubes,  medicine  jars, old inkwells,  fragments  of dishes,  and chipped
cups that constituted  their laboratory.  There,  hidden  in the densest
part  of  the  park,  away  from  all  eyes,  they  would  prepare  their
mysterious  potions.  Their base was oleander,  simply  because  they
had often heard it said around  them that its shadow  was deadly  and
that anyone so imprudent  as to go to sleep at the foot of an oleander
would  never  awaken.  So  they  ground  up  oleander  leaves,  and
owers  in season,  between  two stones,  to make an evil (unhealthy)
pulp, the mere sight of which promised  a terrible  death.  This pulp
was left in the open air, where it immediately  took on colors  of
particularly  frightening  iridescence.  During  this  time,  one  of  the
children  would run to ll  an old bottle  with water.  Now it was the
turn of the cypress cones to be ground  up. The children  were sure of
their  malevolence  for  the  unsure  reason  that  the  cypress  is  the
cemetery  tree. But the fruits were collected  from the tree, not on the
ground  where  drying  out and hardening  gave them a distressingly
e healthy  appearance.  Next, the two mashes  were mixed  in an old
bowl  and  diluted  with  water,  then  ltered  throug h  a  dirty

handkerchief.  The children  handled  the liquid  thus obtained,  of an
alarming  green,  with all the care one would  exercise  with a virulent
poison.  They  carefully  decanted  the  liquid  into  aspirin  tubes  or
pharmaceutical  jars,  which  they  restoppered  while  prudently
avoiding  touching  the  contents.  They  mixed  what  was  left  with
various  mashes  of all the berries they could gather,  so as to make a
series  of more and more intense poisons,  carefully  numbered  and
put  away  under  the  stone  bench  until  the  next  week,  so  that
fermentation  would  make  them  denitively  deadly.  When  this
sinister  work was nished,  J. and P. would  gaze enraptured  at their
collection  of terrifying  ask s and sni    delightedly  the sharp  acid
smell  that  rose  from  the  stone  stained  with  green  mash.  These
poisons  were  not  actually  intended  for  anyone.  The  chemists
calculated  the  number  of  people  they  could  kill,  sometimes
optimistically  stretching  it  to  the  point  of  supposing   they  had
manufactured  a quantity  su cient to depopulate  the whole  city. Yet
they had never thought  that these magical  drugs might  rid them of a
classmate  or teacher  they detested.  But to tell the truth,  there was
no  one  they  hated,  which  would  greatly  hinder  them  when  they
were adults, in the world where they then had to live.
But  the  grandest  days  were  those  of  the  wind.  A  side  of  the
building  that faced the park ended  in what had  once been a terrace,
with its stone railing  now lying in the grass in front of the huge red-
tiled  cement  footing.  From  the  terrace,  open  on  three  sides,  you
looked  out over the park and, beyond  it, a ravine  that separated  the
Kouba  hill from one of the high plains  of the Sahel.  The terrace  was
so oriented  that on days when the east wind rose, always  violent  in
Algiers,  it would  whip straight across  it. On those days the children
would  dash to the closest  palms, where  long dried palm branches
were  always  lying  around.  They  scraped  the  ends  to  remove  the
thorns  and so they could hold on with both hands.  Then,  dragging
the branches  behind  them,  they ran to the terrace;  the wind blew
furiously,  whistling  through  the big eucalyptuses  that were wildly
waving  their top branches,  disheveling  the palms,  making a sound
of paper  crumpling  as it shook  the big shiny leaves  of the rubber
trees.  The  idea  was  to  climb  up  on  the  terrace,  lift  the  palm

branches  and turn their backs to the wind. The children  would  get a
good grip on the dry rustling  branches,  partly  shielding  them with
their bodies, then would  abruptly  turn around.  The branch  would
immediately  be plastered  against  them, they would  breathe its smell
of dust and straw.  The game was to advance  into the wind while
lifting  the branch  higher  and higher.  The winner  was the one who
rst  reached  the end of the terrace  without  letting  the wind tear the
branch  from his hands,  then he would  stand erect holding the palm
branch  at arm’s length,  one leg extended  with all his weight  on it,
struggling  victoriously  for  as  long  as  possible  against  the  raging
force of the wind. There,  standing  erect over the park and the plain
seething  with trees,  under  the sky crossed  by huge clouds  traveling
at full speed, Jacques  could feel the wind from the farthest  ends of
the country coursing  down the length  of the branch  and down his
arms to ll  him with such a power  and an exultation  that he cried
out  endlessly,  until  his  arms  and  shoulders  gave  way  under  the
strain and he let go of the branch,  which  the storm instantly  carried
o   along with his cries. And that night lying in bed, worn out, in the
silence  of the room where  his mother  was lightly  sleeping , he could
still hear the howling  and the tumult  of the wind that he would  love
for all his life.
f Thursday  was also the day Jacques  and Pierre  would  go to the
public  library.  Jacques  had always devoured  any books  that came to
hand,  and  he  consumed  them  with  the  same  appetite  he  felt  for
living,  playing,  or dreaming.  But reading  enabled  him to escape  into
a  world  of  innocence  where  wealth  and  poverty  were  equally
interesting  because  both were utterly  unreal.  L’Intrépide , that series
of  thick  collections  of  illustrated  stories  that  he  and  his  friends
passed  around  until the board binding  was gray and rough  and the
pages dog-eared  and torn, was the rst  to transport  him to a world
of comedy  or heroism  where his two basic appetites  for joy and for
courage  were  satised.  The  taste  for  heroism  and  panache  was
certainly  strong  in  the  two  boys,  judging  by  their  incredible
consumption  of  cloak-and-dagger  novels,  and  by  how  easily  they
added  the  characters  of  Pardaillan  to their everyday  lives. Indeed,
g their  favorite  writer  was  Michel  Zevaco,   and  the  Renaissance,

especially  in Italy, with its atmosphere  of stilettos  and poisons,  in
settings  of Roman  or Florentine  palaces  and royal or papal pomp,
was  the  favorite  kingdom  of  these  two  aristocrats,  who  could
sometimes  be seen in the yellow  dusty  street  where  Pierre  lived,
hurling  challenges  at  each  other  as  they  unsheathed  their  long
2 varnished  []   rulers  ghting  impetuous  duels  among  the  garbage
h cans that would  leave long-lasting  marks  on their ngers.  At the
time, they could hardly  nd  any other sort of books,  for the reason
that few people  read in that neighborhood  and all they could buy
for themselves—and  only rarely  at that—were  the cheap  volumes
lying around in the bookstores.
But about the same time they started  at the  lycée , a public library
was opened in the area, halfway between  the street where  Jacques
lived and the heights  where  the more rened  districts  began,  with
their villas surrounded  by little gardens  full of scented  plants  that
thrived  on the hot humid  slopes  of Algiers.  These  villas circled  the
grounds  of Sainte-Odile,  a religious  boarding  school  that took only
girls. It was in this neighborhood,  so near and yet so far from their
own, that Jacques  and Pierre  experienced  their deepest  emotions
(that it is not yet time to discuss,  that will be discussed,  etc.). The
frontier  betwee n these two worlds  (one dusty and treeless,  where  all
the space was devoted  to its residents  and the stone that sheltered
them,  the other where  owers  and trees supplied  this world’s  true
luxury)  was described  by a rather wide boulevard  with superb  plane
trees  planted  along  its  two  sidewalks.  Villas  stretched  along  one
bank of this frontier  and low-cost  buildings  along  the other.  The
public library was built on that border.
It  was  open  three  times  a  week,  including  Thursday,  in  the
evening  after work, and all morning  Thursday.  A quite unattractive-
looking  young  teacher,  who volunteered  several  hours  a week at
this library, would  be sitting  behind  a rather  large blond-wood  table
and was in charge  of books for loan. The room was square,  the walls
entirely  lled  with  blond  wood  bookcases  and  black  clothbound
books.  There  was also a small table with a few chairs  around it for
those who wanted  quickly  to refer to a dictionary,  for it was only a
lending  library,  and  an  alphabetical  card  catalogue  that  neither

Jacques  nor  Pierre  ever  looked  into,  their  method  consisting  of
wandering  along  the shelves,  choosing  a book by its title or, less
often,  by its author,  then making  note of its number  and writing  it
on the blue slip that you used to request  permission  to borrow  the
work.  To be entitled to borrow  books,  you just had to show a rent
receipt  and pay a minimal  fee. Then you received  a  folding  card
where  borrowed  books  were noted,  as well as in the book kept by
the young teacher.
Most of the books  in the library were novels,  but many were set
aside  and  forbidden  to  those  under  fteen.  And  the  children’s
strictly  intuitive  method  made  no real selection  among  the books
that remained.  But chance  is not the worst  method  in matters  of
culture,  and,  devouring  everything  indiscriminately,   the  two
gluttons  swallowed  the  best  at  the  same  time  as  the  worst,  not
caring  in any event whether  they remembered  anything,  and in fact
retaining  just about nothing,  except  a strange  and powerful  emotion
that, over the weeks,  the months,  and the years,  would  give birth to
and nurture  a whole  universe of images  and memories  that never
yielded  to the reality  of their daily lives, and that surely  was no less
immediate  to  these  eager  children  who  lived  their  dreams  as
i j intensely as they did their lives.  
Actually  the  contents  of  these  books  mattered  little.  What  did
matter  was  what  they  rst  felt  when  they  went  into  the  library,
where  they would see not the walls of black books  but multiplying
horizons  and expanses  that, as soon as they crossed  the doorstep,
would  take them away from the cramped  life of the neighborhood.
Then came the moment  when—each  of them provided  with the two
books  they  were  allowed,  holding  them  close  against  their  sides
with their elbows—they  slipped out  onto the boulevard,  dark by this
time; they squashed  underfoo t the fruits of the big plane trees while
calculating  the delights  they were going to extract  from their books,
comparing  them  already  with  those  of  the  previous  week,  until,
having  arrived  on the main street,  they would  rst  open them by the
uncertain  light of the rst  streetlight,  to pick out some phrase  (for
ex.: “his was a most uncommon  strength”)  that would  heighten  their
joyous  and avid hopes.  They would  part quickly  and dash to the

dining  room to open the book on the oilcloth  by the light of the
kerosene  lamp.  A strong  smell of glue rose from the crude binding
that also was rough to the touch.
The way the book was printed  would  give the reader  advance
notice  of the pleasure  he would  derive  from it. P. and J. did not like
books  set in large type with wide margins,  such as pleased  readers
of more rened  tastes,  but rather  pages set in small type stretching
all  the  way  across  tightly  justied  lines,  lled  to  the  brim  with
words  and sentences,  like those enormous  rustic dishes  you can eat
at long and heartily without  ever emptying  them,  and are all that
can satisfy  some gigantic  appetites.  They had no use for subtleties;
they  knew  nothing  and  wanted  to  know  everything.  It  mattered
little if the book was poorly  written  and crudely  printed,  as long as
the writing was clear and it was full of violent  activity;  those books,
and those alone,  would  feed their dreams,  and on that they could go
into a heavy sleep.
Moreover,  each book had its own smell according  to the paper on
which  it was printed,  always  delicate  and discreet,  but so distinct
that with his eyes closed  J.  could  have told a book in the Nelson
1 series  from one of the contemporary  editions  Fasquelle  was then
publishing.  And  each  of  those  odors,  even  before  he  had  begun
reading,  would  transport  Jacques  to another  world  full of promises
already  [kept],  that was beginning  even now to obscure  the room
where  he was, to blot out the neighborhood  itself and its noises,  the
city, and the whole  world,  which would  completely  vanish  as soon
as  he  began  reading  with  a  wild  exalted  intensity  that  would
transport  the  child  into  an  ecstasy  so  total  that  even  repeated
k commands  could not extract  him:  “Jacques, for the third time, set
the table.” Finally he would  set the table, his expression  empty  and
without  color, a bit staring,  as if drunk  on his reading,  and he would
return  to his book as if he had never  put it down.  “Jacques,  eat,”
and nally  he would  eat food that, heavy  as it was, seemed  less real
and less solid than what he found  in the books;  then he cleared  the
table and went back to his book. Sometimes  his mother  came to him
before  seating  herself  in her usual place.  “It’s the library,”  she would
say. She mispronounced  this word she had heard spoken  by her son

that  had  no  meaning  to  her,  but  she  recognized  the  jackets  of
l books.  “Yes,”  Jacques  said without  looking  up. Catherine  Cormery
leaned  over his shoulder.  She looked  at the double  rectangle  under
the light, the regular  rows  of the lines; she would  inhale  the odor,
and sometimes  she would  run her swollen  ngers,  wrinkled  by the
water  from doing  laundry,  across  the page, as if she were trying
better  to understand  what a book was, to come a little closer  to
these mysterious  signs, incomprehensible  to her, but where  her son
so often and for hours on end found  a life unknown  to her and from
which  he would  return  with such an expression,  looking  at her as if
she  were  a  stranger.  Her  gnarled  hand  gently  caressed  the  boy’s
head; he did not react; she sighed, then went and sat down,  far from
him. “Jacques,  go to bed.” The grandmother  repeated  the command.
“You’ll  be  late  tomorrow.”  Jacques  got  to  his  feet,  prepared  his
satchel  for the next day’s classes,  not letting  go of his book, which
he held in his armpit,  and then, like a drunkard,  he fell into a heavy
sleep, after slipping the book under his bolster.
So, for years,  Jacques’s  existence  was divided  unequally  into two
lives between  which  he was unable  to make any connection.  For
twelve  hours,  to the sound  of the drum,  in a society  of children  and
teachers,  amidst games  and study.  For two or three hours  of daily
life,  in  the  home  in  the  old  neighborhood,  close  to  his  mother,
whom  he  did  not  really  join  except  in  the  sleep  of  the  poor.
Although  the  earliest  part  of  his  life  was  this  neighborhood,  his
present  and even more his future  were at the  lycée . So that in a
sense the neighborhood  eventually blended  in with night,  with sleep
and with dreams.  Moreover,  did this neighborhood  even exist, and
was it not the desert  it became for the child one evening  when he
was unconscious?  He had fallen  on cement  ...  At the  lycée , in any
case, there was no one he could talk to about  his mother  and his
family.  In his family  no one he could  talk to about  the  lycée . No
friend,  no teacher  ever came to his home during  all the years before
he  received  his  baccalaureate.  And  as  for  his  mother  and
grandmother,  they  never  came  to  the  lycée ,  except  once  a  year,
when awards  were given,  at the beginning  of July. On that day, it is
true,  they  would  enter  by  the  monumental  door,  in  a  crowd  of

dressed-up  parents  and students.  The grandmother  put on the black
dress and scarf she wore for major  outings;  Catherine  Cormery wore
a hat adorned  with brown  net and black waxen  grapes, a brown
summer  dress, and the only pair of shoes with heels that she owned.
Jacques  wore  a  short-sleeved  white  shirt  with  an  open-necked
collar,  pants that were rst  short then long, but always  carefully
ironed  by  his  mother  on  the  previous  evening;  and,  walking
between  the two women,  he himself  led them to the red trolley,  at
about  one o’clock in the afternoon,  settled  them on a seat in the
motorcar  while  he  remained  standing  at  the  front,  looking  back
through  the glass partition  at his mother,  who smiled  at him from
time to time and throughout  the journey  checked  the angle of her
hat or whether  her stockings  were falling,  or the position  of the
small  golden  medal  of  the  Virgin  she  wore  at  the  end  of  a  thin
chain.  At the place du Gouvernement  began  the daily journey  along
the length of the rue Bab-Azoun,  which  he made just once in the
year with the two women.  Jacques  snied  the [lampero ] lotion  on
his mother,  which  she had liberally  applied  for the occasion,  the
grandmother  walking  erect and proud,  scolding  her daughter  when
she complained  about her feet (“That’ll  teach you to wear shoes too
small  for  you  at  your  age”),  while  Jacques  persisted  in  showing
them the stores  and shopke epers that had come to have such an
important  place in his life. At the  lycée , the monumental  door was
open,  potted  plants  adorned  the  monumental  stairs  from  top  to
bottom,  stairs that the rst  parents  and students  were beginning  to
climb,  the Cormerys  naturall y being far ahead  of time, as the poor
always  are, for they have few social  obligations  and pleasures,  and
m are afraid of not being punctual  for those few.  Then they arrived at
the older students’  courtyard , full of rows of chairs  rented  from a
rm  that staged dances  and concerts,  while at the far end, under  the
great clock,  the whole  width of the courtyard  was occupied  by a
platform  lled  with chairs  and armchairs;  it too was decorated,  and
profusely,  with green  plants.  Little by little the yard was lled  up
with light-colored  outts,  women  being  in the majority.  The rst
arrivals  chose  places  shelter ed from the sun, under  the trees. The
others  fanned  themselves  with Arab fans made of ne  plaited  straw

decorated  with red woolen  tassels  on their rims. Above  the audience
the blue of the sky congealed  and became  harder  and harder  as it
baked in the heat.
At  two  o’clock  a  military  orchestra,  out  of  sight  in  the  upper
arcade,  launched  into the “Marseillaise,”  all the spectators  rose to
their feet, and the teachers  entered  in their square  caps and long
gowns  trimmed  in colors  that diered  according  to their discipline,
led by the headmaster  and the ocial  personage  (usually a high-
ranking  bureaucrat  in the colonial  administration)  drafted  this year
for the occasion.  Another  military  march  covered  for the seating  of
the  teachers,  and  right  after  that  the  ocial  personage  took  the
podium  and gave his opinions  on France  in general  and education  in
particular.  Catherine  Cormery  listened  without  hearing,  but with no
sign of impatie nce or weariness.  The grandmother  could hear, but
did not understand  very much. “He speaks  well,”  she said to her
daughter,  who  assented  with  conviction.  This  encouraged  the
grandmother  to  turn  and  smile  at  her  neighbor  to  the  left,
conrming  with  a  nod  of  her  head  the  opinion  she  had  just
expressed.  The rst  year, Jacques  noticed  that his grandmother  was
the only person  wearing  the old Spanish  woman’s  black mantilla,
and he was embarrassed  by it. To tell the truth,  this false sense of
shame  had  never  left  him;  he  just  decided  he  could  do  nothing
about  it  after  he  timidly  ventured  to  mention  a  hat  to  his
grandmother  and she answered  that she had no money  to waste and
besides  the mantilla  kept her ears warm.  But when his grandmother
spoke to her neighbors  during  the awards  ceremony,  he felt himself
meanly  blushing.  After the ocial  personage,  the youngest  teacher
rose to speak;  he was usually  newly  arrived  that year from France
and was traditionally  entrusted  with delivering  the  formal  address.
The speech  could last from half an hour to an hour, and the young
academician  never  failed  to  stu    it  with  cultural  allusions  and
humanist  subtleties  that  made  it  utterly  unintelligible  to  this
Algerian  audience.  With the help of the heat, attention  agged,  and
the fans waved  faster.  Even the grandmother  showed  her lassitude
by  glancing  around.  Only  Catherine  Cormery,  attentive,  received
without  blinking  the rain of erudition  and wisdom  that was falling

† on  her without  interruption.  As to Jacques,  he was squirm ing; he
looked  around  for Pierre  and his other friends,  signaled  discreetly  to
them, and began  a long conversation  that consisted  of making  faces.
At last, vigorou s applause  thanked  the orator  for being kind enough
to conclude, and the announcement  of the awards  began.  First came
the upper  classes,  and, in the early years,  the two women  spent the
entire  afternoon  sitting  and waiting  for them to come to Jacques’s
class. The awards  for excelle nce were the only ones to be saluted
with a fanfare  of invisible  music. The winners,  who became  younger
and younger, rose, walked  the side of the courtyard,  went up on the
platform,  received  a handshake  sprinkled  with ne  words from the
ocial  personage,  then from the headmaster,  who presented  each
with his bundle  of books  (after getting  it from an attendant,  who
preceded  the award-winner  to the platform,  at the foot of which
rolling  carts full of books  had been stationed). Then, in the midst of
music  and applause,  the award-winner  came back down,  his books
under  his arm, radiant  and looking  around  for his happy  relatives,
who were wiping away their tears. The sky became  a little less blue,
losing  some of its heat through an invisible  cleft somewhere  over
the  sea.  The  prizewinners  went  up  and  returned,  one  fanfare
followed  another,  the courtyard  gradually  emptying  out, while the
sky began now to turn a greenish  hue, and they came to Jacques’s
class. As soon as his class was announced,  he stopped  fooling  around
and became serious.  At the sound  of his name,  he rose, his head
buzzing.  Behind  he  could  barely  hear  his  mother,  who  had  not
heard, saying: “Did he say Cormery?”
“Yes,”  said the grandmother,  her face ushed  with excitement.
The cement path he walked  along,  the platform,  the ocial’s  vest
with  his  watch  chain,  the  headmaster’s  good  smile,  sometimes  a
friendly  look from one of his teachers  in the crowd  on the platform;
then returning  accompanied  by the music  to the two women  who
were already standing  in the aisle, his mother  gazing  at him with a
sort of astonished  joy, and he gave her the thick list of awards  to
keep, his grandmother  with a look calling  her neighbors  to witness
—it  all  happened  too  fast  after  the  interminable  afternoon,  and

Jacques  was in a hurry  to go home  and look at the books  he had
n been given.
o They  usually  went  home  with  Pierre  and  his  mother,   the
grandmother  silently  compa ring  the  height  of  the  two  stacks  of
books.  At  home,  Jacques  took  the  award  list,  and,  at  his
grandmother’s  request,  turned  down the corners  of the pages where
his name appeared,  so she could show them to the neighbors  and
family.  Then  he  made  an  inventory  of  his  treasures.  He  had  not
nished  when  he  saw  his  mother  come  back—already  having
removed  her  dress—in  slippers,  buttoning  her  linen  blouse,  and
drawing  her chair toward  the window.  She smiled  at him. “You did
good work,”  she said, and she shook  her head as she gazed  at him.
He returned her gaze; he was waiting,  for what he did not know,
and she turned  to the street,  in the posture  that was familiar to him,
far away now from the  lycée  she would  not see for another year,
while shadows  invaded  the room and the rst  lights came on above
‡ the street,  where no one was passing by but faceless pedestrians.
But if his mother  was leaving forever  that  lycée  she had hardly
glimpsed,  Jacques  found  himself  suddenly  back  for  good  in  the
midst of his family and his neighborhood.
Vacations  also returned  Jacques  to his family,  at least in the rst
years.  No one in his home had a vacation;  the men worked  the year
round  without  respite.  Only an  accident  at work,  when they were
employed  by rms  that had insured  them against  such risks, could
give  them  any  time  o,   and  their  vacation  came  by  way  of  the
hospital  or the doctor.  For example,  Uncle Ernest,  one time when he
felt  worn  out,  had  “put  himself  on  insurance,”  as  he  said,  by
deliberately  shaving a thick slice of meat o   his palm with a plane.
As for the wives, and Catherine  Cormery,  they worked  without  a
break for the good reason  that a rest meant  poorer  meals  for all of
them.  Unemployment,  for which  there was no insurance  at all, was
the calamity  they most dreaded. That explained  why these workers,
in Pierre’s home as in Jacques’s, who in their daily lives were the
most  tolerant  of  men,  were  always  xenophobes  on  labor  issues,
accusing  in turn the Italians,  the Spaniards,  the Jews, the Arabs,  and
nally  the whole  world  of stealing  their work—an  attitude that is

certainly  disconcerting  to those intellectuals  who theorize  about the
proletariat,  and yet very human  and surely  excusable.  It was not for
mastery  of  the  earth  or  the  privileges  of  wealth  and  leisure  that
these  unexpected  nationalists  were  contending  against  other
nationalities;  it  was  for  the  privilege  of  servitude.  Work  in  this
neighborhood  was  not  a  virtue  but  a  necessity  that,  in  order  to
survive, led to death.
In any case, and no matter  how hard the Algerian  summer was,
while  overloaded  boats  took  bureaucrats  and  well-o  people  to
recuperate  in  the  good  “French  air”  (and  those  who  returned
brought  back fabulous  and unbelievable  descriptions  of lush elds
where  the water was owing  right in the middle  of August),  nothing
at all changed  in the lives of the poor neighborhoods,  and, far from
being half emptied, as were the downtown  districts,  their population
seemed  to increase  because  of the great numbers  of children pouring
p out into the streets.
For  Pierre  and  Jacques,  wandering  in  the  dry  streets,  wearing
espadrilles  with  holes,  cheap  pants,  and  skimpy  undershirts  with
round  necks,  vacation  meant above  all the hot season.  The last rains
fell in April,  or May at the latest. Over the weeks  and the months,
the sun, more and more intense,  hotter  and hotter,  had dried,  then
dried out, then roasted  the walls, had ground  plaster,  stone,  and tile
into a ne  dust that, blown  at random  by the wind, would  cover the
streets,  the store windows,  and the leaves  of all the trees. In July the
q entire  neighborhood  became  a sort of gray-and-yellow  labyrin th,
deserted  during the day, all the shutters  of all the houses  carefully
closed,  ruled  by  the  ferocio us  sun,  felling  dogs  and  cats  on  the
doorsteps  of buildings,  forcing  living beings  to hug the walls to stay
out of its reach. In August  the sun disappeared  behind  the thick
oakum  of a sky that was gray with heat, heavy  and humid, shedding
a  diuse,  whitish  light,  tiring  to  the  eyes,  which  erased  the  last
traces  of  color  from  the  streets.  In  the  coopers’  workshops,  the
sound  of  the  hammers  slackened,  and  the  workers  stopped
occasionally  to put their sweaty  heads  and chests  under  the cool
r stream  of water  from the pump.  In the apartm ents, the bottles  of
water and,  less often, wine were swaddled  in damp cloth. Jacques’s

grandmother  moved  around  the shady  rooms  barefooted,  wearing  a
plain  shift,  mechanically  shaking  her  straw  fan,  working  in  the
morning,  dragging  Jacques  to bed for the siesta,  then waiting for the
rst  cool of the evening  to go back to work.  Thus for weeks  the
summer  and those subject  to it would  crawl along under  the heavy,
sweaty,  and roasting  sky, until even the memory  of winter’s  cool
§ and its waters  was lost, as if the earth had never known  the wind,
nor the snow,  nor light waters, and from the Creation  to this day in
September  nothing  had  existed  but  this  enormous  desiccated
mineral  structure  tunneled  with  overheated  corridors  where
sweating  and dust-covered  beings,  a bit haggard,  eyes staring,  were
slowly  moving about.  And then, all at once, the sky contracted  until
it broke open under  the stress. The rst  rain of September,  violent
and abundant,  ooded  the city. All the streets  of the neighborhood
began  to gleam, along with the shiny leaves  of the cus  trees, the
overhead  wires,  and  the  trolley  rails.  Over  the  hills  that  looked
down on the city came the scent of damp  earth from more distant
elds,  bringing  a  message  of  open  space  and  freedom  to  the
prisoners  of the summer.  Then the children  dashed  into the streets,
running  through  the  rain  in  their  scanty  clothes  and  wallowing
happily  in the big frothing  streams  in the street,  making  a circle in
the big puddles  while  holding  each other’s  shoulders,  faces full of
shouts  and laughter  turned  up into the incessant  rain, trampling  out
this new vintage  in unison  so that it gave forth a gush of dirty water
more intoxicating than wine.
Oh yes, the hot season  was terrible,  and often it drove almost
everyone  crazy, nerves  more on edge day by day and without  the
strength  or energy  to react, to shout,  to insult  or strike  out, and
exasperation  accumulated,  like the heat itself, until, here and there
in the sad and untamed  neighborhood,  it exploded—lik e that day
when,  in the rue de Lyon, almost  at the border  of the Arab district
known  as the Marabout,  by the cemetery  cut into the red clay of the
hillside,  Jacques saw an Arab, dressed  in blue with his head shaved,
come out of a dusty Moorish  barbershop;  he took a few steps on the
sidewalk  in front of the child, in a strange  posture,  his body leaning
forward,  his head thrown  back farther  than seemed  possible,  and in

fact it was not possible.  The barber  had gone mad while  shaving
him, and with a single  blow of his long razor had cut the exposed
throat;  all  the  Arab  felt  from  the  smooth  slicing  was  the  blood
choking  him, and he went out, running  like a duck with its throat
poorly  cut,  while  the  barber,  immediately  subdued  by  other
customers,  was howling  horribly—like  the heat itself during  these
interminable days.
Then the water from the cataracts  of the sky would  roughly  scrub
the summer’s dust o   the trees, the roofs, the walls,  and the streets.
The muddy water  quickly  lled  the gutters,  gurgled  ercely  in the
drains,  would  in most years burst the sewer  lines themselves  and
ood  the streets, spraying  out before  cars and trolleys  like two very
streamlined  yellow  ns.  The sea itself  would  turn muddy  on the
beach  and in the port. The rst  sun after that would  make steam rise
from the buildings  and the streets,  from the whole  city. The heat
might  return,  but it no longer  ruled;  the sky was more open, it was
easier  to breathe,  and, through  the depth  of the sun, a vibration  in
the air, a promise  of water  heralded  autumn  and the start of the
s school  year.   “Summer’s  too  long,”  said  the  grandmother;  she
welcomed  with  the  same  sigh  of  relief  the  autumn  rain  and  the
departure  of Jacques,  whose  bored  stamping  around  the shuttered
rooms during the torrid days only added to her exasperation.
Besides,  she did not understa nd why a part of the year should be
specially  set aside for doing  nothing.  “As for me, I never  had any
vacation,”  she would  say, and it was true, she had never  known
either  school  or leisure  time; she had worked  as a child, and worked
without  respite . She could accept  that her grandson  would  not bring
home  any money  for a few years in return  for a greater  gain. But
from  the  rst  day,  she  had  been  brooding  over  those  three  lost
months,  and  when  Jacques   was  going  into  his  fourth  year,  she
judged  that it was time to put his vacation  to use. “You’re going to
work this summer,” she told him at the end of the school  year, “and
t bring home some money.  You can’t just stay here doing  nothing.”
Actually,  Jacques  thought  he  had  a  lot  to  do,  what  with  going
swimming,  the expeditions  to Kouba,  sports,  roaming  the streets  of
Belcourt,  reading  illustrated   stories,  popular  novels,  the  Vermot

u almanac,  and the Saint-Étienne  company’s  inexhaustible  catalogue.
Not including  errands  for the household  and small tasks imposed  on
him by his grandmother.  But, to her, all that amounte d to doing
nothing  at all, since the child was not bringing  home any money  nor
was he working  as he did during  the school  year, and in her eyes
this free ride was as glaring  as the res  of hell. The simplest  thing to
do was to nd him a job.
In  truth  it  was  not  so  simple.  Of  course  you  could  nd  help-
wanted  listings  for junior  clerks or errand  boys in the classied  ads
in the newspapers.  And Mme. Bertaut,  the dairywoman  whose  shop
alongside  the barbershop  smelled of butter  (unusual  to these noses
and  palates  accustomed  to  oil),  would  read  the  ads  to  the
grandmother.  But the employ ers always  required  applicants  to be at
least  fteen  years  old,  and  it  would  take  audacity  to  lie  about
Jacques’s  age, for he was not very big for thirteen.  Furthermore,  the
employers  always  hoped  for  employees  who  would  make  their
career  with them.  The rst  ones to whom  the grandmother  (rigged
out as she was for major  outings,  including  the infamous  mantilla)
oered  Jacque s found him too young  or else atly  refused  to hire an
employee for two months.
“You’ll just have to say you’ll stay,” the grandmother said.
“But that’s not true.”
“It doesn’t matter. They’ll believe you.”
That was not what Jacques  meant,  and actually  he did not worry
about whether  he would  be believed.  But it seemed  to him that this
sort of lie would  stick in his throat.  Of course  he had often lied at
home,  to avoid punishment,  to keep a two-franc  coin, and far more
often for the pleasure  of talking  or bragging.  But if to lie to his
family  seemed  a venial  sin, with strangers  it seemed  mortal.  In an
obscure  way he felt that you do not lie on essentials  to those you
love, because  then you could no longer  live with them or love them.
All the employers  could learn of him was what he told them, and so
they would not know him, the lie would  be absolute.  “Let’s go,” said
the  grandmother,  knotting  her  mantilla,  one  day  when  Mme.
Bertaut  told her a big hardware  store in the Agha district  wanted  a
young  ling  clerk. The hardware  store was on one of the slopes  that

led up to the central  districts; the mid-July  sun was roasting  the
street and intensifying  the smells  of urine and asphalt  that rose from
its surface. There was a narrow but very deep store at street level,
divided  the long way by a counter  displaying  samples  of iron parts
and  latches;  the  walls  were  largely  occupied  by  drawers  bearing
mysterious  labels.  To the right of the entrance,  a wrought-iron  grille
had been installed above  the counter  with a window  for the cashier.
The  soft,  day-dreaming  lady  behind  the  grille  asked  the
grandmother  to go up to the oce,  on the second  oor.  A wooden
stairway,  at the end of the store, did in fact lead to a big oce   laid
out and oriented  in  similar  fashion  to the store,  where  ve  or six
employees,  men  and  women,  were  seated  at  a  big  table  in  the
middle. A door on one side led to the manager’s oce.
The manager,  in his sweltering  oce,  was in shirtsleeves  with his
v collar  loosened.  A small window  at his back opened  on to a yard
where  the  sun  did  not  reach,  though  it  was  two  o’clock  in  the
afternoon.  He was short and fat, he hitched  his thumbs  in his wide
sky-blue  suspenders,  and  he  was  short  of  breath.  You  could  not
clearly  see the face, from which  came a low breathless  voice inviting
the grandmother  to be seated.  Jacques  inhaled  the odor of iron that
permeated  the  whole  building.  It  seemed  to  Jacques  that  the
manager’s  motionless  stance  meant  he was suspicious,  and he felt
his  legs  tremble  at  the  thought  of  the  lies  they  would  tell  this
powerful,  fearsome  man.  As  for  the  grandmother,  she  did  not
tremble.  Jacques  was going to be fteen,  he had to nd  a position
and start without  delay.  According  to the manager,  he didn’t  look
fteen,  but if he was intelligent  ... and by the way, did he have his
certicat  d’études?  No, he had a scholarship.  What scholarship?  For
the  lycée . So he was going  to the  lycée?  What class?  Fourth  year?
And he was leaving  the  lycée?  The manager was even more still, his
face could  be seen better  now, and his round  milky  eyes shifted
from the grandmother to the child. Jacques quaked under that gaze.
“Yes,” said the grandmother. “We’re too poor.”
The  manager  relaxed  imperceptibly.  “That’s  too  bad,”  he  said,
“because  he was gifted.  But there are good positions  to be achieved
in  business  also.”  The  good  position  started  modestly,  it  is  true.

Jacques  would  earn  150  francs  a  month  for  being  present  eight
hours a day. He could start the next day.
“You see,” said the grandmother. “He believed us.”
“But how will I explain it to him when I leave?”
“Leave that to me.”
“All  right,”  the  child  said  submissively.  He  looked  up  at  the
summer  sky over their heads and thought  of the smell of iron, the
oce   full of shadows,  that he would  have to get up early tomorrow,
and that his vacation was over when it had barely begun.
For two years Jacques  worked  during  the summer.  First in the
hardware  store,  then  for  a  ship  broker.  Each  time  he  feared  the
1 approach of September 15th, the date he had to give notice.
It  was  really  over,  even  though  the  summer  was  the  same  as
before,  with its heat, its boredom.  But summer  had lost what used to
transgure  it, its sky, its open spaces,  its clamor.  Jacques  no longer
spent  his  days  in  the  untamed  poverty  of  his  neighborhood,  but
downtown  where the cement  of the rich replaced  the rough casting
of the poor, giving  the houses  a more distinguished  and sadder  tone
of  gray.  At  eight  o’clock,  when  Jacques  entered  the  store  that
smelled  of iron and shade,  a light in him went out, the sky had
vanished.  He greeted  the cashier and climbed  up to the big poorly
lit  oce  on the second  oor.  There  was no room for him at the
main table. The old bookkeeper,  his moustache  stained  yellow  by
the hand-rolled  cigarettes  he sucked  on all day long; the assistant
bookkeeper,  a half-bald  man of about thirty with a bull-like  face and
chest;  two  younger  clerks,  one  of  whom,  thin,  brown-haired,
muscular,  with a handsome  straight  prole,  always  arrived with his
shirt wet and sticking  to his body, and gave o   a good smell of the
sea because  he went swimmi ng from the pier every morning before
burying  himself in the oc  e for the day, and the other,  fat and
laughing,  who could not restrain  his jovial vitality;  and lastly Mme.
Raslin,  the manager’s  secretary, a bit horsey  but quite pleasant  to
look  at  in  her  linen  or  duckcloth  dresses,  always  pink,  but  who
gazed  on the world  with a stern eye—these  were enough  to ll  up
the table with their les,  their account  books,  and their machine.  So
Jacques  was stationed  on a chair to the right of the manager’s door,

waiting  to be given  some work to do, which  usually  consisted  of
ling  invoices  or business  correspondence  in the card-index  le  on
either  side of the window—where  at rst  he liked to pull out the
sliding  drawer s, handle  the cards,  and sni    them,  until the smell of
paper  and glue, at rst  exquisite,  nally  became  the very odor of
boredom  for him; or else he was asked to go over a lengthy addition
once more,  and he did it in his lap, sitting  on his chair;  or else the
assistant  bookkeeper  would  ask  Jacques  to  “collate”  a  series  of
numbers  with him and, always  standing,  he would  carefully  check
the numbers that the assistant  read o,   in a doleful  low voice so as
not to disturb  his colleagues . From  the window  you could see the
street and the buildings  across it, but never the sky. Sometimes,  but
not often, Jacques was sent on an errand,  to get oce   supplies  from
the nearby  stationery  store or to the post oce   to send an urgent
money  order.  The  central  post  oce  was  located  two  hundred
meters  away,  on a broad  boulevard  that led from the port up to the
summits  of the hills on which the city was built. Jacques  would
rediscover  space and light on this boulevard.  The post oce  itself,
in  an  immense  rotunda,  was  lit  by  three  large  doors  and  light
w trickling  through  a  huge  cupola.   But  more  often,  unfortunately,
Jacques  was  made  to  post  the  mail  at  the  end  of  the  day,  after
leaving  the oce,  and then it was just more drudgery,  for he had to
run, at the time when the day was beginning  to fade, to a post oce
besieged  by a crowd  of customers,  get in line at the windows,  and
the  wait  made  his  workday  still  longer.  The  long  summer  was
practically  used up for Jacques in dark days without  sparkle and in
trivial  occupat ions. “You can’t go on without  doing  anything,”  his
grandmother  said. But it was precisely  in the oce   that Jacques  felt
he wasn’t  doing anything.  He was not unwilling  to work, though  for
him nothing could take the place of the sea or the games  of Kouba.
But to him real work consisted  of what was done at the cooperage,
for example—a  lengthy  physical  eort,  a series  of skillful,  precise
actions  by  hard,  quick-moving  hands—and  you  saw  the  result  of
your labor take shape:  a new barrel,  well nished,  without  a crack,
something the worker could contemplate.

But this oce   work came from nowhere  and led nowhere.  Selling
and  buying,  everything  turned  on  these  ordinary,  petty  actions.
Although  he had lived till then in poverty,  it was in this oce   that
Jacques  discovered  the mundane, and he wept for the light he had
lost. His co-workers were not the cause of the feeling  that he was
being smothered.  They were nice to him, they never rudely  ordered
him around, and even the stern Mme.  Raslin  sometimes  smiled  at
him. Among  themselves  they spoke  little, with that mix of jovial
heartiness  and  indierence  characteristic  of  Algerians.  When  the
manager  arrived,  a quarter-h our after them,  or when  he emerged
from his oce  to give an order or check  an invoice  (for serious
matters,  he  would  summon  the  old  bookkeeper  or  the  employee
involved  to his oce),  they would  better  reveal  their characters,  as
if these men and this Woman  could not express  themselve s except  in
their relations  with authority—the  old bookkeeper  discourteous  and
independent,  Mme. Raslin  lost in some austere  daydream,  and the
assistant  bookkeeper,  by contrast,  utterly  servile.  But, for the rest of
the day, they would  retreat  into their shells,  and Jacques  sat on his
chair waiting for the order that would  cause him to do some absurd
x hurrying about—what his grandmother called “work.”
When  he could stand it no longer,  when he was literally  boiling
over on his chair,  he would  go down to the yard behind  the store
and hide between  the cement  walls of the poorly  lit Turkish  toilet,
with its sour pervading  odor of urine.  In this dark place he would
close his eyes, and, breathin g the familiar  smell,  he would dream.
Something  obscure  was  stirring  in  him,  something  irrational,
something  in his blood  and in his nature.  At times he would  recall
the sight of Mme. Raslin’s  legs that day when,  having  knocked  over
a box of pins in front of her, he knelt to pick them up and, raising
his head, saw her parted  knees under her skirt and her thighs  in lace
underwear.  Till then he had never seen what a woman  wore under
her skirts, and this sudden  vision made his mouth  dry and caused
him to tremble  almost  uncontrollably.  A mystery  was being revealed
to him that, despite his many experiences, he would never resolve.
Twice  a  day,  at  noon  and  at  six  o’clock,  Jacques  would  dash
outside,  run  down  the  sloping  street,  and  jump  onto  a  packed

trolley,  lined with clusters  of passengers  on every  running  board,
which  was taking  workers  [back]  to their neighborhoods.  Squeezed
against  each other in the heavy  heat, they were silent,  the adults
and the child, looking  toward the home that was expecti ng them—
quiet, perspirin g, resigned  to this existence  divided  among  a soulless
job, long trips coming  and going in an uncomfortable  trolley, and at
the end an abrupt  sleep. On some evenings  it would  sadden  Jacques
to look at them.  Until then he had only known  the riches  and the
joys  of  poverty.  But  now  heat  and  boredom  and  fatigue  were
showing  him  their  curse,  the  curse  of  work  so  stupid  you  could
weep and so interminably  monotonous  that it made  the days too
long and, at the same time, life too short.
At the ship broker’s, summer  was more pleasant  because  the oce
looked  out on boulevard  Front-de-Mer  and especially  because  some
of his work was at the port. Jacques  actually  had to go on board the
ships of all nationalities  that put in at Algiers  and that the broker,  a
handsome  pink-cheeked  old man with curly hair, represented  to the
various  government  oces.  Jacques  brought  the ship’s papers  to the
oce,  where they were translated,  and, after a week, he himself  was
assigned  to translating  lists of supplies  and certain  bills of lading
when  they were written  in English  and addressed  to the customs
authorities  or  the  big  import  companies  that  took  delivery  of
merchandise.  So  Jacques  had  regularly  to  go  to  the  Agha
commercial  port to get those papers.  The heat ravaged  the streets
leading  down to the port. The heavy  cast-iron  ramps  alongside  them
were so burnin g hot that you could not touch them with your hand.
The sun created  a void on the huge piers, except  around  the ships
that had just moored,  side against the pier, where  the longshoremen
were busying themselves—men  dressed  in blue pants rolled  to mid-
calf,  with  bare  bronzed  torsos,  and  on  their  heads  a  cloth  that
covered  their shoulders  and back to the waist,  on which  they loaded
sacks of cement  or coal or sharp-edged  packages.  They came and
went on the gangplank  that sloped  down from the deck to the pier,
or else they entered  straight  into the belly of the freighter  by the
wide  open  door  of  the  hold,  walking  rapidly  across  a  beam  laid
between  the hold and the pier. Beyond  the smell of sun and dust

rising from the piers and that of the overheated  decks where the tar
was  melting  and  all  the  xtures  were  roasting,  Jacques  could
recognize  the particular  odor of each freighter.  Those  from Norway
smelled  of wood,  those from Dakar  or the Brazilian  ships brought
with them the scent of coee  and spices,  the Germans  smelled  of oil,
the English  of iron. Jacques  would  climb  up the gangplank,  show
the broker’s card to a sailor,  who did not understand  it. Then he was
led through passageways  where even the shade was hot to the cabin
y of an ocer  or sometimes  the captain.  Along the way he would
cast covetous glances  at those narrow  bare cabins  where  the essence
of  masculine  life  was  concentrated,  and  that  he  was  coming  to
prefer  that  to  the  most  luxurious  of  quarters.  They  greeted  him
kindly  because  he  himself  smiled  pleasantly,  and  he  liked  these
men’s rough  faces, the appearance that a certain  kind of solitary  life
gave them all, and he let them see his liking  for them.  Sometimes
one of them spoke a little French  and would  question  him. Then, in
good spirits,  he went back to the aming  pier, the burning ramps,
and work in the oce.  It was just that running  these errands  in the
heat  exhausted  him;  he  slept  heavily,  and  September  found  him
thinner and dgety.
He was relieved  at the approach  of the days when he would spend
twelve  hours at the  lycée , at the same time  that he was increasingly
embarrassed  at having  to inform the oce   that he was leaving.  The
hardware  store was the hardest. He would  cravenly  have preferred
that he not go to the oce   and that his grandmother  go and give
whatever  explanation.  But  the  grandmother  thought  it  was  easy
enough  to skip the formalitie s: all he had to do was collect  his pay
and never go back, with no further  explanation.  Jacques,  who would
have found  it quite natural  to send his grandmother  to endure  the
manager’s  thunder—and  in a sense it is true she was responsible  for
the situation  and the lie it entailed—was  nonetheless  indignant  at
the  idea  of  this  evasion,  without  being  able  to  explain  why;  in
addition,  he found  the clinching argument:  “But the boss will send
someone here.”
“That’s  true,”  the grandmoth er said. “Well  then, you’ll  just have
to  tell  him  you’re  going  to  work  at  your  uncle’s.”  Jacques  was

already  leaving  with damnation  in his heart when his grandmother
told him: “And above all collect your pay rst. Then talk to him.”
That evening  the manager  called each employee  to his lair to give
him  his  pay.  “Here,  kid,”  he  said  to  Jacques,  oerin g  him  his
envelope.  Jacques  was  reaching  out  a  hesitant  hand  when  the
manager  smiled  at him. “You’re  doing very well, you know. You can
tell  your  parents  that.”  Jacques  was  already  speaking,  saying  he
would  not be coming  back. The manager  looked  at him, amazed,  his
hand still outstretched  to him. “Why?”  He had to lie, and the lie
would  not come out. Jacques  remained  silent,  and with so woeful  an
air that the manager understood. “You’re going back to the  lycée? ”
“Yes,”  said Jacques,  and in the midst  of his fear and distress  a
sudden  feeling  of  relief  brought  tears  to  his  eyes.  Furious,  the
manager  got to his feet. “And you knew it when you came here. And
your grandmot her knew it too.” Jacques  could only say yes with a
nod. Vocal thunderclaps  lle d the room:  they were dishonest,  and
he, the manager,  hated  dishonesty.  Did he know  that he had the
right not to pay him, and he’d be pretty  foolish,  no he wouldn’t  pay
him, let his grandmother  come,  she’d get a warm receptio n all right,
if they’d  told him the truth,  he might  have hired him anyway,  but
oh! that lie—“he  can’t stay at the  lycée , we’re too poor”—and  he’d
let himself be had.
“It was because of that,” the bewildered Jacques suddenly said.
“Why because of that?”
“Because  we’re poor”;  then he was silent,  and it was the manager
who went on after looking  at him: “... that you did that, that you
made up that story?”  Jacques,  teeth clenched,  stared  at his feet. The
silence  was interminable.  Then the manager  took the envelope  from
the  table  and  held  it  out:  “Take  your  money.  Get  out,”  he  said
harshly.
“No,” said Jacques.
The  manager  stued  the  envelope  into  Jacques’s  pocket:  “Get
out.” In the street Jacques  was running,  and now he was crying  and
gripping  his collar  with both hands  to avoid  touching  the money
that was burning in his pocket.

To lie for the right to have no vacation,  to work far from the
summer  sky and the sea he so loved,  and to lie  again for the right to
return  to his work at the  lycée —this  injustice  made him desperately
unhappy.  For the worst of it was not the lies that after all he was
unable  to  utter,  ready  as  he  always  was  to  lie  for  pleasure  but
incapable  of  doing  so  out  of  necessity,  the  worst  of  it  was  the
delights  he had lost, the season’s  light and the time o   that had
been taken away from him, and now the year consisted  of nothing
but a series of hasty awakenings  and hurried  dismal  days. He had to
lose what was royal in his life of poverty,  the irreplaceable  riches
that he so greatly  and gluttonously  enjoyed,  to earn a little bit of
money  that would  not buy one-millionth  of those treasure s. And yet
he understood  that he had to do it, and there was even something  in
him that, at the very time he was most rebellious,  was proud  of
having  done it. For he had found  the sole compensation  for those
summers  sacri   ced to the misery of the lie on his rst  payday when
—entering  the  dining  room  where  his  grandmother  was  peeling
potatoes  that  she  then  tossed  in  a  basin  of  water;  Uncle  Ernest,
seated,  was  picking  eas  o   the  patient  Brillant  whom  he  held
between  his legs; and his mother,  who had just arrived,  was at the
buet  opening  a small bundle  of dirty laundry  she had been given to
wash—Jacques  had stepped  forward  and, without  a word, placed  on
the  table  the  100-franc  bill  and  the  large  coins  he  had  been
clutching  in  his  hand  all  the  way  home.  Without  a  word,  the
grandmother  pushed  a 20-franc  piece back toward  him and picked
up the rest. With her hand she touched  Catherine  Cormery on the
side to get her attention  and showed  her the money:  “That’s  your
son.”
“Yes,”  his mother  said, and her sorrowful  eyes briey  caressed  the
child.
The uncle nodded  while holding  on to Brillant,  who had thought
his ordeal was over. “Good, good,” he said. “You a man.”
Yes, he was a man, he had paid a bit of what he owed, and the
idea of having  diminished  the poverty  of this household  by a little
lled  him with that almost  wicked  pride that comes  to men when
they begin  to feel themselve s free and subject  to nothing.  And in

fact, when he entered  the fth-year  courtyard  at the start of the next
school  year, he was no longer the disoriented  child who four years
earlier  had  left  Belcourt  in  the  early  morning—unsteady  on  his
studded  shoes, anxious  at the thought  of the strange  world awaiting
him—and  his  expression  as  he  looked  at  his  classmates  had  lost
some  of  its  innocence.  Besides,  by  that  time  many  things  were
beginning  to pull him away from the child he had been. And if one
day he who till then had patiently  accepted  being  beaten  by his
grandmother  as  if  it  were  one  of  the  inevitable  obligations  of
childhood,  if he tore the leather  whip out of her hands,  suddenly
crazed,  in a furious  rage, so determined  to strike  that white  head
whose  bright  cold eyes were driving  him out of his mind that the
grandmother  understood  him—she  recoiled  and  went  to  close
herself  in her room,  sobbing  certainly  over the misfortune  of having
raised  unnatural  children  but already  knowing  she would  never beat
Jacques  again,  and in fact never  again  did she beat him—it  was
because  the child had indeed  died in this thin muscular  adolescent,
with his brush-cut  hair and his ery  expression,  this youth  who had
worked  all summer  to bring home wages,  who had just been named
rst-string  goalie  on the  lycée  team, and who, three days earlier,  had
had his rst faltering taste of a girl’s lips.
a . At the  lycée  it was called a  castagne  not a  donnade .
1 . The reference is to Jacques.
b . Is that its name?
c . the re.
*  the children
d . the other big trees.
e . put back in chronological order.
f . separate them from their environment.
g . Author of the  Pardaillan  stories— Trans .
2 . An illegible word.

h . Actually  they were ghting  over who would  be D’Artagnan  or Passepoil.  No one
wanted  to be Aramis  or Athos,  Porthos  if necessary.  [All characters  in Alexandre  Dumas’s
The Three Musketeers , except Passepoil, who is from  Le Bossu  by Paul Feval— Trans .]
i . Pages of Quillet’s dictionary, smell of the plates.
j .  Mademoiselle , Jack London, is that good?
1 . A series of classics— Trans .
k . to develop.
l . They made him (Uncle Ernest) a small desk of blond wood.
m . and those whom  fate has poorly  endowed cannot  help thinking  somewhere  inside
that they are responsible  and they feel they must not add to this general  culpability  by
any small failings ...
†  bouncing o
n .  Les Travailleurs de la mer . [By Victor Hugo— Trans .]
o . She had never  seen the  lycée  nor anything  of its daily life. She had attended  a
program arranged for the relatives. That was not the  lycée , it was ...
‡  the sidewalks.
p . above toys carousel useful presents.
q . wild
r . Sablettes? and other summer activities.
§  rains.
s .  in  the  lycée —subscription  card— renew  monthly —the  exhilaration  of  answering:
“Subscriber” and the triumphant verication.
t . the mother speaks up—He’ll be tired.
u . His reading earlier? the upper neighborhoods?
v . collar button, detachable collar.
1 . Passage circled by the author.
w . postal transactions?
x . Summer lessons after the baccalaureate—the stupeed head in front of him.
y . The longshoreman’s accident? See diary.

2 : A Mystery to Himself
Oh  yes,  that  was  how  it was,  the  life  of this  child  was  like  that:  that
was  how  life  was  in  the  neighborhood’s  island  of  pove rty,  bound
together  by  stark  necessity,  in an  ignorant  and  handicapped  family,
with  his  youthful  blood  boiling,  a  ravenous  appetite  for  life,  an
untamed  and  hungry  intelle ct,  and  all  the  while  an  ecstasy  of  joy
punctuated  by  the  sudden  counterpunches  inicted  by  a  world
unknown  to  him,  leaving  him  abashed  at  the  time,  but   he  would
quickly  recove r,  trying  to  understand,  to  learn,  to  assimilate  this
world  he did  not  know,  and  he  did  assimilate  it,  because  he  seized
upon  it so  avidly,  not  trying  to worm  his  way  in;  he  was  willing  to
go  along  but  would  not  abase  himself,  and  nally  he  was  never
without  a sure  condence,  yes  a certainty,  since  he  was  guaranteed
that  he  would  achieve  everything  he  desired  and  nothing  would
ever  be  impossible  for  him,  nothing  that  is of this  world  and  only  of
this  world;  he  was  preparing  himself  (and  was  prepared  also  by  the
bareness  of his  childhood)  to nd  his  place  anywhere,  bec ause  there
was  no  position  he  wanted,  but  only  joy,  and  free  spirits,  and
energy,  and  all  that  life  has  that  is good,  that  is mysterio us,  that  is
not  and  never  will  be  for  sale.  Preparing  himself  even  by  dint  of
poverty  to be  able  one  day  to receive  money  without  ever  seeking  it
or submitting  to it, to be  as he  was  now—he,  Jacques,  at age  forty,
holding  sway  over  so much  and  yet  so certain  that  he  was  less  than
the  leas t of people,  and  nothing  in any  case  next  to his  mother.  Yes,
that  was how  he  lived,  in tho se games  by  the  sea,  in the  wind,  in the
street,  under  the weight  of summer  and  the  heavy  rains  of the  brief
winter,  with  no  father,  with  no  heritage  handed  down,  but  nding  a
father  for  a  year,  just  when  he  needed  him,  and  learnin g  through
1 the  people  and  the  things  of  [],   thr ough  the  knowledge  that

revealed  itself  to him  to fashion  something  that  resembled  a style  of
behavior  (sucient  at  the  time  for  his  circumstances,  insucient
later  on when  confronting  the cancer  of the  world)  and  to create  his
own heritage.
But  was  that  all  there  was:  that  style,  those  games,  tha t  daring,
that  ardor,  the  family,  the  kerosene  lamp  and  the  dark  stairs,  the
palms  in  the  wind,  birth  and  baptism  in  the  sea,  and  nally  those
gloomy  laborio us  summers?  There  was  that,  oh  yes,  that  is  how  it
was,  but  there   was  also  the  secret  part  of  his  being,  something  in
him  that  through  all  those  years  had  been  blindly  stirring  like  those
measureless  waters  under  the  earth  which  from  the  depths  of rocky
labyrinths  hav e  never  seen  the  light  of  day  and  yet  dimly  reect  a
light,  come  from  who  knows  where,  drawn  perhaps  from  the
glowing  center  of the  earth  through  stone  capillaries  to the  black  air
of those  buried  caverns  in which  glutinous  and  [compacted]  plants
nd  food  enough  to live  where  any  life  seems  impossible . And  this
blind  stirring  in  him,  which  had  never  ceased,  which  he  still  felt
now,  a dark  r  e buried  in him like  one  of those  peat  res,  gone  out
at  the  surface  but  still  burning  inside,  making  the  outer  ssures  of
the  peat  move  in  rough  eddies  of  vegetation,  so  that  the  muddy
surface  moves  in the  same  rhythm  as the  peat  of the  bog,  and  these
dense  imperceptible  waves  would  cause,  day  after  day,  the  most
violent  and  the  most  terrible  of  his  desires,  as  well  as  his  most
barren  anxieties,  his  most  fruitful  nostalgia,  his  sudden  need  for
bareness  and  sobriety,  his  yearning  also  to  be  nobody—yes  this
mysterious  stir ring  through  all  those  years  was  well  matched  to this
immense  country  around  him;  as a small  child  he  had  felt  its  weight
and  tha t of the  immense  sea  before  him,  and  behind  him  the  endless
expanse  of  mountains,  plains,  and  desert  called  the  interior,  and
between  the  two  the  constant  danger  no  one  spoke  of  because  it
seemed  natura l;  but  Jacques  sensed  it  in  Birmandreis,  in  the  little
farmhouse  with  arched  ceilings  and  whitewashed  walls,  when  his
aunt  went  around  the  bedrooms  at  bedtime  to  make  sur e  the  huge
bolts  on the  thick,  solid  woo den  shutters  had  been  properly  closed,
this  was  the  very country  into  which  he  felt  he  had  been  tossed,  as if
he  were   the  rst  inhabitant,  or  the  rst  conqueror,  landing  where

the  law  of  the  jungle  still  prevailed,  where  justice  was  intended  to
punish  without  mercy  what  custom  had  failed  to  prevent— around
him  these  people,  alluring  yet  disturbing,  near  and  separate,  you
were  around  them  all  day  long,  and  sometimes  friendship  was  born,
or  camaraderie ,  and  at  evening  they  still  withdrew  to  their  closed
houses,  where  you  never  ent ered,  barricaded  also  with  their  women
you  never  saw,  or  if you  saw  them  on  the  street  you  did  not  know
who  they  were,  with  faces   half  veiled  and  their  bea utiful  eyes
sensual  and  soft  above  the  white  cloth,  and  they  were  so numerous
in  the  neighborhoods  where   they  were  concentrated,  so  many  of
them  that  by  their  sheer  numbers,  even  though  exhausted  and
submissive,  they  caused  an  invisible  menace  that  you  could  feel  in
the  air  some  evenings  on  the  streets  when  a  ght  would  break  out
between  a Frenchman  and  an  Arab,  just  as it might  have  broken  out
between  two  Frenchmen  or  two  Arabs,  but  it  was  not  viewed  the
same  way;  and  the  Arabs  of the  neighborhood,  wearing  their  faded
blue  overalls  or  their  wretched  cloaks,  would  slowly  approach,
coming  from  all  directions  in  a  continuous  movement,  until  this
steadily  agglu tinating  mass  by  the  mere  action  of  its  coalescing
would  without  violence  eject  the  few  Frenchmen  attracted  by
witnesses  to  the  ght,  and  the  Frenchman  who  was  ghting  would
in backing  up  nd  himself  suddenly  confronting  both  his  antagonist
and  a  crowd  of  somber  impenetrable  faces,  which  would  have
deprived  him  of what  courag e he  possessed  had  he  not  been  raised
in this  country  and  therefore  knew  that  only  with  courage  could  you
live  here;  and  so  he  would  face  up  to  the  threatening  crowd  that
nonetheless  was making  no  threat  except  by  its  presence  and  by  the
movement  it could  not  help  making,  and  mo st often  it was  they  who
took  hold  of  the  Arab  ghting  in  a  transport  of  rage  to  make  him
leave  before  the  arrival  of  the  police,  who  were  quickly  informed
and  quick  to  come,  and  who  without  debate  would  take   away  the
ghters,  manh andling  them  as they  passed  by  Jacques’s  windows  on
the  way  to the  police  station . “Poor  fellows,”  his  mother  would  say,
seeing  the  two  men  rmly  held  and  shoved  along  by  their  shoulders,
and  after  they  were  gone,  violence,  fear,  and  menace  prowled  the
street  in the  child’s  mind,  and  a nameless  dread  made  his  mouth  go

dry.  This  night  inside  him,   yes  these  tangled  hidden  roots  that
bound  him  to this  magnice nt and  frightening  land,  as much  to its
scorching  days  as  to  its  heartbreakingly  rapid  twilights,  and  that
was  like  a second  life,  truer  perhaps  than  the  everyday  surface  of his
outward  life;  its  history  would  be  told  as  a  series  of  obscure
yearnings  and  powerful  indescribable  sensations,  the  odor  of  the
schools,  of  the  neighborhood  stables,  of  laundry  on  his  mother’s
hands,  of  jasmine  and  honeysuckle  in  the  upper  neighborhoods,  of
the  pag es of the  dictionary  and  the  books  he  devoured,  and  the  sour
smell  of the  toilets  at home  and  at the  hardware  store,  the smell  of
the  big  cold  classrooms  wher e he  would  sometimes  go  alone  before
or  after   class,  the  warmth  of  his  favorite  classmates,  the  odor  of
warm  wool  and  feces  that  Didier  carried  around  with  him,  of  the
cologne  big  Marconi’s  mother  doused  him  with  so  profusely  that
Jacques,  sitting  on  the  bench  in class,  wanted  to move  still  closer  to
his  friend;  the  scent  of  the  lipstick  Pierre  swiped  from  one  of  his
aunts  and  that  several  of the m snied  together,  excited  and  uneasy,
like  dogs  that  enter  a house  where  there  has  been  a female  in heat,
imagining  tha t  this  was  what  a  woman  was,  this  sweet-smelling
chunk  of bergamot  and  cosm etic  cream  that,  in their  rough  world  of
a shouting,  sweating,  and  dust,  revealed  to them  a world  rened  and
delicate  and  inexpressibly  seductive,  from  which  even  the  foul
language  they  were  mouthing  all  together  over  the  lipstick  could  not
succeed  in protecting  them;  and,  since  earliest  childhood,  his  love  of
bodies,  of  their  beauty,  whi ch  made  him  laugh  with  bliss  on  the
beaches,  of  their  warmth  that  never  stopped  attracting  him,  with
nothing  particular  in  mind,  like  an  animal—it  was  not  to  possess
them,  which  he  did  not  know  how  to do,  but  just  to ente r into  their
radiance,  to  lean  his  shoul der  against  his  friend’s  with  a  great
sensation  of  condence  and  letting  go,  and  almost  to  faint  when  a
woman’s  hand  lingered  a moment  on  his  in the  crowd  of the  trolley
—the  longing,  yes,  to live,  to live  still  more,  to immerse  himself  in
the  gre atest  warmth  this  earth  could  give  him,  which  was  what  he
without  knowi ng  it hoped  for  from  his  mother;  he  did  not  get  it and
perhaps  did  not  dare  to get  it, but  he  found  it with  the  dog  Brillant
when  he  stretched  out  alongside  him  and  breathed  his  strong  smell

of  fur,  or  in  the  strongest  and  most  animal-like  odors  where  the
marvelous  heat  of  life  was  somehow  preserved  for  him  who  could
not do without it.
From  the  darkness  within  him  sprang  that  famished  ardor,  that
mad  passion  for living  which  had  always  been  part  of him  and  even
today  was  still  unchanged,  making  still  more  bitter—in  the  midst  of
the  family  he  had  redisco vered  and  facing  the  images  of  his
childhood—the  sudden  terrible  feeling  that  the  time  of  his  youth
was  slipping  away,  like  the  woman  he  had  loved,  oh  yes,  he  had
loved  her with  a great  love,  with  all  his  heart  and  his  bod y too,  yes,
with  her  it  was  a  fervent  desire,  and  when  he  withdrew  from  her
with  a  great  silent  cry  at  the  moment  of  orgasm  he  was  in
passionate  harmony  with  his  world,  and  he  had  loved  her  for  her
beauty  and  for  the  openhearted  and  despairing  passion  for  life  that
was  hers,  and  that  made  her  deny,  deny  that  time  could  pass,
though  she  knew  it  was  pass ing  at  that  very  moment,  not  wanting
people  to be  able  one  day  to say  she  was  still  young,  but rather  to
stay  young,  always  young;  she  burst  into  sobs  one  day  when,
laughing,  he  told  her  youth  was  passing  and  the  days  were  waning:
“Oh  no,  oh  no,”  she  said  through  her  tears,  “I’m  so  in  love  with
love,”  and,  intelligent  and  outstanding  in  so  many  ways,  perhaps
just  bec ause  she  truly  was  intelligent  and  outstanding,  she  rejected
the  world  as it was.  As  it had  been  those  days  when,  returning  after
a  brief  stay  in  the  foreign  country  where  she  was  born—those
funereal  visits,   those  aunts  about  whom  she  was  told:  “It’s  the  last
time  you’ll  see  them,”  and  actually  see  their  faces,  their  bodies,  their
ruins,  and  she  wanted  to  go  out  screaming;  or  else  those  family
dinners  on  a  tablecloth  embroidered  by  a  great-grandmother  who
was  long  since  dead  and  wh om  no  one  thought  about,  except  she
who  was  thinking  about  her  great-grandmother  when  she  was
young,  about  her  pleasures ,  about  her  appetite  for  living,  like
herself,  marvelously  beautiful  in  the  bloom  of  her  youth,  and
everyone  at the  table  was  paying  her  compliments,  and  on  the  wall
around  the  table  were  hangi ng  portraits  of beautiful  young  women
who  were  the  ones  who  were  complimenting  her  now  and  who  were
all  decrepit  and  worn  out.  Then,  her  blood  on  re,  she  wanted  to

ee,  ee  to  a  country  where   no  one  would  grow  old  or  die,  where
beauty  was  imperishable,  where  life  would  always  be  wild  and
radiant,  and  that  did  not  exist;  she  wept  in  his  arms  when  she
returned, and he loved her desperately.
And  he  too,  perhaps  more  than  she,  since  he  had  been  born  in a
land  without  forefathers  and  without  memory,  where  the
annihilation  of  those  who  preceded  him  was  still  more  nal  and
where  old age  nds  none  of the  solace  in melancholy  tha t it does  in
1 civilized  lands   [],   he,   like  a  solitary  and  ever-shining  blade  of  a
sword,  was  destined  to be  shattered  with  a single  blow  and  forever,
an  unalloyed  passion  for  life   confronting  utter  death;  today  he  felt
life,  youth,  people  slipping  away  from  him,  without  being  able  to
hold  on  to  any   of  them,  left   with  the  blind  hope  that  this  obscure
force  that  for  so many  years  had  raised  him  above  the  daily  routine,
nourished  him   unstintingly,  and  been  equal  to  the  mo st  dicult
circumstances—that,  as  it  had  with  endless  generosity  given  him
reason  to  live,  it  would  also  give  him  reason  to  grow  old  and  die
without rebellion.
1 . An illegible word.
a . add to the list
1 . An illegible word.

I n t e r l e a v e s
SHEET I
(4) On the ship. Siesta with child + war of 14.
(5) At his mother’s—the bombing.
(6) Journey to Mondovi—siesta—the settlement.
(7) At his mother’s.  Childhoo d continued—he  recaptures  childhood
and not his father. He learns he is the rst man. Madame Leca.
“When,  having  kissed  him two or three times with all her strength,
holding  him tight against  her, and after letting  him go, she looked  at
him and took him in her arms again to kiss him once more,  as if,
having  measured  her aecti  on to its fullness  (which  she had just
1 done),  she had decided  that one measure  was still missing  and.  And
then, right afterwards,  turned away,  she seemed  no longer to be
thinking  of him nor  for that matter  of anything,  and even sometimes
looked  at him with a strange  expression  as if now he were in the
way,  disturbing  the  empty,  closed,  conned  universe  where  she
circled.”
SHEET II
A settler wrote to a lawyer in 1869:

“For Algeria to survive  her doctors’  treatments  she has to be hard
to kill.”
Villages surrounded by moats or walls (and turrets at the 4 corners).
Of 600 settlers  sent in 1831, 150 died in the tents. Hence  the great
number of orphanages in Algeria.
In Boufarik,  they plow with a gun on their shoulder  and quinine  in
their pocket.  “He looks like Boufarik.”  19% died in 1839. Quinine  is
sold as a drink in the cafés.
Bugeaud  marries  o   his  soldier  settlers  in  Toulon  after  having
written  the mayor  of Toulon  to select  20 energetic  ancées.  These
were  “shotgun  weddings.”  But,  once  confronted  with  it,  they
exchange mates as best they can. It’s the birth of Fouka.
Communal  work  at  the  beginning.  These  are  military  collective
farms.
Settling  “by  region.”  Chéragas  was  settled  by  66  families  of
horticulturists from Grasse.
In most cases the town halls of Algeria  have no archives .
• • •
The people  from Mahon  landed  in small bands  with a trunk  and
their children.  Their word is their bond. Never  hire a Spaniard. They
created the wealth of the Algeria seaboard.
Birmandreis and the house of Bernarda.

The story of [Dr. Tonnac], the rst settler in Mitidja.
Cf. de Bandicorn,  Histoire de la colonisation de l’Algérie , p. 21.
Pirette’s history,  idem , pp. 50 and 51.
SHEET III
1 10—Saint-Brieuc
14—Malan
20—Childhood games
30—Algiers.  The father  and his death  (+ the bombing ) 42—The
family
69—M. Germain and the School
91—Mondovi—the settlement and the father  II
101— Lycée
140—Unknown to himself
2 145—The adolescent
SHEET IV
Also important  is the theme  of performing  for others.  What rescues
us from our worst  sorrows  is the feeling  of being  abandoned  and
alone,  yet not so alone that “others”  do not “take notice” of us in
our unhappine ss. It is in this sense that our moments  of happiness
are  sometimes  those  when  the  feeling  that  we  are  abandoned
inates  us and lifts us into an endless  sadness.  In the sense also that
happiness often is no more than self-pity for our unhappiness.
Striking  among  the poor—G od put resignation  alongside  despair
a like the cure alongside the disease.
When  I was young,  I asked  more of people  than they could give:
everlasting friendship, endless feeling.
Now  I  know  to  ask  less  of  them  than  they  can  give:  a
straightforward  companionship.  And their feelings,  their friendship,

their generous  actions  seem in my eyes to be wholly  miraculous:  a
consequence of grace alone.
Marie Viton: airplane
SHEET V
He was the prince  of the world,  with a crown  of shining  talent,  of
passions,  of strength,  of joy, and it was from all that that he was
coming  to beg her forgiveness,  she who had been a submissive  slave
to life and the passing  days, who knew  nothing,  desired nothing,
and  did  not  dare  to  desire,  and  who  nonetheless  had  preserved
intact  a  truth  he  had  lost  and  that  was  all  that  justied  our
existence.
Thursdays in Kouba
Practice, sports
Uncle
Baccalaureate
Illness
O mother, O love, dear child, greater  than my times,  greater  than
the history that subjected  you to itself,  more true than all I have
loved in this world,  O mother,  forgive  your son for having  ed  the
night of your truth.
The grandmother, a tyrant, but she serves standing up at the table.
The son who makes his mother respected and strikes at his uncle.
1 . The sentence ends there.
1 . The numbers correspond to the pages of the manuscript.
2 . The manuscript stops at page 144.

a . death of the grandmother.

The First Man (Notes and Sketches)
“Nothing  compares  to a life that is humble,  ignorant,
stubborn ...”
CLAUDEL ,  The Exchange
Or else
Conversation about terrorism:
Objectively she is responsible (answerable)
Change the adverb or I’ll hit you
What?
Don’t  take  what’s  most  asinine  from  the  West.  Don’t  say
objectively or I’ll hit you.
Why?
Did your mother  lie down in front of the Algiers-Oran  train?  (the
trolleybus)
I don’t understand.
The train blew up, four children died. Your mother  didn’t move.  If
* objectively  she  is  nonetheless  responsible,   then  you  approve  of
shooting hostages.
She didn’t know.
Neither did  she . Never say objectively again.
Concede that there are innocent people or I’ll kill you too.
You know I could do it.
Yes, I’ve seen you.
a Jean is the rst man.

Then  use  Pierre  as  a  reference  point  and  give  him  a  past,  a
country, a family, a morality (?)—Pierre—Didier?
Adolescent  loves on the beach—and  night falling  on the sea—and
nights of stars.
Meeting  the Arab in Saint-Étienne.  And this befriending  by the two
exiles in France.
Mobilization.  When my father  was called  to the colors,  he had never
seen France. He saw it and was killed.
(What a modest family like mine has given to France.)
Last conversation  with Saddok when J. is already  against  terrorism.
But he receives  Saddok,  the right of asylum  being  sacred.  At his
mother’s.  Their conversation  takes place in his mother’s  presence.  At
the end, “Look,”  said J., indicating  his mother.  Saddok  got up, went
to his mother,  hand on his heart, to kiss his mother  while bowing  in
the Arab manner.  “She is my mother,”  he said. “Mine  is dead. I love
and respect her as if she were my mother.”
(She fell because of a terrorist attack. She isn’t well.)
• • •
Or else:
Yes I hate you. For me honor  in the world  is found  among  the
oppressed,  not those who hold power.  And it is from that alone that
dishonor  arises.  When  just  once  in  history  an  oppress ed  person
understands ... then ...
Goodbye, said Saddok.
Stay, they’ll catch you.
That’s  better. Them I can hate, and I join them in hatred.  You’re
my brother and we’re separated ...

J. is on the balcony at night ... In the distance  they hear two shots
and speeding ...
What is it? said the mother.
It’s nothing.
Ah! I was afraid for you.
He falls against her ...
Then he is arrested for harboring.
They would send to be baked the two francs in the hole
The grandmother, her authority, her energy
He stole the change.
The sense of honor among Algerians.
Learning  justice and morality  means  to decide  whether  an emotion
is  good  or  bad  according  to  its  consequences.  J.  can  give  in  to
women—but if they take all his time ...
“I’ve lived too long, and acted and felt, to say this one is right and
that one wrong.  I’ve had enough  of living  according  to the image
others  show  me  of  myself.  I’m  resolved  on  autonomy,   I  demand
independence in interdependence.”
Would Pierre be the actor?
• • •
Jean’s father a teamster?
After Marie’s  illness,  Pierre  has an outburst  like Clamence  (I don’t
1 love anything ...), then it’s J. (or Grenier) who responds to the fall.

Contrast  the mother  and the universe  (the airplane,  the most distant
countries brought together).
2 Pierre a lawyer. And lawyer for Yveton.
“Men like us are good and proud  and strong  ... if we had a faith, a
God, nothing could undermine  us. But we had nothing,  we had to
learn everything, and living for honor alone has its weaknesses ...”
At the same time  it should  be the history  of the end of a world  ...
with regret for those years of light running through it ...
Philippe  Coulombel  and  the  big  farm  in  Tipasa.  Friendship  with
Jean. His death in a plane over the farm. They found  him with the
stick in his side, his face crushed  against  the instrumen t panel.  A
bloody pulp sprinkled with glass splinters.
Title:  The  Nomads.  Begin  with  a  move  and  end  with  evacuation
from Algerian soil.
• • •
Two  exaltations:  the  poor  woman  and  the  world  of  paganism
(intelligence and happiness).
Everyone  likes  Pierre.  J.’s  success  and  his  conceit  make  him
enemies.
Lynching scene: 4 Arabs thrown o the Kassour.
His mother  is  Christ.

Have others  speak  about  J., bring him on, show him, through  the
contradictory picture that together they paint of him.
Cultivated,  athletic,  debauched,  a loner and the best of friends,
spiteful, unfailingly dependable, etc., etc.
“He doesn’t  like anyone,”  “No one could be more noble in spirit,”
“cold and distant,”  “warm  and passionate,”  everyone  thinks  he’s an
energizer except he himself, always lying down.
Thus  expand  the personality.
When  he speaks:  “I began  to believe  in my innocence.  I was Tsar.
I reigned  over everything  and everyone,  at my disposal  (etc.). Then I
found  out I didn’t  have enough  heart truly to love and I thought  I
would  die  of  contempt  for  myself.  Then  I  recognized  that  others
don’t truly love either  and that I just had to accept  being like just
about everyone.
“Then  I decided  no, I would  blame  myself  alone  for not being
great enough  and be comfortable  in my hopelessness  until I was
given the opportunity to become great.
“In other words,  I’m waiting  for the time when I’ll be Tsar and
won’t enjoy it.”
• • •
Or else:
One cannot  live with truth—“knowingly”—,  he who does so sets
himself  apart from other men, he can no longer  in any way share
their illusion. He is an alien—and that is what I am.
Maxime  Rasteil:  the  ordeal  of  the  1848  settlers.  Mondovi—Insert
history of Mondovi?
1 Ex: 1) the grave the return  and the []  at Mondovi  1A) Mondovi  in
1848 → 1913.
His Spanish side sobriety and sensuality energy and  nada

J.: “No one can imagine  the pain I’ve suered  ... They honor  men
who do great things.  But they should  honor  even more those who, in
spite of what they are, have been able to restrain  themselves  from
committing the worst crimes. Yes, honor me.”
Conversation with the paratroop lieutenant:
“You talk too well. We’re  going to give you the third degree and
see if you’re still so smart.”
“All right, but rst  I want to warn you because  no doubt  you’ve
never encounte red any real men. Listen  carefully.  I am holding  you
responsible  for what’s  going to happen  in that third degree, as you
call it. If I don’t crack,  it doesn’t  matter.  I’ll just spit in your face in
public  on the day it becomes  possible  for me to do so. But if I crack
and if I get out  alive, and whether  it takes a year or twenty  years,  I
personally will kill you.”
a “Take good care of him,” said the lieutenant, “he’s a wise guy.”
J.’s friend  kills himself  “to make Europe  possible.”  To  make  Europe
requires a willing victim.
J. has four women  at the same time and thus is leading  an  empty
life.
C.S.:  when  the  soul  suers  too  much,  it  develops  a  taste  for
misfortune ...
1 Cf. History of the  Combat  movement.
Darling  who  dies  in  the  hospital  while  her  neighbor’s  radio  is
blaring nonsense.
—Heart  disease.  Living  on borrowed  time. “If I commit  suicide,  at
least it will be my choice.”

“You alone will know why I killed myself.  You know my principles.
I hate those who commit  suicide.  Because  of what they do  to others .
If you have to do it, you must disguise  it. Out of kindness.  Why am I
telling  you  this?  Because  you  love  misfortune.  It’s  a  present  I’m
giving you.  Bon appétit! ”
• • •
J.:  A  life  that  is  surging,  reborn,  a  multitude  of  people  and
experiences,  the capacity  for renewal  and [propulsion]  (Lope)—  The
end. She lifts her knotted  hands  to him and strokes  his face. “You,
you’re  the greatest  one.” There was so much love and adoration  in
her somber  eyes (under  the somewhat  worn brow)  that something  in
him—the  one who knew—rebelled  ... A moment  later he took her in
his arms. Since she, who saw more clearly,  loved  him, he had to
accept it, and to admit that to love he had to love himself a little ...
A Musil theme: the search  for salvation  of the soul in the modern
world—D: [meeting] and parting in  The Possessed .
Torture.  Executioner  by proxy. I could  never  get close to another
man—now we are side by side.
The Christian condition: pure feeling.
The book  must be  unnis  hed. Ex.: “And on the ship bringing  him
back to France ...”
Jealous,  he pretends  not to be and plays the man of the world. And
then he is no longer jealous.

At age 40, he realizes  he needs  someone  to show him the way and
to give him censure or praise: a father. Authority and not power.
X sees a terrorist  re  at ... He hears someone  running  after him in a
dark street,  stands  still, turns suddenly,  trips  him so he falls, the
revolver  drops.  He takes the weapon  and trains it on the man, then
realizes  he cannot  turn him in, takes him to a remote  street, makes
him run ahead of him and res.
The young actress in the camp: the blade of grass,  the rst  grass
amidst  the slag and that acute feeling  of happiness.  Miserable  and
joyful.  Later on she loves Jean—because  he is  pure . I? Those  who
arouse  love, even if it is disappointed,  are princes  who make the
world worthwhile.
28  Nov. 1885 : birth of Lucien  C. in Ouled-Fayet:  son of Baptiste  C.
(age 43) and Marie  Cormery  (age 33). Married  1909 (13 Nov.)  to
Mile. Catherine  Sintès  (born 5 Nov. 1882).  Died in Saint-Brieuc  11
Oct. 1914.
When he is 45, he discovers  by comparing  the dates that his brother
was born two months  after the wedding?  But the uncle who has just
described the ceremony speaks of a long slender dress ...
It is a doctor who delivers  the second  son in the new home where
the furniture is piled up.
She leaves  in  July 14  with the child swollen  with mosquito  bites
from the Seybouse.  August,  mobilization.  The husband  goes directly
to  his  [unit]  in  Algiers.  He  gets  out  one  night  to  kiss  his  two
children. They will not see him again till word of his death.

A settler  who, expelled,  destroys the vines,  lets in brackis h water ...
“If what we did here is a crime, it must be wiped out ...”
• • •
Maman  (about N.): the day you “graduated”—“when  they gave you
the bonus.”
Criklinski and ascetic love.
He  expresses  surprise  that  Marcelle,  who  has  just  become  his
mistress,  takes no interest  in her country’s  misfortune.  “Come,”  she
says.  She  opens  a  door:  her  nine-year-old  child—delivered  with
forceps  motor  nerves  smashed—paralyzed,  speechless,  left side of
the face  higher  than the right, must be fed, washed,  etc. He closes
the door.
He knows he has cancer,  but does not say he knows.  Others think
they are fooling him.
1st part: Algiers,  Mondovi.  And he meets an Arab who speaks  to him
of his father. His relations with Arab workers.
J. Douai: L’Écluse.
Beral’s death in the war.
How F. cries out in tears when she learns  of his aair   with Y.: “Me
too, I’m beautiful  also.”  And Y.’s cry: “Ah! Let someone  come and
carry me o.”

Later, long after the tragedy, F. and M. meet.
Christ did not set foot in Algeria.
The rs t letter he received  from her and his feeling  on seeing  his
own name in her handwriting.
• • •
Ideally,  if the book were written  to the mother,  from beginning  to
end—and  if one learned  only at the end that she cannot  read—yes,
that would be it.
And what he wanted  most in the world,  which  was for his mother  to
read everythin g that was his life and his being,  that was impossible.
His love, his only love, would be forever speechless.
Rescue  this  poor  family  from  the  fate  of  the  poor,  which  is  to
disappear from history without a trace. The Speechless Ones.
They were and they are greater than I.
Begin  with the night of the birth.  Chap.  I , then  chap. II : 35 years
later, a man would get o the train at Saint-Brieuc.
1 Gr,  whom  I acknowledge  as father,  was born where  my real father
died and was buried.
Pierre  with Marie. At the beginning  he could  not take her:  that is
why   he  came  to  love  her.  On  the  contrary,  J.  with  Jessica,
immediate  bliss. That is why it takes him time to really  love her—
her body conceals her.

The hearse on the high plains [Figari].
The  story  of  the  German  ocer  and  the  child:  nothing  makes  it
worth dying for him.
• • •
The pages of the Quillet dictionary: their smell, the plates.
1 The  odors  of  the  cooperage:  the  chip  that  smells  more  []   than
sawdust.
Jean, eternally unsatised.
He leaves home as an  adolescent  in order to  sleep alone .
Discovery of religion in Italy: through art.
End of  chap.  I : during  this time, Europe  was tuning  its cannons.
They  went  o   six  months  later.  The  mother  arrives  in  Algiers,
holding  a four-year-old  by the hand, another  child in her arms, this
one swollen  with bites from the Seybouse  mosquitoes.  They arrive  at
the grandmother’s,  three rooms  in a poor neighborhood.  “Mother,
thank  you for taking  us in.” The grandmother  erect, looking at her
with hard clear eyes: “Daughter, you’ll have to go to work.”
Maman : like an ignorant  Myshkin.  She does not know Christ’s  life,
except on the cross. Yet who is closer to it?
One morning,  in the courtyard  of a provincial  hotel,  waiting for M.
That feeling of happiness  he could never experience  except  in what

was  temporary,  illicit—which  by  the  fact  that  it  was  illicit
guaranteed  the happiness  could never last—infected  him most of the
time, except  the few times,  like now, when it appeared  in its pure
state, in the gentle light of morning,  among  dahlias  still shiny with
dew ...
• • •
Story of XX.
She  arrives,  pushes  her  way  in,  “I’m  free,”  etc.,  plays  the
emancipated  woman.  Then she gets in bed naked,  does everything
1 for ... a bad []  Unfortunate.
She leaves her husband—in  despair,  etc. The husband  writes  to
the other man: “You’re  responsible.  Go on seeing  her or she’ll kill
herself.”  Actually,  sure failure: infatuated  with the absolute,  and in
that case trying  to woo the impossible—so  she killed  herself.  The
husband  came.  “You know what brings  me here.”  “Yes.”  “All right,
it’s your choice,  I kill you or you kill me.” “No, it’s you who has to
bear the burden  of the choice.” “Go ahead  and kill.” Actually,  the
kind of predicament  that the victim  is really  not accountable  for.
But [no doubt]  she was responsible  for something  else she never
paid for. Foolishness.
XX. She has in her a disposition  toward  destruction  and death.  She
is [dedicated] to God.
A naturist: in an eternal state of suspicion about food, air, etc.
In occupied Germany:
Good evening,  herr ozer .
Good evening,  says J., closing  the door. He is surprised  at the tone
of his voice.  And he understands  that many conquerors  use that tone

only because they are embarrassed to be conquering and occupying.
J. wants not to be. What he does, loses his reputation, etc.
• • •
Character: Nicole Ladmiral.
The father’s “African sadness.”
End. Takes his son to Saint-Brieuc.  On the little square,  standing
facing  each other. How do you live? says the son. What? Yes, who
are  you,  etc.  (Happy)  he  feels  the  shadow  of  death  thickening
around him.
V.V. We men and women  of that time, of this city, in this country,
we embraced  each other,  rejected  and took each other back, and
nally  parted.  But through  all that time we never  stopped  helping
each  other  to  live,  with  that  marvelous  complicity  of  those  who
have to ght  and suer   together.  Ah! that is what love is—love  for
all.
At the age of 40, having  ordered  meat very rare in restaur ants all his
life, he realized he actually liked it medium and not at all rare.
Free  oneself  from  any  concern  with  art  and  form.  Regain  direct
contact,  withou t intermediary,  thus innocence.  To give up art here is
to  give up one’s self . Renouncing the self, not through  virtuousness.
On  the  contrary,  accept  one’s  hell.  One  who  wants  to  be  better
prefers  his self, one who wants  to enjoy prefers  his self. The only
one  who  renounces  his  self,  his  I,  is  one  who  accepts  whatever
happens  with its consequences. Then this one is in direct contact.

Regain  the greatness  of the Greeks or the great Russians  through
this distanced  innocence.  Do not fear. Fear nothing.  But who will
help me!
That  afternoon ,  on  the  road  from  Grasse  to  Cannes,  where  in  a
moment  of incredible  rapture  he discovers,  suddenly,  after  an aair
lasting  years,  that he loves Jessica, that at last he loves her, and that
the rest of the world becomes like a shadow beside her.
I was not in any of what I said or wrote.  It was not I who married,
not I who was a father, who ... etc ...
Many  documents  about  sending  foundlings  to settle in Algeria.  Yes.
All of us here.
The morning  trolley,  from Belcourt  to the place du Gouvernement.
In front, the motorman with his levers.
I am going to tell the story of an alien.
The story I am going to tell ...
Maman  and history: She is told about sputnik:  “Oh, I wouldn’t  like it
up there!”
Chapter  going  backwards .  Hostages  Kabyle  village.  Emasculated
soldier—roundup,  etc.,  step  by  step  to  the  rst  shot  red  in  the
settlement.  But  why  stop  there?  Cain  killed  Abel.  Problem  in
technique: a single chapter or in countermelody?
Rasteil: a settler with a thick moustache, graying sideburns.

His father:  a carpenter  from Faubourg  Saint-Denis;  his mother:  a
ne-linen laundress.
All  the  settlers  were  Parisian  anyway  (and  many  were  forty-
eighters).  Many  unemployed  in  Paris.  The  Constituent  had  voted
fty million to send a “colony”: For each settler:
a dwelling
2 to 10 hectares  seeds, cultures, etc.
food rations
No railroad  (it only went as far as Lyon).  From there canals— on
barges   hauled  by  draft  horses.  “Marseillaise,”  “Chant  du  Départ,”
benediction by the clergy, ag to take to Mondovi.
Six  barges  100  to  150  meters  each.  Cooped  up,  on  straw
mattresses.  The  women,  to  change  underwear,  undress  behind
bedsheets they hold up one after the other.
Almost a month journey.
1 In Marseilles,  at the big Lazaret  (1,500 people),  for a week. Then
loaded  on an old paddlewheeler:  the  Labrador . Leave in a mistral.
Five days and ve nights—everyone sick.
Bône—with  the  whole  population  on  the  dock  to  greet  the
settlers.
Things piled up in the hold that disappear.
From  Bône  to  Mondovi  (on  the  army’s  gun  carriages,  to  leave
room and air for the women  and children)  no road . By guesswork  in
the  swampy  plain  or  in  the  brush,  under  the  hostile  eyes  of  the
Arabs,  accompanied  by  the  howling  pack  of  Kabyle  dogs—
2 12/8/48.  Mondovi  did not exist, some military  tents. During  the
night  the  women  were  weeping—8  days  of  Algerian  rain  on  the
tents,  and  the  wadis  were  overowing.  The  children  relieved
themselves  in the tents. The carpenter  put up light shelters  draped
with sheets to protect  the furniture.  Hollow  reeds cut on the banks
of the Seybouse so the children could urinate from the inside out.
Four months  in the tents , then temporary  wooden  huts; each double
hut had to lodge  six families .

Spring  49: untimely  hot season. They are roasting  in the huts.
Malaria  then  cholera.  8  to  10  deaths  a  day.  The  carpenter’s
daughter,  Augustine,  dies,  then  his  wife.  His  brother-in-law  also.
(They  bury them in a layer of tu.)   The doctors’  prescription:  dance
to heat the blood.
And they dance every night to a ddler between two burials.
The land grants  would  not be distributed  until 1851.  The father
dies. Rasine and Eugéne are left alone.
To  go  wash  their  laundry  in  a  tributary  of  the  Seybouse  they
needed an escort of soldiers.
Walls built + ditches  by the army. Cabins  and gardens,  they build
with their hands.
Five  or  six  lions  roar  around  the  village.  (Numidian  lion  with
black mane.) Jackals. Boars. Hyena. Panther.
Attacks  on  the  villages.  Theft  of  livestock.  Between  Bône  and
Mondovi,  a  wagon  bogs  down.  The  travelers  leave  to  get
reinforcements,  except  a pregnant  young  woman.  They nd  her with
her belly slit and breasts cut o.
The rst church: four clay walls, no chairs, a few benches.
The  rst  school:  a  shack  made  of  poles  and  branches.  Three
sisters.
The lands:  scattered  plots, they plow with a gun on their shoulder.
At night you go back to the village.
A column of 3,000  French  soldiers  passing  by raids the village
during the night.
June 51: uprising.  Hundreds  of cavalrymen  in burnooses  around
the  village.  Simulating  cannons  with  stovepipes  on  the  little
ramparts.
In actual  fact, the Parisians  in the elds;  many  went to the elds
wearing top hats and their wives with silk dresses.
Smoking  cigarettes  forbidden.  Only the covered  pipe was permitted.
(Because of res.)  • • •

The houses built in 54.
In the departm ent of Constantine,  2/3 of the settlers  died almost
without having laid a hand on a spade or plow.
1 Old settler cemetery, immense oblivion.
Maman . The truth is that, in spite of all my love, I had not been
able to live that life of blind patience,  without  words,  without plans.
I could not live her life of ignorance.  And I had traveled  far and
wide,  had  built,  had  created,  had  loved  people  and  abandoned
them. My days had been full to overowing—but  nothing  had lled
my heart like ...
He knew he was going to leave again,  make a mistake  again, forget
what he knew.  But actually  what he knew was that the truth of his
life was there in that room ... No doubt  he would  ee  that truth.
Who can live with his own truth?  But it is enough  to know  it is
there,  it is enough  to know it at last and that it feeds a secret  and
silent [fervor] in the self, in the face of death.
Maman ’s Christianity  at the end of her life. The poor, unfortunate,
2 ignorant woman []  show her sputnik? May the cross sustain her!
In 72, when the paternal branch settled, it was following:
—the Commune,
—the Arab uprising  of 71 (the rst  one killed  in Mitidja was a
teacher).
The Alsatians occupied the land of the  insurgents .
• • •
The measure of the era

1 The mother’s  ignorance  in countermelody  to all the []  of history
and the world.
Bir Hakeim: “it’s far” or “over there.”
Her religion is visual.  She knows  what she has seen without  being
able to interpret it. Jesus is suering, he dies, etc.
Woman warrior.
2 Write one’s []  in order to nd the truth.
1 ST PART: THE NOMADS
a (1)  Birth  during  the  move.  6  months  after  the  war.   The  child.
Algiers,  the  father  in  Zouave  uniform  wearing  a  straw  hat  going
over the top.
(2) 40 years later. The son facing  the father  in the Saint-Brieuc
cemetery. He returns to Algeria.
(3) Arrival in Algeria in time for the “events.” Look up.
Trip to Mondovi. He nds childhood and not the father.
b He learns he is the rst man.
2 ND PART: THE FIRST MAN
Adolescence: The punch
Sports and morality
The Man: (Political activity [Algeria], the Resistance)
3 RD PART: THE MOTHER
Loves
The kingdom:  the old playmate,  the old friend,  Pierre,  the old
1 teacher, and the story of his two enlistments The mother
In the last part, Jacques  explains to his mother  the Arab question,
Creole  civilizat ion, the fate of the West. “Yes,”  she says, “yes.”  Then
full confession and the end.

There  was a mystery  about  this man, and a mystery  he wanted  to
clear up.
But at the end there was nothing  but the mystery  of poverty  that
creates people without a name and without a past.
Youth  at the beaches.  After days full of shouting,  of sunlight,  of
strenuous  activity, of dull or intense  desire.  Night falls on the sea. A
swift cries high in the sky. And anguish seizes his heart.
2 Finally  he takes Empedocles  as his model.  The []  philosopher who
lives alone.
• • •
I want to write the story of a pair joined  by the same blood  and
every kind of dierence.  She similar  to the best this world  has, and
he quietly  abominable.  He thrown  into all the follies  of our time;
she passing through  the same history  as if it were that of any time.
She silent most of the time, with only a few words  at her disposal  to
express  herself;  he  constantly  talking  and  unable  to  nd   in
thousands  of words  what she could  say with a single  one of her
silences ... Mother and son.
Freedom to use any style.
Jacques,  who until then had felt himself  at one with all victims,  now
recognizes  that  he  is  at  one  with  the  executioners.  His  sorrow.
Denition.
You would  have to live as an onlooker  to your own life. To add to it
the dream  that would  complete it. But we live, and others  dream
your life.

He  looked  at  her.  Everything  had  come  to  a  standstill,  and  time
passed  with a sputter.  As at the movies  when,  the picture  having
vanished  through  some  malfunction,  you  hear  nothing  in  the
darkness  of the hall except  the sound  of the machinery  going on ...
with an empty screen.
The  jasmine  necklaces  sold  by  the  Arabs.  The  scented  string  of
1 1 yellow  and white  owers  [].  The necklace s quickly  fade  []  the
2 owers turn yellow []  but the odor lingers, in the poor room.
Paris days in May when the white pods of the chestnut  owers  are
oating everywhere in the air.
He had loved his mother  and his child, everything  that it was not up
to him to choose. And after all he, who had challenged  everything,
questioned  everything,  he  had  never  loved  anything  except  what
was inevitable.  The people  fate had imposed  on him, the world  as it
appeared  to  him,  everything  in  his  life  he  had  not  been  able  to
avoid,  his illness, his vocation,  fame or poverty—in  a word, his star.
For the rest, for everything  he had to choose,  he had made himself
love,  which  is  not  the  same  thing.  No  doubt  he  had  known  the
feeling  of wonderment,  passion,  and even moments  of tenderness.
But each moment had sent him on to other moments,  each person  to
others,  and he had loved nothing he had chosen,  except  what was
little by little imposed  on him by circumstance,  had lasted  as much
by accident as by intention,  and nally  became  necessary:  Jessica.
The heart, the heart above  all is not free. It is inevitability  and the
recognition  of  the  inevitable.  And  he,  in  truth,  had  never
wholeheartedly  loved other than the inevitable.  All that was left for
him was to love his own death.
a  Tomorrow,  six million  yellow  people,  billions  of yellow,  black,  and
dark-skinned  people  will pour onto the shore of  Europe  ... and at

best would [convert  her]. Then everything  that had been taught,  to
him and to those like him, also everything  he had learned,  on that
day the men of his race, all the values  he lived for, would  die of
uselessness.  Then  what  will  still  be  worthwhile?  His  mother’s
silence.  He laid down his arms before her .
M. at 19. He was 30 then, and they did not know each other.  He
realizes  we cannot  set the clock back, prevent  the loved one from
having  been,  and  done,  and  experienced,  we  possess  nothing  of
what we choose. For we would  have to choose  with the rst  cry at
birth, and we are born apart—except  from the mother.  We possess
only what is inevitable,  and we must return  to it and (see preceding
note) submit to it. And yet, what nostalgia and what regrets!
One must relinquish. No, learn to love what is imperfect.
To conclude, he asks his mother’s forgiveness—Why  you’ve  been a
good son—But  it is because  of all the rest she cannot  know or even
1 imagine  []  that she is the only one who can forgive  (?) Since I’ve
inverted it, show Jessica old  before  showing her young.
He  marries  M.  because  she  has  never  known  a  man  and  he  is
fascinated  by  that.  In  short,  he  marries  for  what  is  wanting  in
himself.  Then he will learn to love women  who have been used—
that is—to love the awful necessity of life.
A chapter on the war of 14. Incubator  of our era. As seen by the
mother?  Who  knows  neither  France,  nor  Europe,  nor  the  world.
Who thinks shells explode of their own volition, etc.
Alternate  chapters  would  give the mother’s  voice.  Commenting  on
the same events but with her vocabulary of 400 words.

In  short,  I  wanted  to  speak  of  those  I  loved.  And  of  that  only.
Intense joy.
a  Saddok: (1) “But why get married that way, Saddok?”
“Should I marry the French way?”
“The French or any other way! Why subject  yourself  to a tradition
b you believe is foolish and cruel?”
“Because  my people  are identied   with this tradition,  they have
nothing  else, they stopped  there, and to part with that tradition  is to
part with them. That is why I will go into that room tomorrow,  and
I will strip a stranger  of her clothes,  and I will rape her to the sound
of gunshots.”
“All right. In the meantime, let’s go swimming.”
(2) “So what?”
“They  say that for the time being the anti-Fascist  front must be
consolidated, that France and Russia must join in self-defense.”
“Can’t  they  defend  themselv es  and  at  the  same  time  establish
justice at home?”
“They say that will come later, that we have to wait for that.”
“Justice can’t be delayed here, and you well know it.”
“They say if you don’t wait, objectively you’ll be aiding Fascism.”
“And  that’s  why  prison  is  the  right  place  for  your  former
comrades.”
“They say it’s too bad, but they can’t do otherwise.”
“They say, they say. And you say nothing.”
“I say nothing.”
He looked at him. It was beginning to get hot.
“So, you’re betraying me?”
He had not said: “you’re  betraying  us” because  betrayal  concerns
the esh, the single individual, etc ...
“No. I’m leaving the Party today ...”
(3) “Remember 1936.”

“I’m  not  a  terrorist  for  the  Communists.  I’m  one  against  the
French.”
“I’m French. She is too.”
“I know. Too bad for you.”
“So you are betraying me.”
Saddok’s eyes shone with a kind of fever.
If  I  nally  choose  chronological  order,  Madame  Jacques  or  the
doctor will be descendants of the rst settlers in Mondovi.
Let’s not feel sorry for ourselves,  said the doctor,  just imagine  our
rst ancestors here, etc ...
(4)—And  Jacques’s father  killed at the Marne.  What remains  of that
obscure  life? Nothing,  an impalpable  memory—the  light ash of a
buttery wing incinerated in a forest re.
...
The  two  Algerian  nationalisms.  Algeria 39 and 54 (rebellion).  What
becomes  of French  values  in an Algerian  sensibility,  that of the rst
man.  The  account  of  the  two  generations  explains  the  present
tragedy.
The holiday camp at Miliana,  the barracks’  trumpets  morning  and
evening.
Loves:  he would  have wanted  them all virgin,  with no past and no
men. And the only one he ever met who actually  was, he vowed  his
life to her but could not himself be faithful.  So he wanted  women  to
be what he himself  was not. And what he was sent him back to
women  who were like him and whom  he loved and possessed with
anger and passion.

Adolescence.  His drive to live, his faith in life. But he is spitting
blood.  So that is what life will be, a hospital,  death,  solitude,  this
absurdity.  Hence  the parting.  And in his very depths:  no, no, life is
something else.
Inspiration on the road from Cannes to Grasse ...
And he knew that even if he had to go back to that barren  cold
where  he had always  lived, he would  dedicate  his life, his heart,  the
gratitude  of his entire  being,  which  had enabled  him once, perhaps
only once, but once, to yield ...
Begin the last part with this scene:
The blind donkey  who for years patiently  turns his wheel in a
circle,  endurin g beatings,  the ferocity  of nature,  the sun, the ies,
still  enduring,  and  from  that  slow  circular  motion,  seemingly
fruitless, monotonous, painful, water endlessly ows ...
• • •
1 1905.  L.C.’s   war  in  Morocco.  But,  at  the  other  end  of  Europe,
Kaliayev.
The life of L.C. Entirely  involuntary,  except  his will to be and to
keep on. Orphanage.  Farm laborer  obliged  to marry  his wife. Thus
his life evolves despite him—and then the war kills him.
He  goes  to  see  Grenier:  “Men  like  me,  I’ve  conceded  it,  have  to
obey. They need a guiding  rule, etc. Religion,  love, etc.: impossible
for me. So I have decided  to vow obedience  to you.” What follows
(news).
After all, he does not know who his father  is. But who is he himself?
2nd Part.

The silent movie, reading the subtitles to the grandmother.
No, I am not a good son: a good son is one who stays put. I’ve
traveled  far and wide,  I’ve betrayed  her with trivialities,  fame,  a
hundred women.
“But, you loved no one but her?”
“Ah! I’ve loved no one but her?”
When,  by his father’s  grave,  he felt the time go out of joint—this
new course of time is that of the book.
He is a man of excess: women, etc.
So the [hyper] in him is punished. Then he knows.
• • •
The dread in Africa  when the sudden  twilight  falls on the sea or on
the high plateaus  or on the rough  mountains.  It is the dread  of the
sacred,  fear  of  eternity.  The  same  as  at  Delphi,  where  nightfall
produces  the same eect,  it makes  the temples  come forth. But on
the soil of Africa the temples  have been destroyed,  all that remains
is this immense  weight  on the heart.  Then how they die! In silence,
away from everything.
What they did not like in him was the Algerian.
His dealings  with money.  Owing  in part to poverty  (he never bought
anything  for himself),  and on the other hand to his arrogance:  he
never bargained.
Confession to his mother to conclude.

“You do not understand  me, and yet you are the only one who
can forgive  me. Plenty  of people oer   to do it. Many also shout in
all sorts of ways that I am guilty, and I am not guilty  when they tell
me I am. Others  have the right to say it to me, and I know they are
right  and  that  I  should  seek  their  forgiveness.  But  one  asks
forgiveness  of those one knows can forgive.  Just that, to forgive,  and
not to ask you to deserve  forgiveness,  to wait. [But] just to talk to
them, to tell them everything  and receive  their forgiveness.  The men
and women of whom  I could ask it, I know that somewhe re in their
hearts,  despite  their good intentions,  they neither  can nor do they
know how to forgive.  One person  alone could have forgiven me, but
I was never guilty  toward  him and I gave him my heart entire,  and
yet I could have gone to him, I often did so in silence,  but he is dead
and I am alone. You alone can do it, but you do not understand  me
and cannot read me. And I am speaking  to you, I  am writing, to you,
to you alone,  and when it is nished,  I will ask forgiveness  without
further explanation and you will smile on me ...”
Jacques,  at  the  time  of  the  escape  from  the  clandestine  editorial
oce,  kills a pursuer  (he grimaced,  staggered,  a bit bent forward.
Then Jacques  felt a terrible  fury rising in him: he hit him once more
from below in the [throat],  and a huge hole burst open immediately
at the base of the neck; then, crazed  with disgust  and anger, he hit
1 him  again  []   right  in  the  eyes  without  looking  where  he  was
striking ...) ... then he goes to Wanda’s.
The poor and ignorant  Berber  peasant.  The settler.  The soldier.
The White with no land. (He loves them,  those people,  not those
half-breeds  with pointed  yellow shoes and scarves  who have only
adopted the worst from the West.) The end.
Return  the land, the land that belongs  to no one. Return  the land
that is neither  to be sold nor to be bought  (yes and Christ  never set
foot  in  Algeria,  since  even  the  monks  owned  property   and  land
grants there).
And he cried out, looking at his mother, then the others:

“Return  the land. Give all the land to the poor, to those who have
nothing  and who are so poor that they never wanted  to have and to
possess,  to those in the country  who are like her, the immense  herd
of the wretche d, mostly  Arab and a few French,  and who live and
survive  here  through  stubbornness  and  endurance,  with  the  only
pride that is worth  anything  in the world,  that of the poor, give
them the  land as one gives what is sacred  to those who are sacred,
and then I, poor once more and forever,  cast into the worst of exiles
at the end of the earth,  I will smile and I will die happy,  knowing
that those I revered,  she whom  I revered,  are at last joined  to the
land I so loved under the sun where I was born.”
(Then  shall the great anonym ity become  fruitful  and envelop  me
also—I  shall return  to this land.) Revolt.  Cf.  Demain  in Algeria, p.
48, Sender.
Young  politica l commissars  in the F.L.N,  who took Tarzan  as their
pseudonym.
Yes, I command,  I kill, I live in the mountains,  under  the sun and
the rain. What do you oer me that’s better: laborer in Béthune.
And Saddok’s mother, cf. p. 115.
Confronting  ... in the oldest  story in the world  we are the rst  men
1 —not men on the wane as they shout in the []  newspaper but men
of a dierent and undened dawn.
Children  without  God  or  father,  the  masters  they  oered  us
horried us. We lived without legitimacy—Pride.
What they call the skepticism of the new generations—a lie.
Since when is an honest  man who refuses  to believe  the liar a
skeptic?
The nobility of the writer’s  occupation  lies in resisting  oppression,
thus in accepting isolation.

• • •
What  has  helped  me  bear  an  adverse  fate  will  perhap s  help  me
accept  an overly  favorable  outcome—and  what has most sustained
me was the great vision, the very great vision I have of art.
Except in [antiquity]
Writers started out in slavery.
1 They won their freedom—no question []
K.H.:  Everything  exaggerated  is  trivial.  But  Monsieur  K.H.  was
trivial before becoming exaggerated. He wanted to be both.
*  answerable
a . Cf.  Histoire de la colonisation .
1 . Clamence is the protagonist of Camus’s  The Fall—Trans .
2 . Communist  activist  who put explosives  in a factory.  Guillotined  during  the Algerian
war.
1 . Word illegible.
a . (he meets him again unarmed [and provokes] a duel).
1 .  Combat  was a Resistance newspaper of which Camus was editor— Trans .
1 . Grenier.
1 . An illegible word.
1 . An illegible word.
1 . hospital— Trans .
2 . Circled by the author.
1 . “immense oblivion” circled by the author.
2 . An illegible word.
1 . An illegible word.
2 . Two illegible words.
a . Mondovi in 48.

b . The settlers from Mahon in 1850—the Alsatians in 72-73—14.
1 . The author drew a box around this whole passage.
2 . An illegible word.
1 . Six illegible words.
1 . Two illegible words.
2 . Two illegible words.
a . he dreams it during his siesta:  1 . An illegible word.
a . All this in a [not-true-to-life] style that is lyrical and not exactly realistic.
b . The French  are right,  but their lightness  is oppressive  to us. And that is why I
choose Arab madness, the madness of the oppressed.
1 . Probably Lucien Camus, his father.
1 . Four illegible words.
1 . An illegible word.
1 . Four illegible words.

T w o   L e t t e r s
19 November 1957
Dear Monsieur  Germain,  I let the commotion  around  me these days
subside  a bit before  speaking  to you from the bottom  of my heart.  I
have just been given far too great an honor,  one I neither  sought  nor
solicited.  But when  I heard  the news,  my rst  thought,  after my
mother,  was of you. Without  you, without  the aectionate  hand you
extended  to the small poor child that I was, without  your teaching,
and your example,  none of all this would  have happen ed. I don’t
make too much  of this sort of honor.  But at least it gives me an
opportunity  to tell you what you have been and still are for me, and
to assure  you that your eorts,  your work,  and the generous  heart
you put into it still live in one of your little schoolboys  who, despite
the years, has never  stopped  being  your grateful  pupil.  I embrace
you with all my heart.
Albert Camus

Algiers, this 30th of April 1959
My dear child,
I have receive d, addressed  in your handwriting,  the book  Camus
that its author  Monsieur  J.-Cl. Brisville  was kind enough  to inscribe
to me.
I do not know how to express  the delight  you gave me with your
gracious  act nor how to thank you for it. If it were possible,  I would
give a great hug to the big boy you have become  who for me will
always be “my little Camus.”
I have not yet read this work, other than the rst  few pages. Who
is Camus?  I have the impression that those who try to penetrate
your  nature  do  not  quite  succeed.  You  have  always  shown  an
instinctive  reticence  about revealing  your nature,  your feelings.  You
succeed  all the more for being unaected,  direct.  And good on top
of that! I got these impressions  of you in class. The pedagogue  who
does his job conscientiously  overlooks  no opportunity  to know his
pupils,  his  children,  and  these  occur  all  the  time.  An  answer,  a
gesture,  a stance  are amply  revealing.  So I think I well know  the
nice little fellow  you were,  and very often the child contains  the
seed of the man he will become.  Your pleasure  at being in school
burst  out  all  over.  Your  face  showed  optimism.  And  I  never
suspected  the actual  situatio n of your family  from studying  you. I
only had a glimpse  when your mother  came to see me about your
being listed among the candidates  for the scholarship.  Anyway,  that
happened  when you were about  to leave me. But until then you
seemed  to me to be in the same position  as your classmates.  You
always  had what you needed.  Like your brother,  you were nicely
dressed.  I  don’t  think  I  can  nd  a  greater  compliment  to  your
mother.
To return to Monsieur  Brisville’s  book,  it is amply  illustrated.  It
was  very  moving  to  know,  from  his  photograph,  your  poor  papa

whom  I have always  considered  “my comrade.”  Monsieur  Brisville
was kind enough to quote me: I will thank him for it.
I saw the ever-lengthening  list of works  that are about  you or
speak of you. And it gives me very great satisfaction  to see that your
fame (this is the exact truth)  has not gone to your head. You have
remained Camus: bravo.
I have followed  with interes t the many  vicissitudes  of the play
you adapted  and also staged:  The  Possessed . I love you too much not
to  wish  you  the  greatest  success:  it  is  what  you  deserve.  What’s
more,  Malraux  wants  to provide  you with a theatre.  But ... can you
manage  all  these  various  activities?  I  fear  that  you  misuse  your
talents.  And, permit  your old friend  to point out, you have a nice
wife and two children  who need their husband  and  papa . On this
subject,  I am going to tell you what the head of our normal school
used to tell us now and then. He was very hard on us, which  kept us
from seeing,  from feeling,  that he  really  loved us. “Nature keeps  a
great  book  in  which  she  scrupulously  records  every  one  of  the
excesses  we  commit.”  I  must  say  that  this  wise  advice  has  often
restrained  me when  I was about  to disregard  it.  So listen, try to
leave a blank on the page reserved for you in nature’s Great Book.
Andrée  remind s  me  that  we  saw  and  heard  you  on  a  literary
program  on  television,  a  program  about  The  Po ssessed .  It  was
moving  to  see  you  answer  the  questions  that  were  asked.  And  I
could not keep myself  from making  the malicious  observ ation that
you well knew I would,  after all, see and hear you. That makes up a
bit for your absence  from Algiers.  We haven’t  seen you for quite a
while ...
Before  closing,  I want to tell you how troubled  I am, as a secular
teacher,  by the menacing  plots aimed  at our schools.  I believe  that
throughout  my career  I have respected  what is most sacred  in a
child:  the  right  to  seek  out  his  own  truth.  I  loved  you  all  and  I
believe  I did my best not to show my opinions  and thus to inuence
your  young  minds.  When  it  was  a  matter  of  God  (it  was  in  the
curriculum),  I said some believed, others  did not. And in the fullness
of his rights,  each did as he pleased.  Similarly,  on the subject  of
religion,  I limited  myself  to listing  the ones that existed , to which

those who so desired  belonged.  To be accurate,  I added  that there
were people  who practiced  no religion.  I am well aware this does
not please  those who would like to make teachers  fellow travelers
for  religion  and,  more  precisely,  for  the  Catholic   religion.  At  the
normal  school of Algiers  (it was then at the parc de Galland)  my
father,  like  his  classmates,  was  required   to  go  to  Mass  and  take
Communion  every  Sunday.  One  day,  exasperated  by  this
requirement,  he  put  the  “consecrated”  host  in  a  prayerbook  and
closed  it! The head of the school was informed  of this and did not
hesitate  to expel my father.  That is what the promoters  of the “Free
1 school”   (free  ...  to  think  as  they  do)  want.  With  the  current
membership  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  I  fear  this  plot  may
1 succeed.  Le  C anard  Enchâiné   reported  that  in  one  department  a
hundred  secular  schools  function  with  a  crucix  hanging  on  the
wall. I see in that an abominable  attack  on the children’s  minds.
What may it come to in time? These thoughts make me very sad.
My dear child, I am coming  to the end of my 4th page: I’m taking
advantage  of your time and I beg you to forgive  me. All goes well
here.  Christian,  my  son-in-law,  starts  his  27th  month  in  service
tomorrow!
Know that, even when I do not write, I often think of all of you.
Madame  Germain  and  I  warmly  embrace  all  four  of  you.
Aectionately.
Louis Germain
I remember  the time you came to visit our class with your fellow
communicants.  You  were  obviously  proud  of  the  suit  you  were
wearing  and  the  feast  day  you  were  observing.  Honestly,  I  was
happy  for your pleasure,  believing  that if you were making  your
Communion it was because you wanted to. So ...
1 . “Free” meaning  private,  usually  Catholic,  as opposed  to the secular  state school—
Trans .
1 . The satirical weekly— Trans .

A Note About the Translator
David  Hapgoo d  grew  up  in  New  York,  and  was  graduated  from
Swarthmore  College. He is the author  or coauthor  of several books,
including  The Murder  of Napoleon  and  Monte  Cassino . Mr. Hapgood
has translated  several  works  from the French,  including  My Father’s
House   by  Henri  Troyat  and  The  Totalitarian  Temptation   by  Jean
François  Revel,  for  which  he  won  the  Scott-Moncrie  translation
prize.

B o o k s   b y   A l b e r t   C a m u s
The Stranger (1946)
The Plague (1948)
The Rebel (1954)
The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays (1955)
The Fall (1957)
Exile and the Kingdom (1958)
Caligula and Three Other Plays (1958)
The Possessed (1960)
Resistance, Rebellion, and Death (1961)
Notebooks 1935–1942 (1963)
Notebooks 1942–1951 (1965)
Lyrical and Critical Essays (1968)
A Happy Death (1972)
The First Man (1995)

ALBERT CAMUS
A LBERT  C AMUS  was born in Algeria in 1913. He spent the early years of
his life in North Africa,  where  he became  a journalist,  and from
1935  to  1938  he  ran  the  Théâtre  de  l’Équipe,  a  company  that
produced  plays by Malraux,  Gide, Synge,  Dostoyevsky,  and others.
During  World  War II he was one of the leading  writers  of the French
Resistance  and  editor  of  Combat ,  an  underground  newspaper  he
helped  found.  His ction,  including  The  Stranger,  The  Plague,  The
Fall , and  Exile  and  the  Kingdom ; his philosophical  essays,  The  Myth  of
Sisyphus  and  The  Rebel ; and his plays have assured  his preeminent
position  in modern  letters.  In 1957,  Camus  was awarded  the Nobel
Prize for Literature.  Upon his untimely  death in a road accident  in
1960,  Jean-Paul  Sartre  wrote,  “Camus  could never cease to be one
of the principal  forces  in our cultural  domain,  nor to represent,  in
his own way, the history of France and this century.”

ALSO BY
Albert Camus
Winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature
THE FIRST MAN
In  The  First  Man  Albert Camus tells the story of Jacque s Cormery,  a boy who lived
a life much like Camus’ own. Camus  summons  up the sights,  sounds,  and textures
of a childhood  circumscribed  by poverty and a father’s  death yet redeemed  by the
austere  beauty  of  Algeria  and  the  boy’s  attachment  to  his  nearly  deaf-mute
mother.  The result is a moving  journey  through  the lost landscape  of youth  that
also  discloses  the  wellsprings  of  Camus’  aesthetic  powers  and  moral  vision.
Published  thirty-v e  years  after  its  discovery  amid  the  wreckage  of  the  car
accident  that killed its author,  The  First  Man  is the brilliant  consummation  of the
life and work of one of the twentieth century’s greatest novelists.
Fiction/Literature EXILE AND THE KINGDOM
From a variety  of masterfully  rendered  perspectives,  these six stories  depict  people
at painful  odds with the world  around  them. A wife can only surrender  to a desert
night by betraying  her husband.  An artist struggles  to honor  his own aspirations
as well as society’s  expectations  of him. A missionary  brutally  converted  to the
worship  of a tribal fetish is left with but an echo of his identity.  Whether  set in
North  Africa, Paris, or Brazil,  the stories  in  Exile  and  the  Kingdom  are probing
portraits  of spiritua l exile and man’s  perpetual  search  for an inner kingdom  in
which to be reborn. They display Camus at the height of his powers.
Fiction/Literature THE FALL
Mordant,  brilliant,  elegantly  styled,  The  Fall  is  a  novel  of  the  conscience  of
modern  man  in  the  face  of  evil.  In  a  seedy  bar  in  Amsterdam,  Clamenc e,  an
expatriate  Frenchman,  indulges  in a calculated  confession.  He recalls  his past life
as  a  respected  Parisian  lawyer,  a  champion  of  noble  causes,  and,  privately,  a
libertine—yet  one  apparently  immun e  to  judgment.  As  his  narrative  unfolds,
ambiguities  amass;  every  triumph  reveals  a  failure,  every  motive  a  hidden
treachery. The irony of his recital anticipates his downfall—and implicates us all.

Fiction/Literature A HAPPY DEATH
In his rst  novel,  A  Happy  Death , written when he was in his early twenties  and
retrieved  from his private  papers  following  his death in 1960,  Albert  Camus laid
the foundation for the  The  Strang er , focusing in both works on an Algerian  clerk
who kills a man in cold blood.  But he also revealed  himself  to an extent  that he
never  did in his later ction.  For if  A  Happy  Death  is the study of a rule-bound
being shattering  the fetters  of his existence,  it is also a remarkably  candid  portrait
of its author as a young man.
Fiction/Literature THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS AND OTHER ESSAYS
One of the most in uential  works  of this century,  The  Myth  of Sisyphus  and  Other
Essays  is a crucial  exposition  of existential  thought.  Inuenced  by works  such as
Don  Juan  and the novels  of Kafka, these essays  begin with a meditation  on suicide:
the question  of living or not living in a universe  devoid  of order or meaning.  With
lyric eloquence,  Albert  Camus  brillian tly posits  a way out of despair,  rearming
the value of personal  existence,  and the possibility  of life lived with dignity  and
authenticity.
Nonction/Literature THE PLAGUE
A gripping  tale of unrelieved  horror,  of survival  and resilience,  and of the ways in
which  humankind  confronts  death,  The  Plagu e  is at once a masterfully  crafted
novel,  eloquently  understated  and epic in scope,  and a parable  of ageless  moral
resonance  profoundly  relevant  to  our  times.  In  Oran,  a  coastal  town  in  North
Africa,  the  plague  begins  as  a  series  of  portents,  unheeded  by  the  people.  It
gradually  becomes  an omnipresent  reality, obliterating  all traces  of the past and
driving  its  victims  to  almost  unearthly  extremes  of  suering,  madness,  and
compassion.
Fiction/Literature THE REBEL
For Albert Camus,  the urge to revolt  is one of the “essential  dimensions”  of human
nature,  manifested  in man’s  timeless  Promethean  struggle  against  the conditions
of  his  existence,  as  well  as  the  popular  uprisings  against  established  orders
throughout  history.  And yet, with an eye toward  the French  Revolution  and its
regicides  and deicides,  he shows  how inevitably  the course  of revolution  leads to
tyranny.  As old regimes  throughout  the world  collapse,  The  Rebel  resonates as an

ardent,  eloquent,  and supremely  rational  voice of conscience  for our tumultuous
times.
Nonction/Literature RESISTANCE, REBELLION, AND DEATH
Resistance,  Rebellion,  and  Death   displays  Camus’  rigorous  moral  intelligence
addressing  issues  that range from colonial  warfare  in Algeria  to the social cancer
of  capital  punishment.  But  this  stirring  book  is  above  all  a  reection  on  the
problem  of freedom , and, as such, belongs  in the same tradition  as the works that
gave Camus his reputation  as the conscience  of our century:  The  Stran ger,  The
Rebel , and  The Myth of Sisyphus .
Fiction/Literature
Available wherever books are sold.
www.randomhouse.com