EDWARD J. HUGHES
Introduction
Albert Camus was a writer who emerged from social obscurity to become
a best-selling author and post-war icon in France and beyond, winning the
Nobel Prize for literature in 1957 . His premature death in January 1960 –
he and the publisher Michel Gallimard were killed in a car crash at Ville-
blevin, south of Paris – did nothing to diminish that iconic status. Yet behind
this tidy, poverty-to-celebrity-to-tragedy narrative, a more complex life story
and body of writing beckon. In his Nobel acceptance speech at Stockholm in
December 1957 , he points out that his life story is part of the collective his-
 ́ tory of his generation, which has lived through ‘une histoire d ementielle’ (‘an
insane history’), one that has had to contend with ‘le mouvement destructeur
de l’histoire’ ( Ess , 1072 , 1074 ) (‘the destructive movement of history’). Born
on the eve of the First World War, Camus continues, he and his contempo-
raries reached adulthood as Hitler obtained power and as the first of the
revolutionary trials got under way in the Soviet Union. And just to round off
the education of his generation, a string of confrontations follow – with civil
war in Spain, the Second World War and the concentration camps. Mean-
while the children of this generation face the spectre of nuclear destruction.
Camus’s conclusion is that a death instinct is at work in the collective history
of his times as tyranny’s ‘grands inquisiteurs’ ( Ess , 1073 ) (‘grand inquisitors’)
hold sway.
In addition, however, Camus’s Europeanness and more particularly his
Frenchness was in an important sense atypical, skewed by the fact that he
was born into the working-class poor of colonial Algeria, thereby joining the
ranks of the so-called petits colons or small-time colonisers. This marginal
position – adrift not only from metropolitan France but also from the French
colonial bourgeoisie who ruled Algeria and an under-class of native Algerians
1 whose plight he nevertheless highlighted – was to remain central to his sense
of identity. A French colony since 1831 , Algeria had been declared French
national territory by the French government of the 1848 revolution. In demo-
graphic terms, it was to become France’s most French colonial possession,
1
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
so that by 1936 there were a million Europeans living there, mostly French
but also Spanish, Italians and Maltese. By the beginning of the Algerian War
of Independence in 1954 , Europeans made up about one-ninth of the over-
all population. As a contested social site, Algeria was to provide the setting
for the unfolding of complex cultural tensions that manifest themselves in
Camus’s own life, in his public pronouncements and positions and in his
fictional creations. Significantly it was specifically as a French Algerian that
he chose to designate himself when thanking the Nobel Committee for their
recognition of his work ( Ess , 1892 ).
Camus was also, then, a child of empire, of what French colonial cul-
ture had learned to call ‘la plus grande France’ or greater France. These
two dimensions in Camus’s life, captured by Conor Cruise O’Brien in his
suggestive book-title, Albert Camus of Europe and Africa , were to remain
2 inseparable. They generate tensions and dilemmas that go to the heart of his
work and that shape and energise readers’ varying responses to it. Certain
events were crucial in bringing these tensions into acute focus. The Alge-
rian  War  of  Independence  was  an  obvious  example.  Well  before  that,  in
May 1945 , we find another troubling point of intersection on the European
and North African axes. While the defeat of Nazism was being celebrated
in France and much of Europe, Algeria saw an unleashing of French mili-
 ́ tary repression in the form of the S etif massacres, the French colonial army
inflicting massive casualties on native Algerians in retaliation for the killing of
Europeans by Algerian insurgents. Faced with these events, Camus appeared
unable to appreciate that colonial structures themselves were fundamental to
the problem. Wedded to a policy of benign colonial assimilation, he believed
that the solution lay in the implementation of democratic French republican
structures. His formulations of that belief were sometimes couched in a lan-
guage that was uncomfortably close to the triumphal language of empire:
 ́ `  ́ ‘L’Alg erie est a conqu erir une seconde fois’ (‘Algeria is to be conquered a
second time’) was how he exhorted French metropolitan readers of Combat
a week after the massacres. In fairness, what he meant when he said that
this second conquest would be even more difficult to achieve than the first
(that is, the military conquest of Algeria in the nineteenth century) was that
delivering wholesale political and economic reform would be a tall order.
Yet his calls for social amelioration remain within the colonial paradigm
and he appears unable to think his way beyond it: ‘En Afrique du Nord
` ` comme en France, nous avons a inventer de nouvelles formules et a rajeunir
 ́ nos m ethodes si nous voulons que l’avenir ait encore un sens pour nous’ (‘In
North Africa as in France, we must come up with new formulae and update
our way of doing things if we wish to ensure that the future has a meaning
3 for us’). Consistent with his urging of reform, Camus remains outspoken in
2
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Introduction
his opposition to metropolitan French voices who call for what Camus con-
4  ́ demns as ‘une r epression aveugle’ (‘a blind repression’). Ultimately, then,
Camus’s sincerely held reformist beliefs failed to encompass the sheer scale
of social polarisation and colonial militarism signalled by the massacres in
 ́ S etif. Nevertheless, as Conor Cruise O’Brien forthrightly observed, for many
North Africans, French Algeria was every bit as ‘repugnant as the fiction of
5 Hitler’s  new  European  order  was  for  Camus’. Yet  as  O’Brien  concedes,
Camus was most probably oblivious to any such analogy, as were many left-
wing intellectuals at the time. Camus was most likely still a communist in
1937 when he developed a conception of Mediterranean culture which to all
6 intents and purposes legitimised the French domination of Algeria. In the
longer term and particularly in the mid to late 1950 s with the Algerian War
of Independence in full spate, Camus remained fundamentally ill equipped
to adapt to the nascent postcolonialism in the country of his birth. Indeed,
he failed to give any credence to the logic of anti-colonialism.
Camus’s rootedness in Frenchness was deep. He was, if we are to heed
the semantic charge of the French term for a war orphan, a child or ward of
the French nation, a ‘pupille de la nation’. Belonging to the ranks of count-
less orphans of parents killed in the First World War (his father died from
wounds received at the Battle of the Marne), he and his brother Lucien were
placed, as it were both symbolically and, in a very restricted sense, econom-
7 ically, under the protection of the nation. His conception of Frenchness
was strongly coloured by historical memory of the service his French Alge-
rian antecedents had paid to the nation. His unfinished novel, Le Premier
Homme ( The First Man ), posthumously published in 1994 , is a eulogy both
of those nineteenth-century, small-time colonial settlers who uprooted and
moved to North Africa and of the settlers’ descendants (as well as indeed
their  Algerian  Arab  contemporaries),  who  in 1914 crossed  the  Mediter-
ranean  to  fight  in  defence  of  France.  By  preserving  the  memory  of  these
loyal  predecessors,  Camus  implicitly  shows  his  distaste  for  France’s  pro-
gramme of post-war decolonisation. Indeed, he saw French equivocation
in respect of Algeria as a form of betrayal. Camus remained deeply sensi-
tive to the patriotic discourse that evoked memories of earlier struggles. He
was both inspired and troubled by the memory of military sacrifice in the
First World War. In the pages of Le Premier Homme , we are offered, as an
` exemplary tale of that sacrifice, Roland Dorgel es’s patriotic war novel, Les
Croix de bois ( The Wooden Crosses ), from which the primary school teacher
Monsieur Germain (to whom Camus incidentally dedicated his Nobel Prize
address)  reverently  reads  to  his  pupils  ( PH , 139 ; FM , 11 4 ).  In  this  way,
the lessons of patriotism and the French educational system were mutually
reinforcing.
3
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
As a ward of the nation, so to speak, Camus had entitlement to a school
bursary. French colonial culture was such that his academic formation was
 ́ that  provided  by  the  national  lyc ee  system  and  Toby  Garfitt  sets  out  in
detail  the  nature  of  the  education  Camus  received  (chapter 2 ).  Reading
about Camus’s literary tastes in his brief essay on the aesthetics of the novel,
‘L’Intelligence et l’Echafaud’ ( 1943 ) – his enthusiasm for Mme de Lafayette,
the Marquis de Sade, Stendhal and Proust – we could be forgiven for for-
getting that his background was very unlike that of bourgeois, metropolitan
France. Yet in his fiction, life as a petit colon is central. It is actively cele-
brated in the pages of L’Etranger , where the young shipping clerk Meursault,
working in the port of Algiers, is unexcited by his boss’s plans to open up an
office in Paris and have Meursault work there. The reason Meursault gives
 ́ is that ‘toutes (les vies) se valaient et que la mienne ici ne me d eplaisait pas
du tout’ ( TRN , 1156 ) (‘one life was as good as another and . . . I wasn’t at
all dissatisfied with mine here’ ( O , 44 )).
Yet  notwithstanding  Meursault’s  stay-at-home, petit  colon ways,  for
decades many readers saw in Meursault not, to put it crudely, a specific
by-product of European colonial rule in North Africa but rather a largely
innocent, indeed martyr-like figure falling foul of an unjust, Absurd world.
As Danielle Marx-Scouras points out (chapter 10 ), Meursault became the
rebellious hero of the post-war and Vietnam eras. Not surprisingly, given
the  resonance  enjoyed  by  the  text  and  the  accompanying  ‘literature  of
the  Absurd’  tag,  Camus  tended  to  become  synonymous,  for  many  read-
ers, with his Absurd fictional progeny, Meursault. If the runaway success
of the novel largely obscured the cultural seedbed from which L’Etranger
emerged, Peter Dunwoodie crucially restores the French Algerianist back-
drop in his examination of the origins of Camus’s literary formation (see
chapter 11 ).
On the back of the success of L’Etranger , Camus became a cult figure
whose reputation came to be entwined with an array of conditions, causes
and concerns: the world of youth, impulsiveness and rebellion; existential
angst and the struggle with evil; the deadening impact of social hypocrisy,
the dread of conformism, and the individual’s struggle to locate himself in
society. But if one of the challenges in this Companion is to account for and
situate historically the iconic status that Camus’s work acquired for millions
across national boundaries during his lifetime and after, our situation of his
work needs to assume other dimensions too. We need to understand not
just the adulation but also the acrimony his work aroused, particularly in
the last decade of his life and in the era of postcolonialism. This entails a
repositioning of Camus’s work, the hope being that we will open up new
ways of reading and contextualising the corpus.
4
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Introduction
Camus continues to attract critical attention, both negative and appro-
 ́ batory. As Ieme van der Poel reminds us in chapter 1 , Bernard-Henri L evy,
writing in 1991 against the backdrop of the decline of communism, accords
Camus a special place in his account of French intellectual history; by con-
trast, Edward Said, writing around the same time, sees in Camus’s work a
8 strong exemplification, indeed a ‘clarification’, of the culture of empire. In
postcolonial Algeria, as Charles Forsdick and Debra Kelly both demonstrate,
forty years on from the acrimonious War of Independence, a new generation
of Algerian Francophone women writers, alienated by post-independence
violence, has reclaimed Camus as an adoptive brother. These fluctuations
in the reception given to his work provide their own period-specific and
situation-specific cultural barometers. Likewise, the varying perspectives on
Camus  collected  in  this  volume  necessarily  reflect  modes  of  analysis  and
appreciation operating at a particular historical juncture.
By the same logic, if we wind back rapidly to the generation of the 1940 sin
France, we find a different set of circumstances and a contrasting reception.
In that particular decade, which was dominated by the Second World War
and the bleak post-war period, the young Camus was seen as the embodiment
of  a  mindset,  an  outlook  that  he  branded  ‘the  Absurd’.  At  the  heart  of
the Absurd lay what Camus saw as the confrontation between the human
desire for a rational account of the world and a world that resisted any
such explanation. Humanity craves clarity, Camus argues in Le Mythe de
Sisyphe , and the world appears gratuitous and irrational. While the term
enjoyed prominence particularly in French intellectual life, the Absurd came
to suggest more a widespread feeling of human malaise than of any tightly
argued philosophical system.
Camus  was  writing  in  a  context  of  crisis  in  twentieth-century  values
prompted by the loss of religious belief, by totalitarianism and by war being
waged on a global scale. As David Carroll explains in chapter 4 , the mood in
France (which Camus saw at first hand and wrote about) was one of abject
desolation and hopelessness after national defeat and collaboration with the
Nazis. For Camus personally, it was also a time of serious illness. Yet how-
ever urgent the term’s application in that particular set of circumstances, the
‘Absurd’ label has come to be no less dated, no less historically specific than
the events of the war itself. As Carroll demonstrates, Camus himself asserted
in the mid 1950 s that the Absurd was a phase which, however important,
he had by then worked beyond. As with many forms of intellectual pack-
aging or badging, the Absurd tag has persisted. It leaves us with a vestigial
reminder of 1940 s gloom. Yet if we overplay it, we risk obscuring not only
the evolution in Camus’s writing career but also, no less importantly, con-
trasting generational responses to his works. The progressive interpretations
5
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
of Camus’s output have led to a mythologisation of his work that has deliv-
ered  both  ringing  endorsement  and  hostile  critique.  Thus  exegesis  of  his
work provided by French Camusians has been broadly accommodating and
sometimes even hagiographic. In an Anglophone context, on the other hand,
postcolonial readers of French literature often gravitate towards Camus (his
language, characterisation and fictional settings) in their search for an exem-
plary incarnation of the colonial mindset. The complexity and internal con-
tradictions of his work would suggest it can usefully be read in nuanced
ways  that  neither  adulation  nor  demonisation  can  adequately  account
for.
A high-profile opinion-former in war-torn France, Camus also played a
central role in post-war cultural and political debate. As an internationalist,
he was able to look well beyond metropolitan France and French Algeria.
He engaged powerfully with issues such as dictatorship in Franco’s Spain
and other forms of totalitarianism, both fascist and communist, elsewhere
in Europe. In an outspoken editorial published in Combat two days after the
bombing of Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 , Camus vigorously attacked the
seductive presentation of the atomic bomb as a triumph of scientific genius in
the French, American and British press. Rejecting as especially objectionable
the ‘picturesque literature’ used to prettify and obscure the horror of atomic
destruction, Camus concluded that a ‘mechanical civilisation’ had reached its
9 point of ultimate savagery. In a post-war France where communist influence
was strong, he became increasingly sceptical, especially when news began to
emerge of brutal Stalinist repression. He remained unconvinced by revolu-
tionary ideology, arguing from a position of social reformism. As Martin
Crowley draws out (chapter 7 ), Camus placed the figure of the human at the
heart of a fundamentally moral politics; such a politics would work, to use
Camus’s terminology, in the service of man.
This volume attempts, then, to give a full account of Camus’s situation
socially, politically and culturally. At the same time, it seeks to guard against
any exclusive focus on the circumstantial. For Camus’s appeal as a writer
draws us back to, but also takes us beyond, the conditions in which he lived
and worked. He did not conceal his claim to be a writer of the human con-
dition. His appeals to a mythological figure such as Sisyphus, a deranged
ancient  ruler  such  as  Caligula,  a  dehistoricised  type  such  as  Don  Juan,
show that he did not restrict himself to fictional situations couched in mid
 ́  ́ twentieth-century actuality. In L’Homme r evolt e , he dismisses the revolu-
tionary interpreters of Hegel’s Phenomenology of the Spirit who argue that
in a reconciled social order there would no longer be a need for art since – in
 ́  ́  ́ Camus’s disbelieving formulation – ‘la beaut e sera v ecue, non plus imagin ee’
( Ess , 658 ) (‘beauty will be lived and no longer only imagined’ ( R , 220 )).
6
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Introduction
Likewise, he refuses to accept Marx’s thesis that art is determined by the
epoch in which it is produced and that it expresses the privileged values of
the dominant class ( ibid .). In the same essay, perhaps with Sartre, the expo-
nent of the idea that literature has to be understood in terms of its social
situation, also in his sights, Camus delights in telling the story about Balzac,
who remarked at the end of a long conversation about politics and the fate
of the world that it was now time to get down to serious business, by which
he meant talking about his novels ( Ess , 663 ; R , 226 ).
The reader repeatedly senses Camus’s urge to get beyond constricting polit-
ical and social circumstance. In negotiating the connection between the world
and art, he regularly prefers to foreground acutely personal dilemmas. If life’s
circumstances for the individual are often conveyed as being restrictive and
sordid,  emotions  as  overwhelming,  grief  as  disabling,  Camus  encourages
his reader to see art, by contrast, as a form of compensation, of correc-
tion. Appealing to what he characterises as a tradition transcending histor-
ical periods, Camus writes enthusiastically about Madame de Lafayette’s
` seventeenth-century novel, La Princesse de Cl eves . Here, the princess’s crip-
pling if ultimately successful struggle against the temptation of adultery has
disastrous consequences for her and her husband. Camus heaps praise on
the husband prince who, even though he will die of grief, uses a contained,
measured language that does not entertain despair and madness. Camus is
mesmerised by this exercise of control. He sees the greatness of the French
classical novel lying in its obdurate containment of life’s miseries, in its refusal
of what he terms ‘bavardage’ or chatter ( TRN , 1896 ): ‘Aucun de nos grands
 ́  ́ romanciers’, he asserts, ‘ne s’est d etourn e de la douleur des hommes, mais il
 ́  ́ est possible de dire qu’aucun ne s’y est abandonn e et que par une emouvante
ˆ  ́ ` patience, ils l’ont tous ma ıtris ee par les r egles de l’art’ ( TRN , 1902 ) (‘None
of our great novelists has turned away from human suffering but it could
be said that none of them has given way to it, that, by exercising a moving
patience, they have dominated it through the rules of art’). Camus draws
these same characteristics into his own fiction, where, be it Meursault’s self-
containment,  the  resignation  of  the  mother  in Le  Premier  Homme or  of
Sisyphus, or Rieux’s understatement in La Peste , a premium is put on stoic
detachment, on an acceptance of one’s destiny.
If  in  Camus’s  estimation  the  containment  of  intense  suffering  is  a  key
attribute of the French classical novel, he sees other ways too in which art
works against life. As he conceives of it, art is a form of utopia, to the extent
that it appeals to and placates the human desire for unity. Be it art, crime or
 ́  ́ religion, Camus argues, each responds to human kind’s ‘d esir d eraisonnable’
` (‘unreasonable desire’), which is to ‘donner a la vie la forme qu’elle n’a pas’
( Ess , 666 ) (‘give life a form it does not have’ ( R , 228 )). The novel, then,
7
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
corrects the world by providing finality: its characters run, in Camus’s image,
to their meeting with destiny, thereby experiencing a resolution, a completion
that in real life remains unavailable. In delivering a sense of unity, the work
of art responds, in Camus’s judgement, to a metaphysical need ( Ess , 668 ; R ,
229 ).
The  aesthetic  preferences  that  Camus  is  voicing  here  connect  with  the
humanist  perspective  which  holds  at  its  centre  the  affirmation  of  human
endeavour as ultimately affirmative. But like the volume more generally in
 ́  ́ which they appear, L’Homme r evolt e , these views would be subject to contes-
tation. Thus post-humanist readings of Camus have mapped out a different
critical terrain in which his often unapologetically moralising accounts of
the creative life are often viewed with suspicion. More broadly, European
humanism’s  socio-cultural  legacy  was  itself  called  into  question  with  the
emergence of postcolonialism. In particular, Europe’s failure to export to its
colonies the humanist value-systems on which it prided itself is a leitmotif of
postcolonial contestation. Notwithstanding Camus’s own campaigning on
` behalf of Algerian rights in Mis ere de la Kabylie , for example, his position
10 and work have come to be the objects of close scrutiny.
This Companion to Camus is designed to convey something of the energy,
variety and generic range of Camus’s work and to counter the narrowing of
his corpus that has tended to follow on from the iconic Camus. It seeks to
explore the circumstances of his life and writing career, to gauge his liter-
ary achievements, and to examine the exposure to public controversy that
he  attracted.  Aiming  not  to  fall  into  Camus  worship,  it  picks  up  on  the
unevenness in his published work, acknowledging how his literary achieve-
ments helped preserve corners of his writing that might otherwise have fallen
from view. The celebrity Camus secured on the strength of successes such as
L’Etranger , La Peste and La Chute – landmarks of twentieth-century world
literature that have sold in their millions of copies and been translated around
 ́ the  world  –  was  indeed  considerable.  But  as  Jeanyves  Gu erin  points  out
(chapter 6 ), critical interest in his journalism, for example, persists largely as
a derivative of that literary success. Likewise, and even allowing for Camus’s
keen commitment to the theatre, his plays, as Christine Margerrison demon-
strates in chapter 5 , have had mixed success. Certainly they have not enjoyed
collectively the sustained resonance and impact of the work of a contempo-
rary such as Samuel Beckett, whose more accomplished technical dramatisa-
tion of an absurd human condition has attracted justifiably fuller critical
attention.  Nevertheless,  as  Danielle  Marx-Scouras  argues  in  chapter 10 ,
Camus’s  puzzling  over  competing  ethical  imperatives  feeds  centrally  into
the debate about justice and love in Les Justes .
8
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Introduction
The first two of the three chapters of Part i combine biographical overview
and an account of the cultural and intellectual influences that shaped Camus’s
outlook. Chapter 3 complements these by exploring Camus’s early collection
of essays L’Envers et l’Endroit and gleaning evidence of the author’s cau-
tious moves towards autobiographical writing. Part ii begins by exploring
the generic range to be found in the corpus: his ambiguous engagement with
philosophy and the cult of the Absurd in Le Mythe de Sisyphe (chapter 4 );
his work in the world of theatre (chapter 5 ); his increasingly high-profile
work as a journalist, writing and often campaigning in the hard-edged cir-
cumstances of colonial life in Algeria, the Second World War and that war’s
aftermath (chapter 6 ). The section then moves on to explore Camus’s very
public  and  sometimes  controversial  contributions  to  ethical  and  political
debate: chapter 7 looks at Camus’s attempt to articulate a pragmatic theory
of meaningful social responsibility in an age of genocide and global conflict;
chapter 8 addresses the temptation of violence that Camus wrestles with
through fictional protagonists such as Caligula, Meursault and Kaliayev;
and  chapter 9 re-evaluates  an  emblematic  moment  in  Cold  War  cultural
debate in 1950 s France, namely the quarrel between Camus and Sartre in
the wake of Camus’s controversial essay which attacked both fascist and
 ́  ́ communist forms of totalitarianism, L’Homme r evolt e . Chapter 10 explores
the love/justice paradigm in Camus and considers specifically how fictional
heroines such as Janine and Dora work for a reconciliation of spheres that
are deemed irreconcilable in Western political thought, namely the private
and the public. The four chapters in Part iii , finally, are devoted to the fic-
tional texts that are central to Camus’s literary legacy and reputation: chapter
11 charts the cultural genesis of Camus’s fiction, taking the reader through
some of the early prose work, principally Noces and L’Etranger ; chapter 12
explores the incremental accumulation of meaning in La Peste ; chapter 13
unpacks the complex baggage of evasiveness and garrulousness that makes
up La  Chute ;  and  chapter 14 approaches  Camus’s  last  text, Le  Premier
Homme , in the light of concerns about legacy and collective memory.
NOTES
 ́ 1 .  See chapter 6 , where Jeanyves Gu erin discusses Camus’s reporting on famine in
Kabylia in 1939 .
2 .  Conor Cruise O’Brien, Albert Camus of Europe and Africa (New York, The Viking
Press, 1970 ).
`  ́ 3 . Camus a ‘Combat’ , ed. Jacqueline L evi-Valensi (Paris, Gallimard, 2002 ), p. 501 .
For a sense of the scale of the French army reprisals against local Algerians, see
Olivier Todd, Albert Camus: une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ), pp. 378 – 9 .
` 4 . Camus a ‘Combat’ ,p. 502 .
9
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
5 .  Conor Cruise O’Brien, Camus (Glasgow, Collins (Fontana), 1970 ), p. 48 .
6 .  See ibid ., p. 13 . For a detailed consideration of Camus’s conception of Mediter-
ranean culture, see Peter Dunwoodie’s discussion in chapter 11 .
7 .  See  Todd, Albert  Camus:  une  vie ,p. 24 .  The  status  of  ‘pupille  de  la  nation’
entailed a modest entitlement to medical care and a school bursary.
8 .  Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism (London, Vintage, 1994 ), p. 224 .
9 . Camus a ‘Combat’ , pp. 569 – 71 .
 ́ 10 .  Frantz Fanon, for example, writing in Les Damn es de la terre ( The Wretched of
the Earth ), complains: ‘Cette Europe qui jamais ne cessa de parler de l’homme,
 ́ ` jamais  de  proclamer  qu’elle  n’ etait  inqui ete  que  de  l’homme,  nous  savons
 ́  ́ aujourd’hui de quelles souffrances l’humanit e a pay e chacune des victoires de
son esprit’ (‘This Europe which never stopped talking about man and proclaim-
ing that man was its sole, anxious concern, we know today with what sufferings
humanity has paid for each of the victories of the European mind’), Fanon, Les
 ́ Damn es de la terre (Paris, Gallimard, 1991 ), p. 372 .
10
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

1
IEME VAN DER POEL
Camus: a life lived in critical times
The life of Albert Camus ( 1913 – 60 ) was profoundly affected by the three
major  tragedies  which  dominate  the  history  of  twentieth-century  France:
the Great War ( 1914 – 18 ), World War II ( 1939 – 45 ) and the Algerian War
of Independence ( 1954 – 62 ). It is unusual that Camus’s destiny should have
been so closely bound up with that of metropolitan France. As a French petit
colon born in Algeria, he spent most of his life outside France. It was not
until he was in his late thirties that, as a celebrated writer, Camus settled
in France permanently. After the very successful publication of La Peste in
1947 , he was able to set up house in the sixth arrondissement in Paris, near
the premises of his editor, Gallimard.
Camus was born on 7 November 1913 , on the eve of the First World War,
in the little village of Mondovi near Constantine, one of the major cities of
what was then French Algeria. His mother was of Spanish origin, his father
a so-called pied-noir , a Frenchman born in the colony and whose family
had lived there for several generations. In his last and unfinished work, the
autobiographical novel Le Premier Homme , Camus claims that his forebears
had  fled  from  Alsace  after  the  French  defeat  in  the  Franco-Prussian  war
of 1870 – 1 . According to Camus’s biographer Olivier Todd, however, the
Camus family came from the Bordeaux region in the south-west of France.
This would make it more probable that it was economic rather than political
1 reasons that led them to try their fortune in Algeria.
In terms of social class, Camus’s parents belonged to the colony’s poor
whites, who occupied an intermediate position between the French ruling
class ( les colons ), and the indigenous population, which consisted mainly
of Arabs and Berbers. When Camus was eight months old, his father was
drafted into the French army and shipped to France, to become one of the
first victims at the Battle of the Marne. He died on 11 October 1914 and
was buried in Saint-Brieuc in Brittany. In Le Premier Homme , Camus draws
a striking portrait of the father he never knew, showing him as one of the
countless, nameless soldiers from the colonies who, immediately on their
13
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ieme van der poel
arrival in a foreign country they were supposed to consider as their homeland,
were thrown into the battle:
 ́ On n’avait pas eu le temps de leur trouver des casques, le soleil n’ etait pas
 ́ assez fort pour tuer les couleurs comme en Alg erie, si bien que des vagues
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ d’Alg eriens  arabes  et  franc ̧ais,  v etus  de  tons eclatants  et  pimpants,  coiff es
` de  chapeaux  de  paille,  cibles  rouges  et  bleues  qu’on  pouvait  apercevoir a
`  ́  ́ des centaines de m etres, montaient par paquets au feu, etaient d etruits par
paquets. ( PH , 70 )
There was no time to find them helmets; the sun was not strong enough to erase
colours as it did in Algeria, so that waves of Arab and French Algerians, dressed
in smart shining colours, straw hats on their heads, red-and-blue targets you
could see for hundreds of metres, went over the top in droves into the fire,
were destroyed in droves. ( FM , 55 )
Camus here criticises the seemingly casual way in which metropolitan France
disposed of the lives of its colonial subjects during the Great War. It is also
worth noting that the Arab and French soldiers are depicted here as brothers
in arms, dying together on the same battlefield. From the author’s point of
view, this is not a coincidence: both the Arab masses and the poor whites from
Algeria were victims of oppression and social injustice, united, so to speak,
in their communal suffering and in their profound attachment to their native
soil. One sees the theme’s prominence in Camus’s late fictional writings, such
as L’Exil et le Royaume ( 1957 ) and Le Premier Homme (still unfinished
when he died in 1960 ), at a time when the Algerian War of Independence
was bitterly tearing apart the Arabs and the working-class Europeans. Yet
this should not blind one to the fact that the same theme may also be detected
in some of Camus’s earliest stories, making it one of the more permanent
preoccupations in his life and art.
Camus found the inspiration for his first book, L’Envers et l’Endroit , pub-
lished in Algiers by Charlot in 1937 , in Belcourt, the working-class quarter in
east Algiers where he spent his early childhood. This also explains its initial
title: Voix du quartier pauvre ( Voices from the Poor Quarter ). In the preface
to the second edition published in 1958 , Camus claims that, in spite of its
‘forme maladroite’ ( Ess , 5 ) (‘clumsiness’), he considers this small volume to
be the source that sustained all his later life and work. It is about poverty and
the Algerian sunlight, which, according to Camus, makes the misery of the
inhabitants of southern locations less grim than the grey skies of the north;
moreover, the author professes his love for the sparsely furnished Arab and
Spanish houses, preferring them to the apartments of the wealthy Parisian
bourgeoisie that he became familiar with after he had grown to be one of
the most successful writers of his time. Finally, he concludes that if he had
14
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus: a life lived in critical times
to rewrite the original text, he would again centre it on ‘l’admirable silence
` d’une m ere et l’effort d’un homme pour retrouver une justice ou un amour
 ́ qui equilibre ce silence’ ( Ess , 13 ) (‘the admirable silence of a mother and a
man’s effort to find a kind of justice or love that would counterbalance that
silence’).
The figure of the resigned, older woman, as she appears in several of the
sketches collected in this volume, was modelled, no doubt, on Camus’s own
mother, a partially deaf and taciturn figure. She belongs to the women who
 ̈ find themselves ‘au bord de la vie’ (‘on the edge of life’), as Ma ıssa Bey
puts it, thus symbolising Camus’s humble origins, which he never denied
and which laid the foundations for a political and social engagement that
2 lasted a lifetime. Moreover, in one of the stories, entitled ‘Entre oui et non’
(‘Between Yes and No’), the mother’s silence is juxtaposed with that of the
 ́ owner of a Moorish caf e, where the narrator muses upon his past. In fact,
 ́ there is a continual intermingling of the two spaces: the deserted caf e that
is about to close, and the humble lodgings where the narrator lived with
his mother as a child. In both, people sit together in total silence, which
opens up the possibility for another, more corporeal kind of ‘communica-
tion’. It consists in a sharing, next to one another, but not jointly, of the same,
strong, sensory perceptions, which are bound up with the Mediterranean:
its  smells,  its  sounds,  its  light,  its  starry  nights.  The  three  silent  figures,
 ́ then, of the mother, the owner of the Moorish caf e and the child, can be
seen  as  the  embodiment  of  an  all-encompassing,  Mediterranean  culture,
glossing over all ethnic and linguistic differences. In L’Envers et l’Endroit ,
the  geographical  and  other  ‘continuities’  of  the  Mediterranean  basin  are
also  evoked  in  a  series  of  colourful  evocations  of  the  Italian  landscape,
the small harbours along the coast of Ibiza and the smiles of the Genoese
women.
Around the time that Camus was working on his first book, he became
increasingly involved in politics. In this respect also, the idea of a Mediter-
ranean culture was of great concern to him, as is made clear by the text of a
lecture that he gave at the Algiers Cultural Centre on 8 February 1937 : ‘Nous
 ́  ́  ́ sommes d’autant mieux pr epar es que nous sommes au contact imm ediat de
`  ́ ˆ l’Orient, qui peut tant nous apprendre a cet egard . . . Le r ole essentiel que
pourraient jouer les villes comme Alger et Barcelone, c’est de servir pour leur
 ́  ́ faible part cet aspect de la culture m editerran eenne qui favorise l’homme au
3  ́ lieu de l’ ecraser.’ (We are all the better prepared for this because we are in
immediate contact with the Orient, from which we can learn so much in this
regard...the cities of Algiers and Barcelona could play a small though essen-
tial part in the process of restoring the idea of a Mediterranean culture that
defends human values, instead of crushing them.) Camus opposed Italian
15
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ieme van der poel
fascism’s call for a new Rome that would emulate ancient Roman imperial
grandeur by once again radiating greatness across the Mediterranean, the
Mare Nostrum (‘Our Sea’). By dismissing Mussolini’s revivalism, he exhorted
his fellow citizens to save the Mediterranean from the Italian fascists. Instead
of Mussolini’s dream of the supremacy of a Latin culture which would match
that of Hitler’s Germania , Camus invited his audience to recall yet another
aspect of a glorious past: that of al-Andalus , in which the different ethnic and
religious groups from Spain and the Arab-Muslim Mediterranean had been
united. In this way, Camus made it very clear that he was not only opposed
to fascism, but that he also looked upon Arab culture as a substantial part
of the Mediterranean heritage.
From 1935 until 1937 , Camus was a member of the Algerian Communist
Party. In his choice of membership, he was certainly influenced by his former
teacher and mentor, the writer Jean Grenier. It is less obvious why, after a
relatively short period of time, Camus was struck off the party’s register.
His fall from grace took place against the background of growing political
tension between the communists and the nationalists in Algeria. Although
the communists had already fought against colonialism since the beginning
of the 1920 s, they were unhappy that Messali Hadj, the leader of the newly
created Algerian Popular Party (PPA), should hark back to certain traditional
values in order to reinforce the notion of an Algerian identity. This was also
the reason why Messali rejected the Blum–Violette plan ( 1937 ), according to
which the French socialist government planned to offer full French citizen-
ship to 22 , 000 Algerians. In Messali’s view, this plan, to which the Algerian
communists were also fiercely opposed, would increase the gap that already
existed between the assimilated Algerian elite and the impoverished masses
4 from the countryside.
Camus’s support for the PPA is also illustrated by his work as a reporter.
In September 1938 he met Pascal Pia, the journalist and former Surrealist,
who had recently arrived from France to become editor-in-chief of the newly
 ́ created newspaper Alger r epublicain . Pia hired Camus as an editorial sec-
retary and it was in this position that he first worked as a journalist. He
wrote several book reviews, including an article about Sartre’s first novel La
 ́ Naus ee , which had come out in the autumn of 1938 . But central to Camus’s
contributions to the newspaper were the articles he produced about current
developments in Algeria itself, which seem to have preoccupied him more at
this time than the growing threat of war in Europe or the civil war in Spain.
Camus was very critical of the way in which the French-Algerian govern-
ment handled the rise of nationalism. In the summer of 1939 , several leading
members  of  the  PPA  were  arrested  and  died  of  ill  treatment  in  Algerian
5  ́ prisons. In an article published in Alger r epublicain , Camus commented:
16
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus: a life lived in critical times
 ́  ́  ́ ‘La mont ee du nationalisme alg erien s’accomplit sur les pers ecutions dont
on  le  poursuit’  ( Ess , 1370 )  (‘The  rise  of  Algerian  nationalism  is  brought
about by the persecution directed against it’). In Camus’s view, the repres-
sive measures taken by the French authorities against nationalist political
leaders were not the only reason for the growing discontent among native
Algerians. Between 5 and 15 June 1939 , he published the ten instalments of
` Mis ere de la Kabylie . In this travel report, consisting of articles about the
terrible famine that had struck the Kabylia region, Camus questioned the
impact of colonialism on the native inhabitants of Algeria. He accused his
fellow citizens of systematically exploiting the local population, by refusing
them equal pay and by providing them with insufficient schools and medical
care.
` With the publication of Mis ere de la Kabylie , Camus became one of the
first French intellectuals to criticise overtly the French colonial enterprise in
its overseas territories. But in Camus’s case, his denunciations of the ill treat-
ment of the Algerian peasants by their colonial oppressors did not have the
 ́ same impact on the French public as, somewhat earlier, Andr e Gide’s protest
 ́ against the excesses of colonial rule in the French Congo, or Andr ee Viollis’s
condemnation of the atrocities that were being perpetrated in Indochina.
In France, all public attention was now focused on the impending war in
Europe.
Meanwhile, in Algeria, Pia and Camus had founded a second newspaper,
 ́ Le Soir r epublicain . The outbreak of the war had made the distribution of
 ́ Alger r epublicain more difficult and it saw an important decrease in the num-
ber of copies sold. By launching a new paper, the editors hoped to make up for
 ́ this loss, but after a few months, Alger r epublicain folded. The impact of the
war was not limited to economic matters; it also affected the ethics of journal-
ism. Although the press in Algeria was placed under censorship, this did not
prevent Camus from exercising his right to freedom of speech. In favour of
neither Hitler nor Stalin, he and Pia were, above all, convinced pacifists: they
protested against the rounding up of communists after the German–Russian
non-aggression pact had been concluded and they published extensively on
the historical background of the then current situation, as well as on the
possibilities of restoring peace. After many altercations with the censors, Le
 ́ Soir r epublicain was eventually suspended by the French authorities on 10
6 January 1940 .
The years 1940 – 2 constituted a turning point in Camus’s career as a writer,
profoundly affecting both his political and philosophical views. Living in
occupied France part of the time (and at other times in the Algerian city of
Oran), Camus wrote the three texts that would establish his reputation as
one of the most important writers of his generation: the novel L’Etranger
17
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ieme van der poel
( 1942 ), the philosophical essay Le Mythe de Sisyphe ( 1942 ) and the play
Caligula ( 1944 ). These texts, together with the articles that he wrote for Le
 ́ ` Soir r epublicain , and the Lettres a un ami allemand , which appeared in the
underground press during the German occupation, give a clear picture of the
way in which the experience of war and oppression affected the development
in Camus’s way of thinking.
Time and again, Camus confesses his all-encompassing love of life. His
writings abound with images that represent the physical world. The pleasur-
able experience of swimming and sunbathing is present in both L’Etranger
 ́ and ‘La Guerre’ (‘War’), an article he wrote for Le Soir r epublicain in 1939 .
` The Lettres a  un  ami  allemand praise  the  beauty  of  the  European  land-
 ́  ́ scape, as embodied by ‘les pigeons se d etach[ant] en grappes de la cath edrale
de  Salzbourg’  (‘the  clusters  of  pigeons  taking  off  from  the  cathedral  of
 ́ Salzburg’), and ‘les g eraniums rouges [qui poussent] inlassablement sur les
`  ́ petits cimeti eres en Sil esie’ ( Ess , 236 ) (‘the red geraniums that grow with
tireless energy in the small cemeteries of Silesia’). In ‘La Guerre’, however,
these images of a physical world that seems absurdly unaffected by the atroc-
ities of war and destruction are relegated to an irretrievable past. From this,
` ˆ  ́  ́ the author draws the conclusion that ‘c’est bien l a peut- etre l’extr emit ede
 ́  ́ la r evolte que de perdre sa foi dans l’humanit e des hommes’ ( Ess , 1377 )
(‘losing one’s faith in the humanity of men may perhaps be the ultimate
form of revolt’). This hint of pessimism recalls the answer that Meursault,
in L’Etranger , gives to his boss, when the latter asks him if he would like to
 ́ change his way of life: ‘J’ai r epondu qu’on ne changeait jamais de vie, qu’en
 ́ tout cas toutes se valaient et que la mienne ici ne me d eplaisait pas du tout’
( TRN , 1155 – 6 ) (‘I replied that you could never change your life, that in any
case one life was as good as another and that I wasn’t at all dissatisfied with
mine’ ( O , 44 )).
But these texts also reflect Camus’s struggle with the absurdity of a world
in which God is no longer present. In Caligula , the main character’s lawless
behaviour calls to mind the Surrealists’ idea of revolt against a civilisation
seen as fundamentally restrictive. It is a behaviour also reminiscent of the
sense of revolt as articulated by the marquis de Sade in the eighteenth century.
In a similar way, Caligula claims the right to exercise his individual freedom,
even at the expense of the lives and happiness of his fellow men, and totally
rejects human law. But in the last scene of the play the tyrant is killed by his
best friend, Cherea. Although the latter shares Caligula’s conviction about
the overall absurdity of human destiny, he is revolted by the pointless sacrifice
of human lives that results from it.
If Caligula marks the beginning of a major change in Camus’s philosoph-
ical insights, this becomes even more apparent from the first of the Lettres
18
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus: a life lived in critical times
` a un ami allemand , published in 1943 : ‘C’est beaucoup que de se battre en
 ́ ˆ m eprisant la guerre, d’accepter de tout perdre en gardant le go ut du bon-
`  ́  ́ heur, de courir a la destruction avec l’id ee d’une civilisation sup erieure’ ( Ess ,
222 ) (‘It demands a lot to fight when one despises war, and to accept to
lose everything while keeping a taste for happiness, to run headlong towards
destruction while being guided by the idea of a superior civilisation’). In
Camus’s view, it is precisely because we cling to life so much that we find
the strength to sacrifice it for a future of which we ourselves will no longer
be part. In a world in which God is no longer present, solidarity provides
the only possible answer to the absurdity of human destiny. In this respect,
Camus’s idea of revolt has developed from the contesting of the legitimacy of
any human law, as illustrated by Caligula, to laying claim to a human order
 ́  ́ in which all answers are human. Or, as Camus puts it in L’Homme r evolt e :
 ́  ́  ́  ́  ́ ` ‘L’homme r evolt e, c’est l’homme jet e hors du sacr e et appliqu e a revendiquer
`  ́ un ordre humain o u toutes les r eponses soient humaines’ ( Ess , 1688 ) (‘The
rebel is man thrown outside the sacred and keen to lay claim to a human
order in which all answers are human’).
` The Lettres a  un  ami  allemand also  read  like  a  declaration  of  love  to
European culture. Contrary to the Germans, it is not out of patriotism or to
 ́ gain supremacy over ‘cet espace cercl e de mers et de montagnes’ ( Ess , 234 )
(‘this space surrounded by seas and mountains’) that the author of the letters
wants to fight. He is prepared to sacrifice his life in order to defend a set of
spiritual values that represent to his mind ‘Europe’, and which he considers
to be ‘ma plus grande patrie’ ( Ess , 236 ) (‘my wider fatherland’).
Camus spent the war years partly in Algeria, partly in France. In 1942 ,he
suffered a relapse of the tuberculosis that he contracted in his adolescent years
and was advised to spend some time in the mountains in France. He stayed
in Le Chambon sur Lignon, a Huguenot village in the Vivarais region. After
the war, its inhabitants were the only community in occupied Europe to be
awarded collectively the Yad Vashem decoration for their support of Jewish
refugees during the German occupation. It is not unlikely that during his stay
in the mountains Camus got involved with the French Resistance. It is equally
possible, though, that it was through his friend Pascal Pia (living in nearby
Lyons),  that  he  became  engaged  in  the  Combat  group  of  the  Resistance
movement in 1943 .
Soon after settling in Paris, Camus became the editor-in-chief of the clan-
destine newspaper Combat , which drew together a number of Resistance
groups. By this time, Camus had come to be a prominent figure in Parisian
intellectual circles. He had made friends with Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone
de  Beauvoir,  as  well  as  with  his  editor,  Gaston  Gallimard,  and  had  also
become involved with the world of theatre. On 21 August 1944 , Combat
19
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ieme van der poel
 ́ celebrated the Liberation of France with a leading article, ‘De la R esistance
`  ́ alaR evolution’ (‘From Resistance to Revolution’), written by Camus. It
already contains the core of the paper’s programme for the next few years
which was to stand for political renewal and freedom of speech, while keep-
7 ing its independence from any political party. Nevertheless, Combat had
to operate under various restrictions. Printing paper was scarce and cen-
sorship continued, since the war in Europe had not yet ended. Moreover,
Combat and the other newspapers that had been founded during the days
of the Resistance had to compete with new titles, such as Le Monde , which
8 published its first issue on 19 December 1944 .
From 1944 to 1947 , Camus as Combat ’s editor-in-chief played a major
role in public debate in France. In the direct aftermath of World War II, the
former Resistance divided into two groups which strongly disagreed about
the country’s political future, the communists and the adherents of General
Charles de Gaulle. This controversy was deeply influenced by the dramatic
events  in  Greece,  where,  after  the  defeat  of  the  German  army,  a  bloody
battle was unleashed between the adherents of the former government, now
returned from exile, and the former partisans who had fought the Germans.
Another  matter  of  discontent  involved  the  purges  taking  place  across
France in the aftermath of the war. Camus wrote a series of polemical arti-
cles against his fellow writer and journalist, Franc ̧ois Mauriac. The latter,
opposing the general climate of hatred and vengefulness, had pleaded for
clemency to be shown to former collaborators. Camus, in turn, argued that
justice, not Christian charity, should guide the French in dealing with the
` darker side of their recent history: ‘Si nous consentons a nous passer de Dieu
 ́  ́ et de l’esp erance, nous ne nous passons pas si ais ement de l’homme. Sur ce
`  ́ point, je puis bien dire a M. Mauriac que nous ne nous d ecouragerons pas et
 ́ que nous refuserons jusqu’au dernier moment une charit e divine qui frustr-
erait les hommes de leur justice’ ( CC , 442 ) (‘If we agree to manage without
God and hope, we can’t so easily do without man. On this point, I say to
Monsieur Mauriac that we will not be discouraged and that we will refuse
right to the last a divine charity that would deprive mankind of its justice’).
As in La Peste ( 1947 ) and La Chute ( 1956 ), Camus here shows himself to
be a humanist at heart.
It  was  also  due  to  this  humanist  stance  that  Camus  definitively  broke
with Sartre and the Les Temps modernes group in 1951 . To understand this
controversy, one should be aware of the highly polarised atmosphere which
dominated intellectual life in France during the post-war years. This situation
was to last until the second half of the 1970 s, when Marxism finally lost its
 ́  ́ attraction for the majority of the French intelligentsia. In L’Homme r evolt e
( 1951 ), Camus reproaches Marxism for sacrificing the defence of universal
20
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus: a life lived in critical times
human values to historical relativism. He draws a clear distinction between
the Marxist prophecy , that is, the generous and universal ambition to secure
a certain quality of life for the destitute masses, and the revolutionary practice
which resulted from it and which made everything dependent on, as Camus
termed it, history and nothing else.
Camus’s criticism of Marxism also implied a condemnation of Sartrian
existentialism, which valued the idea of ‘taking action’, ‘making political
choices’, at any cost, even if it later turned out that one had supported a
political system that was most repressive (as was the case with Sartre and
Simone de Beauvoir’s support for the new China in the 1950 s). It is, therefore,
quite understandable that Les Temps modernes , with Sartre as its director,
 ́  ́ should publish an unfavourable review of Camus’s L’Homme r evolt e . This
led to a long-lasting polemic between Camus and Sartre’s influential literary
review, and resulted in the final break between the two leading intellectu-
als (see below chapter 9 ). Sartre became a fellow traveller (as sympathisers
were called) of the French Communist Party, whereas Camus turned away
from communism altogether after the existence of the Gulag – the concen-
tration camps created under Stalin’s regime – was made public in the West.
As illustrated by the fictional works he wrote during these years, includ-
ing the play Les Justes and his most famous novel La Peste , the concept
of  revolution  and  the  bloodshed  it  implied,  even  if  it  was  meant  to  cre-
ate a better world, became intolerable to Camus. As a result of his humanist
stance and firm anti-communism, he became a somewhat lonely figure on the
French intellectual post-war scene, where communist sympathies held such
sway.
By 1954 the  Algerian  War  of  Independence  had  become  inevitable.  In
France, Sartre and a number of other influential intellectuals immediately
gave their support to the Algerian nationalists, but Camus’s position was
more ambiguous. At this point, a noticeable difference also emerges between
the articles he wrote for L’Express and other news media, on the one hand,
 ́ and  his  fictional  writings  on  the  other.  In  his 1957 essay  ‘R eflexions  sur
la guillotine’, Camus condemned the severe French repression of the FLN
 ́ (Front de Lib eration Nationale), the Algerian resistance movement. But, in
spite of his long-lasting criticism of French colonial rule in Algeria, Camus
was also opposed to the idea of an independent, Arab nation. In fact, even
when the hostilities among the three main parties involved – the Algerian
nationalists from the FLN, the French army and the right-wing ‘secret army’
 ́ ` or  OAS  (‘Organisation  d’Arm ee  Secr ete’),  which  wanted  to  keep  Algeria
French – had reached a point of no return, Camus continued to foster the
hope of a federal state reuniting France, Algeria and the two former French
protectorates, Tunisia and Morocco.
21
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ieme van der poel
From 1952 until his untimely death in a car crash in 1960 , Camus’s home-
land served as the major locale in two of the fictional works he was working
on, L’Exil  et  le  Royaume and Le  Premier  Homme .  A  careful  reading  of
these texts uncovers a more subtle approach to the Algerian tragedy and all
it encompassed than that provided by Camus’s journalistic texts, which were,
9 of course, written on the spur of the moment. In his last, unfinished novel as
ˆ well as in two of the short stories collected in L’Exil et le Royaume , ‘L’H ote’
` and ‘La Femme adult ere’, Camus elaborates on what he sees as the main
problem of Algerian society: the impossibility of communication between
the French and Arab populations, because they speak a different language
and  do  not  mix  socially.  ‘ “C’est  toi  le  juge?” ’  ( TRN , 1618 )  (‘ “Are  you
ˆ the judge?” ’) the Arab prisoner in ‘L’H ote’ asks the French schoolteacher,
who has been obliged by the French authorities to guard him for the night.
These four words contain the nightmarish situation in which the Arab pris-
oner finds himself caught, in his native land and yet in a social system that
is utterly alien to him. As a writer, Camus reveals that he is aware of the
anomaly of the system but – as the half-hearted attempt of the schoolteacher
to save the prisoner at the end of the novel shows – he is unable to solve the
problem. Therefore, one does more justice to Camus as a colonial writer by
stressing his fundamental pessimism about the final outcome of the Algerian
tragedy, in which the underprivileged Europeans of Algeria would be among
the principal victims. In Camus’s view, their fate was universal in the sense
that they resembled all the other ethnic groups who, as a consequence of
war and political conflicts, had been deprived of their native soil.
This is also the main theme of Le Premier Homme . In this novel, as we have
seen, Camus tried to reconstruct the unknown history of his own forebears,
the poor settlers from France, who, from their arrival in the colony during
the nineteenth century, toiled and suffered, from one generation to the next,
on what is presented as an inhospitable African soil. But in spite of the fact
that they shared this life of hardship and poverty with the large majority of
the Arab population, Camus also shows the deep rift that existed between the
two races. The wary stand-off between them, as Christiane Chaulet-Achour
10 has so rightly argued, could switch all of a sudden to bloody conflict.
It is an irony that in 1957 , as Camus was achieving worldwide recogni-
tion as the winner of the Nobel Prize for literature, he was becoming increas-
ingly isolated from his fellow writers in France. Neither his anti-communism
nor his refusal to back the cause of Algerian nationalism had made him
popular with those who set the tone in Parisian intellectual circles at that
time. His famous but awkward remark made to an Algerian interlocutor in
`  ́ ` Stockholm – ‘Je crois a la justice, mais je d efendrai ma m ere avant la jus-
tice’  ( Ess , 1882 )  (‘I  believe  in  justice,  but  will  defend  my  mother  before
22
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus: a life lived in critical times
justice’) – dealt a final blow to his already damaged reputation as a progres-
sive intellectual. What Camus had really meant to say was that, for him, there
existed no excuse for acts of terrorism on any side. In an article published
in L’Express on 23 July 1955 , he had given a very perceptive analysis of the
spiral of violence as it had developed and grown under French colonial rule
in Algeria:
ˆ L’oppression, m eme bienveillante, le mensonge d’une occupation qui parlait
 ́ toujours d’assimilation sans jamais rien faire pour elle, ont suscit e d’abord
des mouvements nationalistes, pauvres en doctrine, mais riches en audace. Ces
 ́  ́  ́  ́ mouvements ont et er eprim es.
 ́  ́  ́ ` Chaque r epression, mesur ee ou d emente, chaque torture polici ere comme
 ́  ́  ́ chaque jugement l egal, ont accentu eled esespoir et la violence chez les militants
 ́  ́  ́ frapp es. Pour finir, les policiers ont couv e les terroristes qui ont enfant e eux-
ˆ  ́ m emes une police multipli ee. ( Ess , 1868 )
(Oppression, even if benevolent, and the lie of an occupation that always talked
about assimilation without ever doing anything to bring it about, have given
rise to various nationalist movements, which were ideologically weak but cer-
tainly audacious. These movements have been repressed.
Every instance of repression, whether measured or demented, every act of
police torture, every legal judgement has increased the despair and the violence
of the militants affected by them. In the end, the police have bred terrorists,
who have in turn multiplied the number of police.)
But  the  time  for  peace  negotiations  of  the  kind  Camus  had  wanted  had
long passed. Algeria was to obtain its independence in 1962 , after a long
and bloody battle, and about a million French were to leave the country
immediately afterwards.
In the novel La Chute ( 1956 ), one can sense the feeling of isolation and
loneliness that Camus as an intellectual experienced during the last years of
his life. Clamence, the protagonist, is not to be identified with his creator,
Albert  Camus,  of  course,  yet  some  of  the  reflections  on  his  personal  life
 ́ seem close to Camus’s own: ‘Ah! mon ami, savez-vous ce qu’est la cr eature
solitaire, errant dans les grandes villes? . . .’ ( TRN , 1536 ) (‘Oh, my friend,
do you know what it means to be a solitary figure, wandering around in our
big cities? . . .’), asks the narrator, without even expecting an answer from
his silent interlocutor. And he concludes his soliloquy with the observation
that it is neither possible to ignore one’s very existence nor to escape from
ˆ it: ‘Que faire pour etre un autre? Impossible’ ( TRN , 1550 ) (‘What does one
do to be another? Impossible’).
In 1954 Camus received an invitation to give a lecture in Holland and on
this occasion he also visited Amsterdam, which he would choose as the grey
23
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ieme van der poel
and drizzly setting for Clamence’s confession in La Chute . In his lecture,
Camus spoke on the subject of ‘The Artist and his Time’, the text of which
has only recently been rediscovered. Although written in French, the lecture
was aimed at a non-French, non-Parisian audience. It was an opportunity
for Camus, no doubt, to speak more freely about his own situation as an
engaged intellectual. The writer should share the fate of his fellow men, he
said, but should refrain from foretelling the future, sticking instead to that
part of history he knows from personal experience; he must not be afraid
to position himself in the midst of the public debate: ‘The only peace that
is attainable for an artist is the peace that resides in the heat of the battle.
“Each wall is a door”, as Emerson put it so rightly. Let us not seek a door
11 or an exit, except in the wall that surrounds us.’
In the decade that followed his death, Camus’s intellectual heritage was
considered out of date. The 1960 s saw the spectacular rise of the social sci-
ences in France. Leading intellectuals were no longer writers or philosophers
like Camus or Sartre; they were to be found among anthropologists, psy-
choanalysts and social scientists. It was only after Marxism had definitively
ceased to be a main point of reference within intellectual circles in France that
a younger generation of French intellectuals, generally known as ‘les Nou-
veaux Philosophes’ (the ‘New Philosophers’), turned to universalism again
and started rereading Camus.
 ́ Bernard-Henri L evy gave Camus a special place in his essay on French
 ́ intellectual  history, Les  Aventures  de  la  libert e ( The  Adventures  of  Free-
 ́ dom )( 1991 ). L evy not only praises Camus for his humanist stance, but also
considers him to be one of the first opponents of colonial rule in France.
Around the same time, Edward Said, writing in Culture and Imperialism
 ́ ( 1993 ), defended an attitude that was radically opposed to that of L evy. Said
characterised Camus as one of the last colonial writers whose writings con-
solidate an imperialist vision of the relationship between the Orient and the
Occident. However, given the fact that France has only just begun to come
to terms with its colonial heritage, in particular with the traumatic years of
the Algerian War of Independence, we are only beginning to gauge the full
significance of French colonial rule and its legacy.
NOTES
1 .  Olivier Todd, Albert Camus, A Life , trans. Benjamin Ivry (New York, Carroll &
Graf, 2000 ), p. 4 .
 ́  ́  ̈ 2 .Ma ıssa Bey, ‘Femmes au bord de la vie’, Albert Camus et les ecritures alg eriennes.
Quelles traces? (Aix-en-Provence, Edisud, 2004 ), pp. 127 – 33 .
ˆ  ́  ́ 3 .  Emile Temime, Un r eve m editerran een (Arles, Actes Sud, 2002 ), p. 140 .
24
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus: a life lived in critical times
4 .  Jean-Pierre  Biondi, Les  Anticolonialistes  (1881–1962) (Paris,  Laffont, 1992 ),
p. 216 .
5 . Ibid ., p. 228 .
6 .  Todd, Albert Camus, A Life , pp. 90 – 4 .
`  ́  ́ 7 .  See Jacqueline L evi-Valensi’s comments in Camus a ‘Combat’ , ed. J. L evi-Valensi
(Paris, Gallimard, 2002 ), pp. 42 – 5 .
8 . Ibid ., pp. 59 – 60 .
ˆ 9 .  See Ieme van der Poel, ‘Albert Camus, ou la critique postcoloniale face au “r eve
 ́  ́ m editerran een” ’, Francophone Postcolonial Studies 2 . 1 (Spring/Summer 2004 ),
70 – 9 .
 ́ 10 .  Christiane Chaulet-Achour, Albert Camus et l’Alg erie (Algiers, Barzakh, 2004 ),
p. 98 .
11 .  Albert Camus, ‘De kunstenaar en zijn tijd’, trans. Liesbeth van Nes, Raster 108
( 2004 ), 154 – 70 ( 169 ).
25
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

2
TOBY GARFITT
Situating Camus: the formative
influences
When speaking of formative influences on Camus, it would be a mistake
to  concentrate  exclusively  on  the  ‘great’  names:  Nietzsche,  Dostoyevsky,
Gide, and so on. Like any French boy with a passion for reading, the young
Albert Camus lived largely on a diet of adventure stories, among which the
 ́ historical series about the swashbuckling hero Pardaillan by Michel Z evaco
took pride of place (Sartre acknowledges his own debt to this series in his
autobiographical text, Les Mots ( Words )). Well before he was a confident
` reader himself, he was moved by Roland Dorgel es’s First World War novel
of the trenches Les Croix de bois ( The Wooden Crosses ), which his revered
primary  teacher  Louis  Germain  used  to  read  to  the  pupils  at  the  end  of
term and on other special occasions: it introduced him to a different form
of heroism from that of Pardaillan, and provided an essential link with his
own father, who had died before Albert was two, from wounds received at
the Battle of the Marne.
 ́ At the Grand Lyc ee in Algiers, where Camus discovered a totally different
world from that of the rough working-class district of Belcourt where he grew
` up, the author who appealed most to him was probably Moli ere. The impli-
cations of that are still to be explored, both for his dramatic practice and
for his often unrecognised humour. By the age of sixteen, in the classe de
` premi ere , he was beginning to explore outside the school syllabus, and that
 ́ was the year his uncle Gustave Acault lent him Andr e Gide’s Les Nourritures
terrestres ( Fruits of the Earth ). Gide’s lyrical celebration of heady, sensual
`  ́  ́ pleasure did not immediately speak to him. ‘A Alger, a seize ans, j’ etais satur e
de ces richesses; j’en souhaitais d’autres, sans doute’ ( Ess , 111 7 ) (‘In Algiers,
at sixteen, I was saturated with these riches; no doubt I was looking for
something else’). It was in the following year, 1930 – 1 , that Camus encoun-
tered the man who was to unlock the world of books and ideas for him.
That man was Jean Grenier, who at the age of thirty-two arrived back in
Algiers (where he had already taught for a year in 1923 – 4 ) to teach philos-
 ́ ophy at the Lyc ee. But Grenier was not only a teacher of philosophy and a
26
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Situating Camus: the formative influences
practising philosopher himself: he had recently begun to publish essays in
the Nouvelle Revue franc ̧aise ( NRF ), and he had even worked for a while
for the publishers Editions de la NRF (Gallimard), so that he brought with
him all the prestige of the Parisian literary world. His aim was less to teach
the official syllabus than to open his pupils’ minds to culture in a broad
sense. He had also recently visited Spain, and his enthusiasm for the culture
of that country (evident in his essays of the next few years) may well have
encouraged Camus to explore his own Spanish heritage: the figure of Don
Juan, discussed in one of Grenier’s essays, was to be of particular impor-
tance to Camus, who devoted a chapter to ‘Le Don Juanisme’ in Le Mythe
de Sisyphe .
Grenier was generous about lending books, and the first that he passed
on to Camus in the autumn of 1931 (on restarting the classe de philosophie
after a year of illness) was a slim novel by an obscure writer whom Grenier
 ́ had met only just before coming to Algiers, Andr e de Richaud. La Douleur
( Grief ) was a revelation to Camus. This book was
` `  ́ le  premier a  me  parler  de  ce  que  je  connaissais:  une  m ere,  la  pauvret e,  de
beaux soirs dans le cie l...Jevenais d’apprendre que les livres ne versaient pas
ˆ seulement l’oubli et la distraction. Mes silences t etus, ces souffrances vagues
et souveraines, le monde singulier qui m’entourait, la noblesse des miens, leur
` mis ere, mes secrets enfin, tout cela pouvait donc se dire! ( Ess , 111 7 – 18 )
(the first to speak to me of what I knew: a mother, poverty, beautiful evening
skies . . . I discovered that books offered more than just escapism. My moody
silences, those unclear but imperious sufferings, the strange world around me,
the nobility of my family, their poverty, my own secrets, all of that could be
acknowledged and expressed!)
He found something similar in Louis Guilloux’s account of his father’s syn-
dicalist  (trades  union)  past  in La  Maison  du  peuple ( The  House  of  the
People ) (Guilloux was a friend of Grenier’s from his adolescence in Saint-
Brieuc). These affirmations of the value of his personal identity set him free
to explore in writing what he later called the ‘part obscure’ ( Ess , 1925 ) (‘the
hidden side’), a term which also covers his strongly physical appreciation
 ́  ́ of the natural environment, and defines his distinctive form of alg erianit e .
Another writer that Grenier greatly admired and recommended to his pupil
was Proust; and given his passion for sport, this period may well have found
Camus reading Les Olympiques ( Olympics ), by Grenier’s friend Henry de
Montherlant,  with  the  preface  exalting  sport  as  a  means  of  escape  from
oppressive sociological definition.
During the year, of course, there were philosophical texts that the whole
class had to read, some of them on the official syllabus, and others chosen by
27
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

toby garfitt
the teacher to complement their studies. Schopenhauer, Nietzsche and Berg-
son were three on whom Grenier particularly insisted, as well as the Greek
thinkers that he knew so well, including both Plato and Plotinus (Camus’s
 ́ interest in the Greeks was to be further encouraged by Ren e Poirier during
his university studies). Schopenhauer had been at the source of Grenier’s own
vocation as a philosopher, while Nietzsche had been central to the analysis
of modern nihilism that he had published in Philosophies in 1924 . It was
Nietzsche’s Birth of Tragedy that he made his pupils read, with its reinterpre-
tation of the Greek tradition and its message of heroic optimism in the face
of despair: Grenier’s portrayal of Suetonius’s Caligula as ‘un Nietzsche bar-
1 bare’ (‘a barbarian Nietzsche’) was to make a profound impact on Camus.
Already between March and June 1932 several essays that Camus had orig-
inally written for Grenier and other teachers in the classe de philosophie
appeared in the local monthly review Sud , culminating in a longer piece on
music (in relation to Schopenhauer and Nietzsche: the full title of Nietzsche’s
work is The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music ) which Grenier had
corrected with great care. If all his pupils benefited from this level of atten-
tion, they were indeed fortunate. One of them reminded Grenier many years
 ́  ́ later of ‘vos admirables...corrig es de dissertation sur l’unit e profonde du
moi’ (‘your wonderful . . . comments on our essays on the deep unity of the
2 self’). He was a harsh marker, in a good French tradition; but this rigorous
training left Camus with a love for philosophical investigation and a desire
to take it further.
ˆ By  October 1932 ,  when  he  did  at  last  enter  the kh agne (or classe
 ́  ́ pr eparatoire for the prestigious Parisian grandes ecoles ; this had been created
two years before by Pierre Martino, Dean of the Faculty of Arts, but covered
just one year rather than the normal two, with some pupils going on to do a
 ́ second year of preparation at one of the big Paris lyc ees), Camus was begin-
ning to write seriously, which consolidated the burgeoning friendship with
Grenier. Although the class was small, numbering only a dozen, quite a few
of the pupils found Grenier’s classes incomprehensible. Their teacher was
also fairly frequently absent through illness. Camus and two or three others,
on the other hand, found him immensely stimulating. Germaine Blanchet
(Mme Blasi) describes a typical lesson, which might have to do with ideas of
freedom:
 ́  ́  ́  ́ Au d ebut, c’ etait construit . . . Grenier est en train de faire son expos e, il ecrit au
` tableau . . . et tout d’un coup, on ne sait pas d’o u cela est parti, on s’envole . . .
`  ́  ́  ́ on plane, on plane . . . c’est une esp ece de d elire . . . c’ etait inspir e...Dece
 ́ ` fait, il y avait des el eves qui ne pouvaient pas l’encaisser.
28
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Situating Camus: the formative influences
(To begin with, there was a clear structure . . . Grenier would be giving his
lecture, writing on the blackboard . . . and suddenly, without warning, it just
took off ...wewere soaring high . . . in a kind of delirium ...itwas inspired . . .
3 So of course some of the pupils couldn’t cope with it at all.)
Grenier introduced his students to all sorts of heterodox material, not least
the Eastern traditions of Hinduism, Buddhism and Taoism, Western mystics,
and the radical Russian Jewish philosopher Chestov, whose existential irra-
tionalism was inspired by the Old Testament prophets and by Dostoyevsky.
Dostoyevsky was one of the more mainstream authors he recommended,
along  with  Stendhal  and  Malraux,  whose La  Condition  humaine ( The
Human  Condition )  came  out  in  instalments  in  the NRF throughout  the
first half of 1933 . Dostoyevsky was one of Grenier’s heroes: when he and
Louis Guilloux were starting out as writers in the early 1920 s, Guilloux
aimed to be the new Tolstoy, and Grenier the new Dostoyevsky. As with
Schopenhauer, it was Dostoyevsky’s exploration of evil that first spoke to
Grenier, in relation to human freedom. He later noted that Dostoyevsky’s
analysis, in Notes from the Underground , of man’s awareness of his total
impotence within a blind, even absurd world, was very similar to that found
4 in L’Etranger : it  may  well  have  been  his  own  teaching  that  got  Camus
thinking along those lines. It was certainly the personal rather than the his-
torical implications of Dostoyevsky’s thought that touched Camus initially,
although  he  came  to  see  him  as  an  earlier  and  more  reliable  prophet  of
nihilism than Nietzsche. Dostoyevsky revealed the hidden depths of human
nature, characterised by the tragic conflict between the desire for truth and
the almost irresistible desire for unlimited freedom (represented by Ivan in
The  Brothers  Karamazov ),  in  relation  to  which  Camus  was  to  comment
that Dostoyevsky’s ‘souffrance personnelle est d’y participer et de le refuser
` a la fois’ ( TRN , 1888 ) (‘own personal suffering comes from sharing in it
and at the same time refusing it’). Meursault will find that the compatibil-
ity of truth and personal freedom is problematic, and the extension of the
debate in Camus’s later works to include justice will keep it firmly in a Dos-
toyevskian perspective. He and Grenier often discussed Dostoyevsky in their
correspondence; and in 1950 , when Grenier was writing a series of articles on
‘le mal’ (‘evil’), Camus approved enthusiastically, saying that it was ‘le sujet
` contemporain et, d’une certaine mani ere, le seul’ ( Corr , 168 ) (‘the subject of
the day, and in a sense the only subject’), and immediately referring to The
Brothers Karamazov . Meanwhile Paul Mathieu, who taught French litera-
ˆ ture in the kh agne , lost no opportunity to share his enthusiasm for Nietzsche
with his pupils, alongside the more traditional Racine and Pascal (the second
29
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

toby garfitt
of whom both Camus and Grenier later held to be the greatest of the French
stylists, together with Chateaubriand). Faced with these very diverse exam-
ples of heroism in literature and thought, Germaine Blanchet remembered
that Grenier’s main advice to Camus was ‘qu’il fallait dominer ’ (‘you must be
5 in control ’).
Camus was producing creative texts of his own now. It is indeed clear
6 from his first surviving letter to Grenier, dated 20 May 1932 ( Corr , 11 ),
that he looked for guidance and probably specific comments on his early
literary efforts, and at a later stage Grenier would provide these in quite
extensive detail on many of his most important manuscripts. Camus was
naturally drawn to the kind of lyrical essays that Grenier was now publishing
regularly. ‘Les Iles Kerguelen’ (‘The Kerguelen Islands’) had appeared in the
 ́ NRF in May 1931 , and in 1932 he was working on ‘Les Iles Fortun ees’ (‘The
Fortunate Isles’). Although starting from Grenier’s experience of a recent
trip  to  Spain,  with  early  evocations  of  Barcelona  and  Toledo,  this  essay
focusses on the more general point that ‘il existe quelques lieux, quelques
 ́  ́ ` moments privil egi es o u la vue d’un pays agit sur nous, comme un grand
 ́ ` ` ` musicien sur un instrument banal qu’il r ev ele , a proprement parler, a lui-
ˆ m eme’ (‘there are certain places, certain privileged moments, in which the
sight of a landscape acts on us like a great musician playing on a very ordinary
instrument and truly revealing it to itself’). For Grenier, such moments of
intense recognition, of consonance with self and the world, are also tragic
 ́ reminders of the solitude and indeed n eant (nothingness) of ordinary human
existence. Grenier’s writing achieves lyrical and emotional heights in this
essay, while retaining a remarkable classical sobriety:
` ` ` ` Qu’on  travaille a  Paris, a  Londres,  passe  encore.  Mais  partout  o ur egnent
 ́ perp etuellement le soleil et la mer, il faut se contenter de jouir, de souffrir et
` d’exprimer. A quoi bon remuer la boue de la plan ete quand on demeure au
centre des choses? Et lorsque lentement sonnaient les coups de midi et que
 ́ tonnait le canon du Fort Saint-Elme, un sentiment de pl enitude, non pas un
 ́  ́ sentiment de bonheur, mais un sentiment de pr esence r eelle et totale, comme
ˆ  ́  ́ si toutes les fissures de l’ etre etaient bouch ees, s’emparait de moi et de tout
 ́ ˆ  ́ ` ce qui etait autour de moi. De tous c ot es affluaient des torrents de lumi ere et
 ́ de joie qui de vasque en vasque tombaient pour se figer dans un oc ean sans
 ́ bords. En ce moment (le seul) je m’acceptais par la seule adh esion de mes pieds
` ` ˆ au sol, de mes yeux a la lumi ere. Et au m eme moment sur tous les rivages
 ́  ́  ́ de la M editerran ee . . . des milliers d’hommes etaient comme moi, retenant
leur souffle et disant: Oui. Et je pensais que si le monde sensible n’est qu’un
 ́ ` tissu l eger d’apparences, un voile de chim eres changeantes que la nuit nous
 ́ d echirons et que notre douleur essaie en vain de balayer, il est pourtant des
` hommes qui, les premiers a en souffrir, reforment ce voile, reconstruisent ces
30
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Situating Camus: the formative influences
 ́ apparences et font rebondir la vie universelle qui sans cet elan quotidien se
7 tarirait quelque part comme une source perdue dans la campagne.
(If you work in Paris or London, that is one thing. But wherever the sun and
the sea reign perpetually, one must be content with enjoying life, with suffering
and expressing. What is the use of stirring up the mud of the planet when one is
at the centre of everything? And when the clock slowly struck midday and the
cannon fired from the fort of Sant’ Elmo, a sense of plenitude, not a sense of
happiness, but of real, total presence, as if all the cracks were now filled, took
hold of me and everything around me. From all sides came torrents of light
and joy, cascading down and down and eventually coming to rest in a limitless
ocean. In that moment (alone) I accepted myself by virtue of the simple contact
between my feet and the ground, between my eyes and the light. And at the
same moment on every shore of the Mediterranean . . . thousands of others
like me were holding their breath and saying Yes! And I reflected that if the
external world is only a frail tissue of appearances, a veil of changing chimeras
that we tear aside at night and that our suffering attempts in vain to banish for
good, there are yet those who, while being the first to suffer from it, reinstate
the veil, rebuild the appearances, and set life going again – that universal life
that would otherwise trickle away and dry up like a spring in the depths of the
countryside.)
Passages like this were to have a major impact on the first readers of Les Iles
( Islands ), among them Camus. By November Grenier was working on a third
ˆ essay, ‘L’Ile de P aques’. The story of the dying butcher, feeling increasingly
vulnerable, isolated, and at the same time guilty, and of his young friend’s
well-meaning but clumsy attempts to comfort him, is a powerful and largely
depressing parable of the human condition, and it lacks the compensating
luminosity of Grenier’s earlier essays. But it was deliberately conceived as a
ˆ foil to the previous two ‘islands’. Camus, for one, was to find ‘L’Ile de P aques’
(‘Easter Island’) at least as suggestive as the others, and it contains the seeds
of both Caligula (in the reference to the narrator reading Suetonius’s life of
Caligula to the butcher) and La Chute (in the episodes where the butcher
 ́ behaves as a kind of juge-p enitent ). The essays of Noces , with their double
emphasis on the intense present-ness of the natural environment and the
inescapability of death, are of course deeply indebted to those of Les Iles ,
8 and to others that Grenier published in the local press.
For Grenier, the island is a place of inevitable confrontation with the self,
in the absence of all other distractions, and is therefore in its essence meta-
physical. One is confronted with the truest image of oneself, and it is that
experience  that  can  then  release  one’s  inner  song.  The  experience  of  the
9 island, then, as Deleuze was later to argue, gives rise to both philosophy
and artistic creation. Camus’s initial response to Les Iles was written down
31
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

toby garfitt
for his own purposes as soon as he had finished the book, and commu-
nicated to Grenier only later, in a letter ( Corr , 13 – 14 ). There is a genuine
desire to understand, a sense of almost surprised recognition, and at the
same time a fair amount of resistance to Grenier’s line of thought, which
is strongly influenced by Indian philosophy and is constantly pulling away
from the human, relegating it to the periphery. Camus is struggling with
Grenier’s essentially metaphysical and potentially antisocial approach, and
wanting to assert the possibility of a definitive commitment to the values of
the here-and-now. Noces will be the fullest statement of that response. What
Camus says about Les Iles in his ‘Notes de lecture’ is less combative, more
appreciative (CAC 2 , 204 ). In a letter of 1938 he would bring together the
combative and the appreciative sides, recognising that ‘Ce que vous me dites
 ́ `  ́  ́ me r evolte toujours pendant quelques heures. Mais cela me force ar efl echir
` `  ́ et a comprendre. Apr es, je ne sens plus que ma gratitude et mon amiti e pour
vous’ ( Corr , 28 ) (‘What you say always revolts me for a few hours. But it
makes me think, and understand. Afterwards, I feel nothing but gratitude,
and my friendship for you’). Camus is drawn despite himself to the tragic
recognition that true satisfaction is ultimately unattainable, and in the pref-
ace he wrote much later for a new edition of Les Iles in 1959 he gave Grenier
the credit for initiating him and his hedonistic Algerian contemporaries into
 ́ d esenchantement (disenchantment with the here-and-now) and hence into
an appreciation of the less materialistic values of culture. He was avidly read-
ing Gide at the same time, but not for the sensual awakening experienced
by so many Northern European readers, and which was simply part of his
Algerian heritage: rather, he saw in Gide the model of the creative artist, and
 ́  ́ in his writing, ‘l’ evangile de d enuement dont j’avais besoin’ ( Ess , 111 8 ) (‘the
gospel of asceticism that I needed’). Grenier thus acted as a catalyst for the
lasting influence that Gide was to have on Camus.
In  the  summer  of 1933 Grenier  and  his  family  moved  up  to  the  ‘Parc
d’Hydra’, on the hills above Algiers, where Camus and his first wife Simone
would also live for a short while after their marriage in 1934 . It was not
always easy for teachers and pupils to get to know each other socially, but
Grenier’s writing offered a discreet invitation to dialogue, and so provided
an opening. The responses of Camus and others encouraged Grenier to take
the initiative in establishing more of a social relationship, and the new, big-
ger house at Hydra made it possible for him to invite some of his pupils
round on a Sunday. This soon became a regular feature, and was remem-
bered with warmth and gratitude, for instance by Charles Dufourcq, later a
10 distinguished historian of medieval Spain and North Africa. Many others
came, including Max-Pol Fouchet, the future editor of the poetry review
 ́ Fontaine , Andr e Belamich, who was to translate Lorca, the architect Jean de
32
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Situating Camus: the formative influences
 ́ Maisonseul, the sculptor Louis B enisti, and several painters. Edmond Char-
lot, whom Grenier later helped to set up his own bookshop and publishing
house, and who would be Camus’s first publisher, joined them before long.
It was to be Charlot who, with Camus, formed the nucleus of the revived
Ecole d’Alger. The colonial tradition launched by Louis Bertrand ( Le Sang
des races ( The Blood of the Races ), 1899 ; Nuits d’Alger ( Algiers Nights ),
1930 ) was no longer dynamic, and the way was open for these two to gather
round  them  not  only  the  elite  group  whose  collective  intellectual  adven-
11 ture was later celebrated by Fouchet, but other significant writers such as
` Emmanuel Robl es and the slightly older Gabriel Audisio. Ideas of all kinds
were discussed on those Sundays at Hydra, and books recommended and
lent: Proust, Chestov (the Russian Jewish philosopher) and many others.
Grenier was certainly someone whose advice was worth listening to. From
1934 onwards, his contributions to the NRF often addressed current political
topics, if from an unconventional angle. Camus recognised that he had some-
thing important to say. ‘Le monde d’aujourd’hui est un dialogue M(alraux)
G(renier)’ ( C ii , 214 ) (‘The world of today is a dialogue between M(alraux)
and G(renier)’): when Camus jotted down this observation in 1947 , it was
12 not new to him. Already in 1934 , according to Olivier Todd, he had identi-
fied two visions of the world, represented by Grenier and Malraux. He was
well aware that the communists, with whom Malraux was closely associated,
put man at the centre, while the Oriental philosophers saw ‘the all’ at the
centre, with man round the edge. Despite the powerful lyrical expressions
of humanism that can be found in Les Iles , particularly in the essay ‘Les Iles
 ́ fortun ees’, the attraction of the Indian metaphysical systems focussed on the
Absolute is dominant in the volume, and Camus was not wrong to identify
in Grenier’s thought an implicit challenge to the philosophy of action rep-
 ́ resented by Malraux, most notably in Les Conqu erants ( The Conquerors )
and La Voie royale ( The Royal Way ).
In the following year, 1935 , Grenier published an article entitled ‘Le cas
Malraux’ (‘The case of Malraux’), in which he dealt not with La Condition
humaine but with an article by Malraux that had appeared much earlier,
13  ́ ‘D’une jeunesse europ eenne’ (‘On European youth’) ( 1927 ). In this arti-
cle Malraux had already defined the dilemma in which Camus now found
himself, in terms of what Nietzsche called European nihilism. For Malraux,
 ́ this  nihilism  showed  itself  as  an  actual  appetite  for  ‘le  n eant’  (‘nothing-
 ́ ness’), experienced as ‘intensit e’ (‘intensity’) and indeed ‘grandeur’ (‘great-
ness, grandeur’), for the conquest of which the countries of the Far East
offered almost unlimited scope. It is hardly surprising that Camus was more
receptive  to  this  kind  of  Orientalism  (explored  also  in La  Tentation  de
l’Occident ( The Temptation of the Occident ), 1926 ) than to that offered
33
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

toby garfitt
by Grenier. In terms of his own writing, the Nietzschean adventurer-hero
favoured by Malraux was to form the subject of a chapter in Le Mythe
de Sisyphe , and also, in conjunction with the figure of Caligula (discussed
ˆ by  Grenier  in  class  and  in  ‘L’Ile  de  P aques’),  to  give  rise  to  the  epony-
mous protagonist of Camus’s first play, the first version of which displays
stronger Nietzschean elements, most notably the fascination with extreme
self-assertion, than the subsequent rewritings. In terms of political commit-
ment, Camus was under pressure in 1934 to join the Communist Party, but
 ́ he wanted to keep his eyes open and avoid being ‘aveugl e par de courtes
certitudes’ ( Ess , 115 9 ) (‘blinded by short-term convictions’); in the course
of the next year, Grenier was to encourage his pupil to follow his natural
inclinations and join the Party. In October 1935 , Grenier’s article ‘La Porte
 ́ ferm ee’ in the NRF argued for the freedom to choose according to one’s own
‘profonde exigence’ (‘deep imperatives’), and while for himself that meant a
philosophical and indeed metaphysical imperative, he recognised that in the
case of Camus there were different imperatives. Grenier’s advice will have
been based on Camus’s own deep needs at the time and the appropriateness
of expressing them in terms of the current social and political climate, rather
than on any belief that communism (or any other ‘ism’ for that matter) was
 ́ the only legitimate creed. Like the rest of humanity, Camus needed ‘un elan
 ́ vers quelque chose qui la d epasse’ (‘an aspiration towards something that
transcends the human’), as Grenier said in his lecture to the Algiers branch of
the ‘Amis d’ Esprit ’ (a nationwide ‘third-way’ movement founded by the left-
wing Catholic intellectual Emmanuel Mounier), which Camus may indeed
14 have attended. Both workers and intellectuals needed to work for justice,
but Grenier interpreted that in terms of human dignity in a broad sense
rather than in terms of a specific political programme.
Grenier and Malraux enjoyed a long and good friendship, but their dif-
ferences  of  approach  and  emphasis  were  marked.  These  stem  essentially
from their analyses of modern nihilism, and the conclusions they draw. Gre-
nier had got in on the act earlier than Malraux, with his two-part article in
 ́ Philosophies in 1924 entitled ‘Le Nihilisme europ een et les appels de l’Orient’
(‘European Nihilism and the Call of the East’). This article, published under
the pseudonym ‘Jean Caves’, already contains a number of themes that will
run through Grenier’s subsequent work. There is an acute awareness of the
climate of nihilism in both Europe and Russia, stemming from an analysis
of European civilisation that owed much to Nietzsche and Spengler on the
15 one hand and a pessimism derived from Schopenhauer on the other. If
Grenier’s preferred solution is to heed what he calls ‘les appels de l’Orient’
(‘the call(s) of the East’), he does not recommend an uncritical Orientalism
(such as that of the Theosophists, who tried to combine Western spiritualism
34
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Situating Camus: the formative influences
with Hinduism, or the devotees of Gandhi’s creed of non-violent resistance
to imperialism). His analysis of the heritage of nihilism, and his disquiet at
the cult of action, were to be confirmed by the political events of the 1930 s:
the rise of the fascist threat across Europe, the attempted right-wing coup
 ́ d’ etat of 6 February 1934 in Paris, the disputes over the French Popular Front
coalition of 1936 – 8 and the prospect of renewed world conflict.
In April 1936 Grenier published an important article in the NRF , ‘L’Age
des orthodoxies’. The problem with modern Western society, Grenier argues,
is that there has been a loss of faith in principles, while the necessity of
action has become imperious. Action, once performed, is then used to furnish
principles for thought. He gives credit to Malraux for exploring this paradox
so effectively in L’Espoir ( Hope ), as is clear from his open letter to Malraux
dated 30 January 1938 and included in his Essai sur l’esprit de l’orthodoxie .
Both of them recognise that there is an unbridgeable gap between thought
and action. The choice of particular forms of action is just that, a choice,
 ́ and not an ‘ evidence’ (‘an obvious, logical conclusion’), and it will inevitably
 ́ involve a ‘d echirement’ (‘agonising decision’). That of course is precisely the
 ́  ́ dilemma that Camus will explore in Les Justes and L’Homme r evolt e , and
in very much the same terms that Grenier uses here:
ˆ ` Vaut-il mieux etre un enfant ou un bourreau? Voil a ce que peut se deman-
 ́ der un r evolutionnaire . . . Mais voici un cas particulier, celui des gens qui
`  ́ ` attachent tant d’importance a des choses (qu’il faut bien se r esigner a appeler
 ́  ́ des vieux noms de Justice et de V erit e) qu’ils ont toutes sortes de scrupules
ˆ  ́ ` (m eme quand ils sont lanc es en pleine action) a faire quelque chose qui aille
contre ces abstractions . . . tel un de nos aviateurs qui trouve par moments son
16  ́ ˆ ` m etier dego utant et se sent a la fois justicier et assassin.
(Is it better to be a child or an executioner? That is a question that a revolu-
tionary may well ask...Buthere is a particular case, that of people who attach
such importance to certain things (that one must resign oneself to calling by the
old names of Justice and Truth) that they have all sorts of scruples (even when
in the thick of action) about doing anything that goes against those abstract
ideas...such as one of our airmen who at times finds his job revolting and
feels himself to be a righter of wrongs and a murderer rolled into one.)
Grenier offered no practical solutions. In the face of the Absolute, that which
is relative is indeed ‘mensonger’ (‘deceitful, a lie’). But such a conclusion is
untenable, because inhuman. Nevertheless, Camus was deeply sympathetic
to Grenier’s desire to find an alternative to Prometheus, and his own choice
of Sisyphus may have been partly inspired by a historical reflection in ‘Le cas
 ́ `  ́ Malraux’, where Grenier had written: ‘Notre epoque de progr es mat eriel
 ́  ́  ́ ` ind efini a aboli le rocher de Sisyphe: l’œuvre d’une g en eration s’ajoute a
35
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

toby garfitt
 ́  ́  ́ l’autre: mais elle a instaur e la pens ee de Sisyphe depuis la ruine de la m ethode
 ́ d’autorit e par Descartes.’ (‘Our age of unlimited material progress has done
away with the rock of Sisyphus: the work of the next generation carries
on where the previous one left off: but in the realm of thought, Sisyphean
thinking has dominated since the destruction of the old system of authority
17 by Descartes.’) Camus’s instinctive reaction to Grenier’s Essai sur l’esprit
d’orthodoxie will again have been negative, but he was generous enough
to recognise the validity of its arguments. He pinpoints Grenier’s main con-
 ́  ́ tention in a footnote in L’Homme r evolt e as being the need to preserve ‘la
 ́  ́ libert e de l’intelligence’ in the face of ‘le principe d’autorit e’ which seeks to
reduce it to conformity ( Ess , 626 ). That is a message that is always relevant,
and so Camus can hail the Essai as still being pertinent fifteen years later,
even though Grenier had made it quite clear in the preface that the individual
 ́ essays that constituted it ‘n’ont pas eu pour objet l’actualit e . . . puisqu’ils
 ́  ́  ́ ont et e ecrits contre elle’ (‘they were not about current affairs, indeed they
18 were written in conscious reaction against current trends’). For his part,
Grenier indicated later that what Camus had appreciated in the Essai was
19  ́  ́ simply ‘l’amour de la v erit e’ (‘the love of truth’): truth, as a bulwark against
all kinds of ‘mensonge’ (‘lies’), was very important to both of them.
In  a  letter  to  Camus  in 1945 ,  in  the  context  of  Camus’s  forthcoming
 ́ ‘Remarque  sur  la  r evolte’  (‘A  Comment  on  Revolt’)  (which  Grenier  had
commissioned for a volume he was editing), Grenier warns him against the
dangers of following Malraux and undoing the positive achievements of the
20 Nietzschean revolt against values: ‘Pourtant les valeurs sont des choses qui
ˆ `  ́ encha ınent l’homme; et a chaque fois qu’il en cr ee il se forge de nouveaux
liens’ ( Corr , 111 ) (‘But values are things that put men in chains; and each
time they create values, they are forging new shackles for themselves’). Gre-
nier nevertheless considered Malraux to be ‘le meilleur reflet de ce qui a fait
`  ́ la grandeur et la mis ere de l’ epoque’ (‘the best reflection of what has gone
21 to make the greatness and the wretchedness of our age’). To that extent
Camus was right to take Malraux as the representative of one major current
in the modern world, although by 1947 , with his Resistance episode behind
him, Malraux had chosen a different (Gaullist) kind of engagement . Grenier,
on the other hand, represented for Camus the uncompromising intellectual,
upholding an ideal that his pupil would always aspire to. Camus’s division
of the world into a Malraux-camp and a Grenier-camp was of course artifi-
cial. The post-war world was indeed becoming polarised, but Malraux was
no longer the left-wing activist of the Spanish Civil War, and Grenier was
certainly no Americanised liberal intellectual. The two of them represented
two very different yet also uncannily similar ideals that Camus admired but
never felt himself able to emulate; pivotal figures, on the borderline between
36
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Situating Camus: the formative influences
the human and the supra-human, the ‘plein’ (‘fullness’, ‘plenitude’) and the
‘vide’ (‘emptiness’, ‘the void’). It may have been the half-realisation of their
underlying similarity that influenced the choice of the name Victor Malan for
the character in Le Premier Homme who is explicitly identified with ‘J.G.’
 ́ (Grenier) in the manuscript ( PH , 33 ): Victor = ‘conqu erant’ (cf. Malraux’s
 ́ novel Les Conqu erants ), Malan = Malraux?
The period 1931 – 4 was crucial for Camus’s intellectual development, and
it is clear that many of the elements that he absorbed in those three years
were introduced to him, and mediated, by Grenier. Their conversations con-
tinued, in person and by letter, for the rest of Camus’s life. There were brief
interruptions (and a certain cooling between 1935 and 1938 during Camus’s
communist phase), which had a positive value in helping Camus to establish
his intellectual independence: he and Grenier would now be equal partners
in  a  relationship  that  continued  to  be  fruitful  for  both  of  them.  Camus,
for his part, was now equipped with his major literary and philosophical
interlocutors, of whom Dostoyevsky and Nietzsche were probably the most
important, with Grenier himself, Malraux and Gide coming close behind.
Others, such as the idealist Jewish/Christian thinker Simone Weil, would
appear later (although Grenier had already introduced Camus to the work
of Rachel Bespaloff, which has much in common with that of Weil). Camus’s
collaboration with Edmond Charlot kept him anchored in the Ecole d’Alger;
and the continuing importance of the ‘part obscure’ ( Ess , 1925 ) (‘dark side’),
which is considered in chapter 3 , should not be overlooked.
NOTES
1 .  See Jean Grenier, Albert Camus. Souvenirs (Paris, Gallimard, 1968 ), p. 59 .
2 .  Unpublished letter from Jean Granarolo to Jean Grenier, 24 November 1967 .
3 .  Conversation with Mme Blasi.
4 .  See Jean Grenier, L’Existence malheureuse (Paris, Gallimard, 1957 ), p. 176 .
5 .  Conversation with Mme Blasi.
6 .  Internal evidence, however, suggests that this may be a misreading for 20 Septem-
ber – 5 and 9 can look very similar – and therefore the second letter, dated 25
August, in fact comes first.
7 .  Jean Grenier, Les Iles (Paris, Gallimard, 1959 (original edition 1933 )), pp. 89 – 90 .
8 .  Some of these were collected in Santa-Cruz (Algiers, Charlot, 1937 ) and then
 ́  ́ in Inspirations  m editerran eennes (Paris,  Gallimard, 1941 ),  others  were  never
reprinted.
 ́  ́ 9 .  See Gilles Deleuze, ‘L’Ile d eserte’ ( 1953 ), in L’Ile d eserte et autres textes , ed.
David Lapoujade (Paris, Minuit, 2002 ).
10 .  Unpublished letter from Charles Dufourcq to Grenier, 11 February 1964 .
 ́  ́  ́ 11 .  Max-Pol Fouchet, ‘M emoire parl ee’, Magazine litt eraire 8 (June 1967 ), 6 , quoted
 ́ by Jacqueline L alensi, Albert Camus ou la naissance d’un romancier (1930– evi-V
 ́  ́ ` 1942) (Paris, Gallimard, 2006 , edition etablie par Agn es Spiquel), pp. 28 – 9 .
37
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

toby garfitt
12 .  Olivier Todd, Albert Camus, une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ), p. 69 .
 ́ 13 .  Jean Grenier, ‘Le cas Malraux’, Les Cahiers du Plateau 3 ( 1935 ), 45 – 7 ; Andr e
 ́  ́  ́ Malraux, ‘D’une jeunesse europ eenne’, in Andr e Chamson, Andr e Malraux, Jean
Grenier, Henri Petit and Pierre-Jean Jouve, Ecrits (Paris, Grasset, 1927 ).
14 .  Reprinted in Jean Grenier, Essai sur l’esprit d’orthodoxie (Paris, Gallimard, 1967
(original edition 1938 )).
15 .  Oswald  Spengler  had  published  the  two  volumes  of  his Der  Untergang  des
Abendlandes ( The  Decline  of  the  West )  in  German  in 1917 and 1922 :  Gre-
nier’s analysis came well before the French translation of the book appeared in
1931 . Schopenhauer’s Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ( The World as Will and
Representation ) was published in 1818 .
16 .  Grenier, Essai ,p. 172 .
17 .  Grenier, ‘Le cas Malraux’, p. 45 .
18 .  Grenier, Essai ,p. 11 .
19 .  Grenier, Albert Camus ,p. 30 .
20 .  See  Nietzsche, Also  sprach  Zarathustra ( Thus  Spake  Zarathustra ), 1883 – 5 ;
 ̈ Jenseits von Gut und B ose ( Beyond Good and Evil ), 1886 .
Jean Grenier, Sous l’occupation (Paris, Claire Paulhan, 1997 ), p. 223 . 21 .
38
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

3
EDWARD J. HUGHES
Autobiographical soundings
in L’Envers et l’Endroit
ˆ  ́ Le m eme vertige qui avait saisi l’enfant que j’ etais a obscurci mes
yeux d’homme.
( TRN , 1423 – 4 )
[I] felt the same horror sweep over me now I was a man as I had
1 previously felt as a child.
( P , 193 )
The collection of five brief essays that go to make up L’Envers et l’Endroit
were first published by Charlot in Algiers in 1937 in a limited print run of
350 copies. Written by Camus in his early twenties, the essays, which he ded-
icated to his mentor Jean Grenier, include a sometimes raw account of family
life for a child growing up in real poverty in working-class colonial Algiers.
In  his  preface  to  the  second  edition  published  two  decades  later,  Camus
2 accounts for his reluctance over many years to authorise a new edition.
While insisting that he denies nothing of the portrait of life contained in the
collection, he expresses doubts about the writing, which he sees as being mal-
adroit and in places unnecessarily high-flown. Yet in spite of their aesthetic
limitations, these early essays stand, he argues with hindsight, as potent tes-
timony to a childhood that involved not only prolonged poverty but also
 ́ what he claims to have been genuine happiness. In a letter to the poet Ren e
Char in October 1953 , he writes of a legacy that he cannot ignore: ‘Oui,
`  ́ renoncer a l’enfance est impossible. Et pourtant, il faut s’en s eparer un jour,
 ́  ́ ext erieurement au moins...j’ai grandi dans les rues poussi ereuses, sur les
 ́ plages sales. Nous nagions et, un peu plus loin, c’ etait la mer pure. La vie
 ́  ́  ́ etait dure chez moi, et j’ etais profond ement heureux, la plupart du temps’
( Ess , 1180 ) (‘Yes, renouncing childhood is impossible. And yet one has to
separate oneself from it, at least externall y...I grew up in dusty streets, on
dirty beaches. We used to swim and, a bit further out, the sea was so pure.
Life at home was hard, and I was deeply happy, most of the time.’)
The autobiographical evidence that we glean from L’Envers et l’Endroit
does not necessarily square with the largely positive balance-sheet which
the  letter  to  Char  conveys.  Moreover, Noces ,  Camus’s  other  collection
39
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
of  early  essays  much  more  widely  available  in  his  day  than L’Envers  et
l’Endroit , preached an exuberant celebration of life that masked the darker
3 side explored in the latter collection. The young Camus and his family had
much to contend with. His illiterate, partially deaf and mute mother was
an impoverished war widow who worked as a cleaner. But she was much
more than a victim of economic hardship. Along with her two children and
a brother, she was forced to live with her mother, a feared authority fig-
ure who is evoked graphically both in L’Envers et l’Endroit and in Camus’s
last work, the unfinished Le Premier Homme , where the autobiographical
is again readily detectable.
Camus’s account of this strained cohabitation features in the first essay
of the collection, ‘L’Ironie’ (‘Irony’). The piece sketches three brief scenar-
ios involving older figures: the first focusses on the isolated, illiterate old
woman for whom the younger generation have no time; in the second, an
elderly man narrates adventures of his life to three young men who remain
ˆ ˆ unimpressed: ‘un vieil homme qui va mourir est inutile, m eme g enant et
insidieux’ ( Ess , 18 ) (‘an old man who is going to die is useless, he is even
4 an insidious embarrassment’) ( BB , 18 ); the third scenario reconstructs the
domestic setting experienced by the young Camus, still at school, his brother
who  works  in  an  insurance  office,  his  mother  and  uncle,  and  the  feared
maternal grandmother. In her bullying manner, the matriarchal figure nar-
cissistically challenges the schoolboy to declare which of the two women in
the household he prefers. Obliged to choose her, the boy can only feel ‘un
 ́ ` grand elan d’amour pour cette m ere qui se taisait toujours’ ( Ess , 20 – 1 ) (‘a
great upsurge of love for his ever silent mother’ ( BB , 21 )). When the grand-
mother develops a liver infection, she shows no desire to be discreet in a way
that might protect the children, preferring instead to vomit noisily into the
rubbish container in the kitchen before resuming the work that she deems,
boastfully, to be crucial to the family’s survival. Camus concludes the essay
with a brief coda where, with the ironic detachment announced by the essay
title, the lives and deaths of the three elderly figures are drawn together as
 ́ three case-studies, ‘trois destins semblables et pourtant diff erents’ ( Ess , 22 )
(‘three destinies which are different and yet alike’ ( BB , 22 )). Irony is also
at work in the way in which the two boys view the grandmother’s sickness.
Well used to her theatrical displays of self-worth (her showy industriousness
and her self-righteousness), they cannot conceive that what turns out to be
her terminal illness is anything other than yet one more sadistic performance
in a life of psychological manipulation, or in Camus’s damning formulation:
` ‘la derni ere et la plus monstrueuse des simulations de cette femme’ ( Ess ,
22 ) (‘the last and most monstrous of this woman’s performances’ ( BB , 22 )).
40
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Autobiographical soundings
Significantly, when the awareness of her death dawns on the younger grand-
son, he experiences no real loss and his show of grieving at the graveside is
merely prompted by the outbursts of those around him.
The raw emotions which Camus’s protagonist evokes in respect of the
grandmother are counterpointed in the second essay in the collection, ‘Entre
oui  et  non’  (‘Between  Yes  and  No’)  where  the  unassuming  figure  of  the
mother – again reflecting faithfully Camus’s autobiographical experience –
takes centre stage. The essay is structured around a disturbance of memory,
working between a present moment in the narrator’s early adulthood as he
sits in a Moorish cafe on the edge of the Arab part of the city and recollection
`  ́ of childhood memories of life with his mother: ‘Je pense a un enfant qui v ecut
 ́ dans un quartier pauvre. Ce quartier, cette maison! Il n’y avait qu’un etage
 ́  ́  ́ et les escaliers n’ etaient pas eclair es’ ( Ess , 24 ) (‘I think of a child living in
a poor district. That district, that house! There were only two floors, and
the staircases were unlit’ ( BB , 24 )). Registering the ‘voix du quartier pauvre’
(‘voices of the poor district’) was Camus’s goal and indeed he had already
used this formulation as the title for an early version of the material that was
5 to feed into L’Envers et l’Endroit .
Camus juxtaposes what negates life and what redeems it in his evocation
of Belcourt, the district in Algiers where he grew up. As working-class fami-
lies sit on the street outside their homes for recreation on summer evenings,
the boy protagonist drinks in the beauty of the pure night sky, a beauty
which assumes its full appeal, Camus argues, in the eyes of those not dis-
tracted by material comfort. Yet the signs of squalor are unavoidable: ‘Il y
`  ́ avait derri ere l’enfant un couloir puant et sa petite chaise, crev ee, s’enfonc ̧ait
un peu sous lui’ ( Ess , 24 – 5 ) (‘Behind the child lay a stinking corridor and
his little chair, splitting across the bottom, sank slightly beneath his weight’
( BB , 24 )). The uninviting interior provides the setting for an arresting portrait
of the mother, a description which, notwithstanding the use of the third per-
son to denote both mother and son, draws on autobiographical experience.
Herself the daughter of a dominating mother, she had briefly experienced lib-
eration through marriage. But once a war widow, she is forced by economic
circumstances to return to the maternal home, earning a wage which she
hands over to the matriarch. The taciturn mother’s self-effacing role allows
the grandmother to assume responsibility for the boys’ education, which she
oversees in a way that is punitive in both physical and psychological terms.
The self-effacement brings its own complications for the children. Thus, on
those occasions when the younger boy returns home to find only his mother
there, he is drawn up short by this image of a vulnerable, pathetic and yet
also forbidding figure:
41
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
 ́  ́  ́ Autour d’elle, la nuit s’ epaissit dans laquelle ce mutisme est d’une irr em ediable
 ́ ` d esolation. Si l’enfant entre a ce moment, il distingue la maigre silhouette aux
 ́ ˆ ` epaules osseuses et s’arr ete: il a peur. Il commence a sentir beaucoup de choses.
` A peine s’est-il aperc ̧u de sa propre existence. Mais il a mal a pleurer devant
 ́ `  ́ ce silence animal. Il a piti edesam ere, est-ce l’aimer? Elle ne l’a jamais caress e
` puisqu’elle ne saurait pas. Il reste alors de longues minutes a la regarder. A se
 ́ sentir etranger, il prend conscience de sa peine. Elle ne l’entend pas, car elle est
` ˆ ` sourde. Tout a l’heure, la vieille rentrera, la vie rena ıtra: la lumi ere ronde de la
`  ́  ́ lampe ap etrole, la toile cir ee, les cris, les gros mots. Mais maintenant, ce silence
ˆ  ́  ́ marque un temps d’arr et, un instant d emesur e...l’enfant croit sentir, dans
 ́ ` ` l’ elan qui l’habite, de l’amour pour sa m ere. Et il le faut bien parce qu’apr es
` tout c’est sa m ere. ( Ess , 25 – 6 )
Around her, night thickens and then her silence is a grief without repair. If the
child comes in at this moment, he sees the thin shape with its bony shoulders
and stops: he is afraid. He is beginning to feel a lot of things. He is scarcely
aware of his own existence, but this animal silence makes him cry with pain.
He feels sorry for his mother, but is this loving her? She has never hugged or
kissed him for she wouldn’t know how. Then he will stand a long time watching
her. Because he feels that he is separate from her, he becomes conscious of her
suffering. She can’t hear him, for she is deaf. In a few moments, the old woman
will come back, life will start up again: the round light cast by the paraffin lamp,
the oil-cloth on the table, the shouts, the swear-words. But in the meantime
this silence marks a pause, an immensely long moment . . . the child thinks
that the upsurge of feeling in him is love for his mother. And this must be so,
because after all she is his mother. ( BB , 25 – 6 )
I have quoted at length from this autobiographical account to give promi-
nence to Camus’s pained, deeply ambivalent portrait of the mother. Crucially,
the narrator is hesitant about equating the son’s pity with love. Indeed in the
concluding lines of the quotation, the strained interaction between the pair
excludes any possibility of affirmative, conventional role models (the nurtur-
ing mother, the loving son). The twenty-two-year-old Camus who authors
this intimate portrait can draw only negative conclusions from the failing
` ˆ relationship:  ‘Sa  m ere  toujours  aura  ces  silences.  Lui  cro ıtra  en  douleur’
( Ess , 26 ) (‘His mother will always have these silences. He will grow in pain’
( BB , 26 )).  The  scene  ends  with  the  mother,  startled  by  her  son’s  return-
ing  home,  sending  him  off  to  attend  to  his  homework.  With  resigned
detachment,  the  narrator  concludes  that  graduating  to  adulthood  in  no
way compensates for the profound lack (of emotional communication and
sustenance) that marked his childhood. Duty and societal expectation thus
become alienating; or as Camus puts it anecdotally, doing one’s homework
and  later  accepting  adulthood  lead  only  to  old  age  and,  by  implication,
42
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Autobiographical soundings
to the alienating non-resolution of the emotional conflicts thrown up by
childhood.
In Camus’s fictional works, the mother figure constitutes a point of contin-
uing fascination: in L’Etranger , her death and Meursault’s socially eccentric
response to it are fundamental to the ensuing drama of his incrimination;
in the play Le Malentendu , the relationship between mother (and daugh-
ter) and son becomes a homicidal one; in La Peste , Dr Rieux’s mother is
portrayed as an idealised, nurturing figure who helps her son through the
emotional and physical strains of the plague. (By contrast, his friend Tarrou,
whose words are cited in the epigraph to this chapter, exemplifies the posi-
tion of the adult child psychologically scarred by a parent figure, in his case
6 the father who, as judge, has the power to condemn people to death.) In Le
Premier Homme , where the autobiographical seam resurfaces, the search for
the figure of the father headlined in the title of Part i of the novel does not
exclude an analogous search for the mother. Significantly, however, by the
time of writing this last text, Camus’s conception of the mother has mutated
and she emerges as a suffering, Christ-like figure ( PH , 283 , 295 ; FM , 232 ,
 ́ 239 ). But by choosing, in ‘Entre oui et non’, to italicise the line ‘ L’indiff erence
`  ́ de cette m ere etrange! ’( Ess , 26 )(‘ The indifference of this strange mother!’
( BB , 26 )), Camus already casts the parent figure as a source of enduring
preoccupation and enigma in his writing.
In the same essay, the emotional negativity clouding the portrait of the
mother finds more direct expression in the narrator’s account of the domestic
drama he experiences as an adult living alone in the suburbs with a dog, two
cats and their kittens. One by one, the kittens die, their mother unable to
feed them. The climax comes when the narrator returns home to find the sole
surviving kitten half-eaten by its mother. These images of failed nurture and
parental violence from the animal world allow Camus to explore emotional
intensity at one remove, importantly, from the set-up with the mother. The
latter remains nevertheless a figure of unresolved contradiction. Much later,
in an autobiographical reference in the appendices to Le Premier Homme ,
Camus alludes to the sequence of adult relationships panning out from the
 ́  ́ strained, intimate connection with the mother: ‘Maman. La v erit e est que,
 ́ malgr e tout mon amour, je n’avais pas pu vivre au niveau de cette patience
aveugle, sans phrases, sans projets. Je n’avais pu vivre de sa vie ignorante.
 ́  ́  ́  ́ ˆ  ́ ˆ  ́  ́ Et j’avais couru le monde, edifi e, cr e e, br ul e les etres. Mes jours avaient et e
`  ́ remplis ad eborder – mais rien ne m’avait rempli le cœur comme . . .’ ( PH ,
304 )(‘ Maman . The truth is that, in spite of all my love, I had not been able
to live that life of blind patience, without words, without plans. I could not
live her life of ignorance. And I had travelled far and wide, had built, had
43
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
created, had loved people and abandoned them. My days had been full to
7 overflowing – but nothing had filled my heart like . . .’ ( FM , 244 ). The
ellipsis delivers the emotionally complex tribute to the mother.
In his preface to the second edition of L’Envers et l’Endroit published in
1958 , more than twenty years after the first, Camus expresses an artistic reti-
cence about publicising the raw emotions contained in these essays. He writes
of a personal recklessness that needs to be checked and goes on to vaunt
the merits of an artistic re-channelling of powerful affect: ‘Je connais mon
 ́ ˆ ` d esordre, la violence de certains instincts, l’abandon sans gr ace o u je peux
ˆ  ́  ́ me jeter. Pour etre edifi e, l’œuvre d’art doit se servir d’abord de ces forces
ˆ obscures de l’ ame. Mais non sans les canaliser, les entourer de digue s...Mes
ˆ digues, aujourd’hui encore, sont peut- etre trop hautes’ ( Ess , 12 ) (‘I know my
disorder, the violence of certain instincts, the graceless abandon into which I
can cast myself. To be constructed, the work of art must first of all use these
dark forces of the soul. But not without canalising them, surrounding them
with dikes...Perhaps my dikes are still too high today’ ( BB , 12 )).
Camus’s lines convey a very palpable sense of work in progress, as well
as a nostalgic desire to retrieve affective experience sidelined in the quest
for artistic containment. He expresses the urgent aspiration to establish the
balance between ‘ce que je suis et ce que je dis’ ( Ess , 12 ) (‘what I am and
what I say’ ( BB , 13 ), a balance that he dreams of securing in a promised
future work that was in fact never to materialise – Camus died less than two
years after the publication of the second edition of L’Envers et l’Endroit .
In the conclusion to his preface, Camus sets as a key, longer-term career
goal the creation of a language and a set of myths that will enable him to
rewrite L’Envers et l’Endroit . He proffers the deeply held, obscure conviction
that, should he fail to do so, he will have failed more generally as a writer.
Fundamental to this project is the figure of the mother. As he continues to
negotiate with the ambivalence of emotions in play, he insists on the central
` place in his work of ‘l’admirable silence d’une m ere et l’effort d’un homme
 ́ pour retrouver une justice ou un amour qui equilibre ce silence’ ( Ess , 13 )
(‘the admirable silence of a mother and the effort of a man to rediscover
a justice or a love which matches this silence’ ( BB , 13 )). The silence, once
so  forbidding  as  we  saw  in  ‘Entre  oui  et  non’,  has  become  an  object  of
reverence for the mature, arguably more circumspect Camus. Even in that
early essay, true to the movements of affirmation and negation signalled by
its title, the young adult son and his mother go on to converse warmly about
the father, whose death in the First World War is to play a prominent role
in Le Premier Homme . Nevertheless, to a degree Camus erases fundamental
psychological conflict through the construction of a tidy role-play, as the
 ́ following sequence illustrates: ‘C’est vrai, il ne lui a jamais parl e. Mais quel
44
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Autobiographical soundings
 ́  ́  ́ besoin, en v erit e? A se taire, la situation s’ eclaircit. Il est son fils, elle est sa
` m ere’ ( Ess , 29 ) (‘It’s true, he has never talked very much to her. But did he
ever really need to? When you keep quiet, the situation becomes clear. He
is her son, she is his mother’ ( BB , 29 )). The syntactic simplicity lays claim
to familial normality through the tidy designation of roles, thereby masking
the central problem of emotional absence.
In  the  concluding  lines  of  the  same  essay,  Camus  appears  to  digress,
protesting about society’s manipulation of language. Singling out the case of
the man condemned to death, Camus dismisses talk of the criminal paying
his debt to society and turns attention instead to the reality of beheading
that a community’s justice delivers. The alarm that Camus voices anticipates
Meursault’s  studious  horror  of  the  mechanics  of  the  guillotine  as  voiced
towards  the  end  of L’Etranger ( TRN , 1204 ; O , 107 – 8 ).  By  configuring
the portrait of the mother and the reflection on capital punishment, ‘Entre
oui et non’ activates two of the key stimuli that will energise Meursault in
L’Etranger .
If a disturbance of memory is the trigger for recall of dysfunctional family
life in ‘Entre oui et non’, dislocation of a different kind provides the narra-
ˆ tive driver in the two travel essays in the collection, ‘La Mort dans l’ ame’
(‘Death in the Soul’) and ‘Amour de vivre’ (‘Love of Life’). Camus travelled
to Czechoslovakia in the summer of 1936 and spent an unhappy few days
ˆ alone in Prague. ‘La Mort dans l’ ame’ foregrounds the protagonist’s sense
of cultural alienation when confronted with an everyday world that is unfa-
miliar (its language, food and people). (We might note in passing that the
play Le Malentendu is also set in what is presented as a land-locked Central
Europe, far from the Mediterranean.) The uprootedness triggers a deep sense
of estrangement. Yet travel brings its own paradoxical reward in spite of the
straitened circumstances in which the narrator makes his trip to Prague. As
he writes in his hotel room: ‘Et quel autre profit vouloir tirer du voyage?
` Me voici sans parure. Ville dont je ne sais pas lire les enseignes, caract eres
 ́ ` ` etranges o u rien de familier ne s’accroche, sans amis a qui parler, sans diver-
tissement enfin’ ( Ess , 33 – 4 ) (‘And what other profit can we seek to draw from
travel? Here I am stripped bare, in a town where the notices are written in
strange, incomprehensible hieroglyphics, where I have no friends to talk to,
in short where I have no distractions’ ( BB , 33 – 4 )). This is the human person
stripped of any familiar backdrop, the absent ‘decor’ anticipating the situa-
tion of Camus’s hero Sisyphus, for whom the disjunction between self and
an irrational universe, between the urge to live and the brute fact of human
ˆ mortality is a cause of deep alienation. ‘Comme une faim de l’ ame’ ( Ess , 34 )
(‘as if my soul were hungry’ ( BB , 34 )) is how Camus’s narrator expresses this
sense of existential unease. The young protagonist’s predicament intensifies
45
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
when he learns that in a neighbouring room in the hotel, a male resident may
have lain dead for some time. Camus thus uses melodrama to connect back
to the ‘death of the soul’ of the essay title.
The subsequent journey from Prague to Italy provides the narrator with
the opportunity to reconnect with life, as he initially presents it. Italy is hailed
as a land after his own heart and the quality of its light, its people and varied
ˆ foods provide all the supports necessary ‘pour qui ne sait plus etre seul’ ( Ess ,
37 ) (‘for the person who can no longer be alone’ ( BB , 37 )). But ultimately
Camus refuses to settle for any simple juxtaposition between the morbid
atmosphere of the drab Prague hotel and the luminous skies, the youthful
bodies and the lush flora of the Mediterranean. For the beauty of Italy brings
 ́ him closer to his own mortality, to ‘l’odeur de mort et d’inhumanit e’ ( Ess ,
39 ) (‘this odour of death and inhumanity’ ( BB , 38 )). Camus’s young narrator
anticipates the plight of the hero of Le Mythe de Sisyphe when he sees as
 ́  ́ fundamental ‘la confrontation de mon d esespoir profond et de l’indiff erence
` secr ete d’un des plus beaux paysages du monde’ ( Ess , 39 ) (‘the confrontation
between  my  deep  despair  and  the  secret  indifference  of  one  of  the  most
beautiful landscapes in the world’ ( BB , 39 )). This divorce between human
mortality and the permanence and indifference of the natural world fuels the
author’s assertion of an absurd human condition.
 ́ Camus’s  mother’s  family  came  originally  from  Mah on  on  the  Balearic
island of Menorca and he was a lifelong Hispanophile. The essay ‘Amour de
vivre’ was inspired by a trip to Palma de Mallorca in 1935 with his first wife,
 ́ Simone Hi e whom he had married the previous year (they were to separate
in 1936 , Camus marrying his second wife, Francine Faure, in 1940 ). Travel,
Camus reflects, has existential consequences:
Car ce qui fait le prix du voyage, c’est la peur. Il brise en nous une sorte de
 ́  ́ ` d ecor int erieur. Il n’est plus possible de tricher – de se masquer derri ere des
heures de bureau et de chantier (ces heures contre lesquelles nous protestons
 ́ ˆ ˆ si fort et qui nous d efendent si s urement contre la souffrance d’ etre seul)...
ˆ ˆ  ́ ` Le voyage nous ote ce refuge. Loin des n otres, de notre langue, arrach es a tous
 ́ ` nos appuis, priv es de nos masques . . . nous sommes tout entiers a la surface de
ˆ nous-m emes. ( Ess , 42 – 3 )
For what gives value to travel is fear. It breaks down a kind of inner decor in us.
We can’t cheat any more – hide ourselves away behind the hours in the office
or at the plant (these hours against which we protest so strongly and which
protect us so surely against the suffering of being alone )...T ravel takes this
refuge from us. Far from our own people, our own language, wrenched away
from all support, deprived of our masks ...weare completely on the surface
of ourselves. ( BB , 41 )
46
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Autobiographical soundings
Thus,  whether  it  be  the  spectacle  of  an  obese  young  woman  performing
an erotic dance to a packed male audience in a Palma cafe or a trip to the
city’s deserted cloister of San Francisco where the narrator watches a woman
drawing water at a well, Camus sees, in these ostensibly contrasting locations
and  experiences,  human  activity  that  is  fundamentally  impermanent  and
thus, for him, deeply miraculous.
In Camus’s characteristically tidy formulation, the break from habit can
awaken both a love for life and a despair with living. Non-routine can be
perceptually enhancing. Yet Camus also writes of ‘la part obscure’, the darker
side of life, and the choice of L’Envers et l’Endroit as a title for the essay
collection connects with this. ‘L’envers’ denotes, among other things, the
reverse side, the ‘wrong side’ of a cloth or fabric, the side we do not usually
see or are not meant to see; ‘l’endroit’ of a garment would mean the right
way round, the part to be shown. As an adolescent, Camus experienced
serious illness, suffering from tuberculosis which was to recur in adult life.
His family lived in considerable poverty (some see his almost dandy-like
appearance as a young adult as a reaction against this). His writing offers
evidence of psychological scars. Talk of life’s precariousness, therefore, of
its other, ‘wrong’ side, was certainly not some abstract notion. Hence the
focus in L’Envers et l’Endroit on life’s transience, its abortive relationships,
its pathology, its penury.
Death forms a leitmotif in the collection, nowhere more eccentrically than
in the final short piece which bears the overall title of the collection. Here
the solitary old woman invests in a burial vault and has everything prepared
to receive her body when the time comes, right down to the gilt letters indi-
cating her name. The cemetery, situated on the edge of town, becomes her
regular Sunday-afternoon destination. When she is close to death, her daugh-
ter is already dressing her in her burial clothes. The young male narrator,
by contrast, watches the play of light in the weak January sun. Alert to the
ephemeral nature of his perceptions, he advises his reader to seize the day,
counselling that to waste one’s time (and spurn the miracle of perception)
is sinful ( Ess , 48 ; BB , 46 ). Striving to retrieve these fleeting experiences, the
narrator implicitly rejects religious notions of a redemptive after-life, argu-
ing instead that ‘tout mon royaume est de ce monde’ ( Ess , 49 ) (‘my whole
kingdom is of this world’ ( BB , 47 )). Consciousness of a fleeting present is the
great prize for the narrator then, even if the instant itself slips through one’s
fingers, in Camus’s analogy, like drops of mercury. But between the image
of the elderly woman prematurely occupying her final resting-place and the
appetite for sentient living expressed by the young narrator, the latter does
not want to choose: ‘Le grand courage’, he concludes, ‘c’est encore de tenir
47
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
` les yeux ouverts sur la lumi ere comme sur la mort’ ( Ess , 49 ) (‘Great courage
still consists of gazing steadfastly at the light as on death’ ( BB , 47 )).
Camus’s early essays, then, composed when he was just into his twenties,
contain important scenarios and tensions which anticipate his later work.
The family nexus, which he represents autobiographically, generates unre-
solved,  often  violent  conflicts  which  the  later  work  will  return  to,  either
directly or obliquely: a physically absent father (a victim of the First World
War); an emotionally absent mother; a grandparental hegemony that induces
fear; and the frail child siblings who inherit these handicaps. Even the com-
pensatory  beauty  of  Mediterranean  nature  which,  in  the  two  travel  nar-
ratives, provides release from an oppressive domestic environment cannot
mask the human frailty of the enraptured young narrator who beholds it.
Camus deploys a form of rhetorical shorthand in these early pieces, writing
of the inseparability of a love for life and the despair of living, the amour
 ́ de vivre and d esespoir de vivre . The reconciliation of these seemingly polar
opposites is manifest in the overall title of the collection, where the fabric
of life becomes reversed and unfamiliar. The technique of defamiliarisation
was to become a hallmark of Camus’s work, as the opening scenarios and
paragraphs of Le Mythe de Sisyphe , L’Etranger , La Peste and La Chute all
confirm.
Yet two decades on, he concedes in his preface to the second edition of
L’Envers et l’Endroit that the essays sometimes display an immature, high-
flown language. The line in which Camus twins the love of life and the despair
with living is one that he specifically singles out for its youthful bombast ( Ess ,
11 ; BB , 11 ). Yet the self-criticism quickly subsides as he reflects that what
was to follow in his life (long after the essays were published in 1937 ) did
 ́ indeed bring him to despair: ‘je n’avais pas encore travers e les temps du
 ́  ́ vrai d esespoir. Ces temps sont venus et ils ont pu tout d etruire en moi, sauf
 ́  ́  ́ justement l’app etit d esordonn e de vivre’ ( Ess , 11 ) (‘I had not yet known the
years of real despair. These years have come, and have managed to destroy
everything in me, except, in fact, this uncontrolled appetite for life’ ( BB , 11 )).
Camus is not specific about the causes of anguish but his very public row with
Sartre in the early 1950 s (see chapter 9 ) and the intellectual and emotional
isolation as a high-profile French Algerian that went with it must surely have
been part of that dejection. Certainly Camus’s message of self-defence can
be read as an oblique response to his detractors, who ironically typecast him
as the figure of the just man. His tactic was, in part, to plead guilty. He
argues that while never claiming to be ‘just’ himself, he had asserted that
an individual should indeed strive to be just, however imperfectly. Yet in a
disarming move, he asks: can the person unable to enshrine justice in his life
preach justice to others? His final, self-protective manoeuvre in the preface
48
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Autobiographical soundings
is to step outside the ethical debate, to affirm that L’Envers et l’Endroit
ˆ  ́ embodies his own tribe – ‘les miens, mes ma ıtres, ma lign ee’ ( Ess , 11 ) (‘my
people, my masters, my race’ ( BB , 12 )) – and opens up a pathway that runs
through everything he has written. If the connection with family ran deep
in Camus, the raw exposure given to kith and kin in L’Envers et l’Endroit
signals a complex and often reluctant autobiographer.
NOTES
1 .  These are the words of Tarrou in The Plague .
2 .  Roger Quilliot estimates that Camus had completed his preface to the second
edition by 1954 ( Ess , 1180 ).
3 .  See Peter Dunwoodie, ‘L’Envers et l’Endroit’ and ‘L’Exil et le Royaume’ (London,
Grant & Cutler, 1985 ), p. 9 .
4 .  The  translation  of L’Envers  et  l’Endroit , Betwixt  and  Between ,  is  contained
in Albert  Camus : Lyrical  and  Critical ,  trans.  Philip  Thody  (London,  Hamish
Hamilton, 1967 ).
5 .  See Roger Quilliot’s editorial note, Ess , 11 75 . For Camus’s earlier treatment of this
material in Voix du quartier pauvre ( 1934 ), see Le Premier Camus , suivi de Ecrits
de jeunesse d’Albert Camus (Cahiers Albert Camus 2 ), ed. Paul Viallaneix (Paris,
Gallimard, 1973 ); for the English translation, see YW , 242 – 59 . Two fragments
from Voix du quartier pauvre are also reproduced in Ess , 1209 – 13 .
6 .  For Tarrou’s pained account of parental influence, see the unnumbered chapter 6
of Part iv of La Peste . See also chapter 12 below.
7 .  On the question of Camus’s multiple intimate relationships, see O. Todd, Albert
Camus, une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ), p. 740 .
49
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

4
DAVID CARROLL
Rethinking the Absurd:
Le Mythe de Sisyphe
 ́ ` ˆ Pour toujours, je serai etranger a moi-m eme.
( Le Mythe de Sisyphe , Ess , 111 )
For ever I shall be a stranger to myself.
( MS , 18 )
After fifteen years I have progressed beyond several of the positions which are
set down here; but I have remained faithful, it seems to me, to the exigency
which promoted them. This book is in a certain sense the most personal of
those I have published in America.
1 ( MS , vi)
History and resistance
Le Mythe de Sisyphe may be the most historically dated of Albert Camus’s
major texts, the work most clearly marked by the conditions under which
it was written and thus the one that might appear to have aged the least
well and have the least to say to modern-day readers. The essay was written
during what Camus in his 1955 preface to its American translation calls ‘the
French and European disaster’ ( MS , v), and it is difficult not to relate its sense
of tragic hopelessness to France’s ignominious defeat at the hands of Nazi
Germany, the Occupation and Vichy collaboration. The text that Camus
also calls ‘the most personal of those (he has) published in America’ (MS, vi)
could also be read as a reflection of his own struggle with tuberculosis during
this period, since he was so seriously ill he expressed doubts at times that
he would survive. But perhaps even more than these historical and personal
factors Le Mythe may be dated by the concept of the Absurd itself to which
Camus’s name is still linked today, even though he admitted as early as 1955
that he had already ‘progressed beyond’ ( MS , vi) its propositions. The post-
war generation in general quickly moved beyond the Absurd as well, which
is why its interest today could be considered largely historical.
But rather than reconsider what is dated in Camus’s notion of the Absurd,
the present reading focuses on what Camus calls the ‘exigency’ underlying the
propositions he quickly abandoned after the war and to which he claims, at
53
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
least until 1955 , he still remained faithful ( MS , vi). I shall argue that this same
‘exigency’ informs Camus’s writings long after he abandoned the concept of
the Absurd itself, in fact throughout his much too short life. Rather than a
Nietzschean ‘will to power’, the exigency is closer to what I would call a
‘will to resist’, even or especially when resistance appears hopeless or turns
out in fact to be completely fruitless – a will to resist that is not simply a
product of history but also a resistance to history.
Le Mythe appeared only months after L’Etranger . The fact that the first
two of Camus’s texts to appear outside of Algeria were published in occupied
Paris indicates that the young Albert Camus, like almost all of France’s estab-
lished writers, agreed to submit his manuscripts to German censorship and
have them published under the conditions imposed by the Nazi occupiers of
France. To publish under such conditions did not in itself, however, reflect
either pro-Nazi or collaborationist sentiments, since almost all of the French
writers who were on the anti-fascist Left and who would eventually join the
Resistance continued to publish throughout the war. And a short time after
having agreed to eliminate a chapter on Kafka in order to publish his essay,
Camus himself joined the Resistance and published the Kafka section clan-
destinely. If he owed his first successes to a publication system controlled by
Nazi censors, he also risked his life editing and writing for the clandestine
Resistance newspaper Combat during the last years of the war. If La Peste ,
written in large part during the last years of the war and published in 1947 ,
describes the conditions for and limits of collective resistance to political
oppression, Le Mythe could be considered to describe the preconditions for
and limits of individual resistance to the human condition itself.
To be or not to be? – the Absurd and the question of being
No one who reads Le Mythe can ever forget how it begins. Not with the
question of the general meaning or purpose of life, not with an investigation
into the nature of the individual subject and his/her freedom, not with a
discussion of the formative role and purported ends of history – nor with
any other abstract, philosophical questions of this type. It begins rather with
the more immediate, practical question of suicide, whether life is worth living
`  ́ in the first place: ‘Il n’y a qu’un probl eme philosophique vraiment s erieux:
ˆ  ́ c’est le suicide. Juger que la vie vaut ou ne vaut pas la peine d’ etre v ecue,
 ́ ` c’est r epondre a la question fondamentale de la philosophie. Le rest e...
vient ensuite. Ce sont des jeux’ ( Ess , 99 ) (‘There is but one truly serious
philosophical problem, and that is suicide. Judging whether life is or is not
worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy.
54
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
All the rest . . . comes afterwards. These are games’ ( MS , 3 )). What is thus
most serious in philosophy, its very condition, is life itself – whatever life
is  and  whatever  it  ultimately  means.  All  the  rest  is  secondary,  frivolous,
nothing more than a game – or much worse, dogmatism, the work of ‘the
gods’.
Even if suicide is posited as the most fundamental philosophical problem,
given the deeply emotional nature not just of the possible responses to the
question of whether one should take one’s own life but of even raising the
question in the first place, philosophy necessarily comes up short when it
deals with it. Philosophy can respond to the ‘one truly serious philosophical
problem’ only partially and inadequately, since affect will inevitably play a
role in any response and philosophy’s domain is reason, not emotion:
 ́  ́ C’est  l’ equilibre  de  l’ evidence  et  du  lyrisme  qui  peut  seul  nous  permettre
 ́ ˆ `  ́ `  ́ ` d’acc eder en m eme temps al’ emotion et a la clart e. Dans un sujet a la fois
 ́  ́ si humble et si charg e de path etique, la dialectique savante et classique doit
 ́ ` donc c eder la place, on le conc ̧oit, a une attitude d’esprit plus modeste qui
` ` proc ede a la fois du bon sens et de la sympathie. ( Ess , 99 – 100 )
Solely the balance between evidence and lyricism can allow us to achieve simul-
taneously emotion and lucidity. In a subject at once so humble and so heavy
with emotion, the learned and classical dialectic must yield, one can see, to a
more modest attitude of mind deriving at one and the same time from common
sense and sympathy. ( MS , 4 , translation modified)
The ‘one truly serious philosophical problem’ is thus located at the limits of
or even outside philosophy itself; it is both too humble and too emotional
a problem for philosophy to deal with on its own. Absurd reasoning thus
demands that philosophy do more than philosophise when dealing with this
fundamental question of life or death.
Estrangement
In  his  generally  laudatory  essay  on The  Stranger and The  Myth ,  written
just months after their appearance, Jean-Paul Sartre agrees with the general
consensus that L’Etranger is ‘le meilleur livre depuis l’armistice’ (‘the best
2 book since the armistice’). But Sartre is more severe in his assessment of
the philosophical merits of Le Mythe , and assuming the role of a rigorous
professor of philosophy he criticises Camus not just for his philosophical
` deficiencies but also for showing off: ‘M. Camus met quelque coquetterie a
citer des textes de Jaspers, de Heidegger, de Kierkegaard, qu’il ne semble pas
toujours bien comprendre’ (‘M. Camus shows off a bit by quoting passages
55
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
from Jaspers, Heidegger, and Kierkegaard, whom, by the way, he does not
3 always seem to have quite understood’). On strictly philosophical grounds,
Le Mythe would seem to have little value for Sartre, and in his mind Camus’s
essay would undoubtedly have been more successful if he had not quoted
philosophical texts at all.
But Le Mythe is less concerned with philosophy as such or what great
philosophers  have  said  about  the  ultimate  meaning  of  life  than  with  an
experience that would seem to have at best extremely limited philosophi-
cal import: the momentary feeling ordinary people sometimes have that life
 ́  ́ suddenly no longer makes sense. ‘Le sentiment de l’absurdit eaud etour de
` n’importe quelle rue peut frapper a la face de n’importe quel homme. Tel
 ́  ́ ` quel,  dans  sa  nudit ed esolante,  dans  sa  lumi ere  sans  rayonnement,  il  est
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ insaisissable. Mais cette difficult em eme m erite r eflexion’ ( Ess , 105 ) (‘At any
street corner, the feeling of absurdity can strike any man in the face. As it
is, in its distressing nudity, in its light without effulgence, it is elusive. But
that very difficulty deserves reflection’ ( MS , 10 – 11 )). This loss of certainty is
 ́  ́ the moment when ‘les d ecors s’ ecroulent’ ( Ess , 106 ) (‘the stage sets collapse’
( MS , 12 )) and daily routines and habits break down; in the life of people
 ́ ` who have never previously questioned life, it is when ‘le “pourquoi” s’ el eve’
( Ess , 107 ) (‘the “why” arises’ ( MS , 13 )). The combination of the undeniable,
unsettling force of the experience and its elusiveness is taken by Camus as
an indication that something important is at stake in this ‘why’.
Even though Camus explicitly compares the contradictory emotions felt at
such moments to aesthetic sentiments and the question of the beautiful, they
are closer in fact to the undetermined, conflicted feelings described by Kant
 ́  ́ ` in his analysis not of the beautiful but of the sublime: ‘ind etermin ees, a la fois
 ́ aussi confuses et aussi “certaines”, aussi lointaines et aussi “pr esentes” que
celles que nous donne le beau’ ( Ess , 105 ) (‘indeterminate, simultaneously as
confused and as “certain”, as remote and as “present” as those furnished us
by beauty’ ( MS , 10 , translation modified)). Such feelings are remote because
their source is a fortuitous occurrence outside the control of the individual,
and yet at the same time they are deeply present within the self because of
their unsettling emotional intensity. Which means that the self can find solace
or escape from them neither in the world nor in itself.
What interests Camus especially in such feelings is that, ‘comme les grandes
œuvres, les sentiments profonds signifient toujours plus qu’ils n’ont con-
science de le dire’ ( Ess , 105 ) (‘like great works, deep feelings always signify
more than they are conscious of saying’ ( MS , 10 , translation modified)).
What these feelings say and are conscious of saying may very well be an
appropriate subject for philosophical investigation, but what they signify (or
suggest) demands an extra-philosophical approach and type of analysis, one
56
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
that recognises the limitations of what can be directly phrased and is open to
what is conveyed indirectly by allusion or suggestion. Because the feeling of
the Absurd signifies more and differently than what any explanation of the
Absurd says , it is up to other forms of discourse, to literature in particular
(and art or ‘creation’ in general), to supplement the inadequacies of philos-
ophy. This leaves philosophical discourse the additional tasks of explaining
why it cannot explain everything and of accounting for the distance that
separates it from experience, affect and art.
The abrupt and unexpected loss of faith in habits, routines and fundamen-
tal assumptions and beliefs has profound and long-lasting effects: ‘Dans un
 ́ `  ́ univers soudain priv e d’illusions et de lumi eres, l’homme se sent un etranger.
 ́ Cet exil est sans recours puisqu’il est priv e des souvenirs d’une patrie per-
due ou de l’espoir d’une terre promise. Ce divorce entre l’homme et sa vie,
 ́  ́ l’acteur et son d ecor, c’est proprement le sentiment de l’absurdit e’ ( Ess , 101 )
(‘In a universe suddenly divested of illusions and lights, man feels an alien,
a stranger. His exile is without remedy, since he is deprived of the memory
of a lost homeland or the hope of a promised land. This divorce between
man and his life, the actor and his setting, is properly the feeling of absur-
dity’ ( MS , 6 )). The feeling of radical divorce, of living in a once familiar but
now suddenly radically alien homeland, of being adrift between past and
future and unable to rely on either to give meaning to the present, of being
a stranger to the world and to oneself, might appear to be cause for despair,
especially since the exile from self, world and others is described as ‘without
remedy’. Le Mythe refutes such a deduction by making the consciousness
of  the  absence  of  remedy  for  the  discontents  of  existence  the  reason  for
living – and ultimately for resisting as well.
It is thus in a context of radical estrangement that the question of suicide
is raised: ‘L’absurde commande-t-il la mort?’ ( Ess , 103 ) (‘Does the Absurd
dictate death?’ ( MS , 9 )). Camus responds that it does not, since suicide rep-
resents a flight from the Absurd condition it only appears to acknowledge
and the destruction of the very tensions and contradictions at the heart of the
Absurd it pretends to affirm. Absurd reasoning, as a thinking of difference,
separation and divorce, strives to maintain these tensions and make them
the reasons to live. Camus thus makes what might logically be taken as an
` ` ‘invitation a la mort’ (‘invitation to death’), a ‘r egle de vie’ ( Ess , 146 ) (‘a rule
of life’ ( MS , 64 , translation modified)). ‘Il s’agit de vivre’ ( Ess , 146 ) (‘The
point is to live’ ( MS , 65 )) – not in spite of but rather because of the Absurd
and the radical divorce or difference at the very core of experience. Instead
of the Cartesian, ‘I think, therefore I am’, Le Mythe proposes something like
‘I experience the feeling of the Absurd, therefore I am’ – and therefore I will
continue to be.
57
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
What Camus calls ‘the constant point of reference’ of the essay is thus the
 ́ indisputable fact of difference, separation or divorce: ‘le gouffre qui s epare
 ́ ˆ le d esir de la conqu ete’ (‘the gulf that separates desire from conquest’), ‘le
 ́ d ecalage constant entre ce que nous imaginons savoir et ce que nous savons
 ́ r eellement’ (‘the hiatus between what we imagine we know and what we
 ́  ́ really know’), ‘le divorce qui nous s epare de nos propres cr eations’ (‘the
 ́ divorce separating us from our own creations’), ‘le foss e (qui) ne sera jamais
 ́ combl e . . . entre la certitude que j’ai de mon existence et le contenu que
` j’essaie de donner a cette assurance’ ( Ess , 11 0 – 11 ) (‘the gap [that] will never
be filled . . . between the certainty I have of my existence and the content I try
to give to that assurance’ ( MS , 17 – 19 )). And it is the ‘gouffre’ between the
individual and the world that also paradoxically constitutes a fundamental
ˆ link between them: ‘Ce monde en lui-m eme n’est pas raisonnable . . . Ce qui
 ́  ́ est absurde, c’est la confrontation de cet irrationnel et de ce d esir eperdu de
 ́  ́  ́ clart e dont l’appel r esonne au plus profond de l’homme. L’absurde d epend
autant de l’homme que du monde. Il est pour le moment leur seul lien’ ( Ess ,
113 ) (‘This world in itself is not reasonabl e...But what is absurd is the
confrontation of this irrational and the wild longing for clarity whose call
echoes in the human heart. The Absurd depends as much on man as on
the world. For the moment it is their only link’ ( MS , 21 )). The problem Le
Mythe raises is how to continue to live with or in the Absurd without either
reducing the radical separation between ‘man and world’ or destroying the
principal link between them, a linkage of differences.
The consciousness of the gap separating thought from experience locates
thought in an alien, inhospitable context, which Camus describes as ‘a desert’
in which thought is purged of its ‘phantoms’, and reduced to a skeleton
of itself, to almost nothing at all. In the section of Le Mythe entitled ‘Le
Suicide philosophique’ (‘Philosophical Suicide’), Camus evokes the work of a
series of philosophers he labels ‘existentialists’ – Nietzsche, Husserl, Jaspers,
Heidegger, Kierkegaard, Chestov and Scheler – but he focusses less on their
philosophical arguments than on what he calls ‘le climat qui leur est com-
` ` mun’ (‘the climate that is common to them’), ‘cet univers indicible o ur egnent
la  contradiction,  l’antinomie,  l’angoisse  ou  l’impuissance’  ( Ess , 11 4 – 15 )
(‘that  indescribable  universe  where  contradiction,  antinomy,  anguish,  or
impotence reigns’ ( MS , 23 )). If the different existentialists’ experiences are
 ́  ́ all ‘n ees dans le d esert’ ( Ess , 11 7 )  (‘born in the desert’ ( MS , 27 )), Camus
attacks all strategies for escaping from the limitations of their condition of
birth, which is also the climate of his own thought. Rather, he insists that it is
necessary to remain within the climate he nevertheless calls ‘meurtrier’ ( Ess ,
11 9 ) (‘deadly’ ( MS , 29 )), while continuing to reject the mirages of escape or
salvation that such a climate also produces.
58
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
Hope itself is a mirage, for it is rooted in the desire for evasion from the
conditions of the desert. But despair is equally illusory. What will remain of
the Absurd in Camus’s later work when the notion itself has been left behind
is precisely a conviction of the importance both of lucidity concerning the
limits of thought and action and the necessity for ‘une confrontation et une
lutte  sans  repos’  (‘a  confrontation  and  unceasing  struggle’):  ‘Tout  ce  qui
 ́ d etruit, escamote ou subtilise ces exigences (et en premier le consentement
 ́  ́ qui  d etruit  le  divorce)  ruine  l’absurde  et  d evalorise  l’attitude  qu’on  peut
` alors proposer. L’absurde n’a de sens que dans la mesure o u l’on n’y consent
pas’ ( Ess , 121 ) (‘Everything that destroys, conjures away, or exorcises these
requirements (and, to begin with, consent, which overthrows divorce) ruins
the Absurd and devalues the attitude that may be proposed. The Absurd
has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to’ ( MS , 31 )). Affirmed but
not agreed to, resisted but not denied, engaged in the hopeless but at the
same time not desperate tasks of living, thinking and acting, meaning and
value emerge precisely out of their absence and in the very nihilistic desert
that both negates them and makes them possible. But this is so only if the
conditions of the desert are acknowledged for what they are. The intellectual
task of ‘proceed(ing) beyond nihilism’ ( MS , v) without falling prey to one
of  its  mirages  is  made  even  more  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  by  the  fact
that the fate of a consciousness of the Absurd is to be bound to the Absurd
4 forever.
Camus’s agnosticism concerning not just religion but philosophy and pol-
itics as well is thus evident in Le Mythe , a decade before it will take on
 ́  ́ a  more  directly  political  form  in L’Homme  r evolt e .  If  in  his  later  major
essay he will attack dialectical history, whether Hegelian or Marxist, and
all forms of revolution for being teleological and messianic and believing
in the promise of an end of history that would justify any means used to
achieve that end, the ‘existentialist philosophies’ evoked in Le Mythe are
criticised in similar terms for deifying the Absurd: ‘Ils divinisent ce qui les
 ́  ́  ́ ecrase et trouvent une raison d’esp erer dans ce qui les d emunit. Cet espoir
 ́ forc e est chez tous d’essence religieuse . . . L’absurde devient dieu (dans le
` ˆ sens le plus large de ce mot) et cette impuissance a comprendre, l’ etre qui
illumine tout’ ( Ess , 122 ) (‘They deify what crushes them and find reason
to hope in what impoverishes them. That forced hope is religious in all of
them...The Absurd becomes god (in the broadest meaning of this word) and
that inability to understand becomes the being that illuminates everything’
( MS , 32 – 3 , translation modified)). Camus calls the existentialist attitude a
form of ‘suicide philosophique’ ( Ess , 128 ) (‘philosophical suicide’ ( MS , 41 )),
 ́  ́ just as he will in L’Homme r evolt e attack ideology in general and the logic
that the end justifies the means in particular as justifications for murder. Le
59
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
Mythe de Sisyphe thus inaugurates Camus’s long struggle against philosoph-
ical, religious and political ideologies that promise salvation in the future
at the expense of living human beings in the present. Like Sisyphus, Camus
never succeeded in his task – but that was never the point. The struggle itself
was.
What’s art got to do with it?
 ́ Si le monde etait clair, l’art ne serait pas. ( Ess , 177 )
If the world were clear, art would not exist. ( MS , 98 )
In order to explain Absurd existence, Camus describes three types of ‘Absurd
man’ – Don Juan, the actor and the conqueror – which he claims are ‘illus-
trations’ of the Absurd but not ‘models’ to be followed ( Ess , 150 ; MS , 68 ).
What the three figures have in common is like certain artists, ‘(ils) connais-
` sent leurs limites (et) ne les exc edent jamais’ ( Ess , 152 ) ((they) know their
limits (and) never go beyond them’ ( MS , 70 )). This is also Camus’s definition
of ‘genius’. But Don Juan, the actor and the conqueror are only incomplete
 ́ versions of ‘le plus absurde des personages qui est le cr eateur’ ( Ess , 170 )
(‘the most absurd of the characters, who is the creator’ ( MS , 92 , transla-
tion modified)). If the awareness of the limitations of the human condition
is characteristic of those who ‘think clearly’, the creator (the artist-writer)
is presented as the figure who ‘thinks’ the most clearly of all. But to think
clearly in Camus’s sense is to know that thought itself is limited and there-
fore to think in part against thought. The Absurd creator cannot fall prey
to the mystification of art, however, since he/she also knows that art is lim-
ited, that it too provides no escape, no salvation. The Absurd artist creates
within and against the limits of art; he/she too creates without either hope or
despair.
The Absurd artist nevertheless experiences what Camus calls ‘un bonheur
 ́ `  ́ m etaphysique a soutenir l’absurdit e du monde’ ( Ess , 173 ) (‘a metaphysi-
cal joy in enduring the world’s absurdity’ ( MS , 93 , translation modified)).
His/her joy is not in changing the world, overcoming the gap that at the
same time distances him/her from and links him/her to life, and certainly
not in any illusory transcendence of or escape from the human condition
itself. Joy comes rather in withstanding and thus maintaining the gap or
divorce constitutive of the Absurd. For if the Absurd is an irreducible given
of human experience, if it is the climate in which thought takes its nour-
ishment, then the choice cannot be between whether to affirm or deny the
Absurd but rather whether to live or die of it: ‘On ne nie pas la guerre. Il
faut en mourir ou en vivre. Ainsi de l’absurde: il s’agit de respirer avec lui; de
60
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
ˆ  ́ reconna ıtre ses lec ̧ons et de retrouver leur chair. A cet egard, la joie absurde
 ́ par excellence, c’est la cr eation’ ( Ess , 173 ) (‘War cannot be denied. One must
live it or die of it. So it is with the absurd: it is a question of breathing with
it, of recognising its lessons and rediscovering their flesh. In this regard the
absurd joy par excellence is creation’ ( MS , 93 )). The artist-creator is not
only the most completely lucid of the Absurd types; he/she is also the most
joyful, even if ‘absurd joy’ is itself a divided feeling, affirmative and negative
at the same time, joyous in a Nietzschean sense and yet ‘sans lendemain’
( Ess , 189 ) (‘ephemeral’ ( MS , 113 )). Absurd ‘man’ is above all an artist – but
an artist who never fulfils the ultimate project of art: to produce a finished
work.
The artist achieves an even greater lucidity (and joy) than the other Absurd
figures because his/her consciousness (and joy) is (are) double: ‘Dans cet
univers l’œuvre est alors la chance unique de maintenir sa conscience et d’en
 ́ fixer les aventures. Cr eer, c’est vivre deux fois’ ( Ess , 173 ) (‘In this universe
the work of art is then the sole chance of maintaining his/her consciousness
and of fixing its adventures. To create is to live doubly’ ( MS , 94 , translation
modified)). The consciousness of the artist-creator is thus at the same time
both same and other, his/hers and not his/hers. The creator’s consciousness is
not, however, self-reflexive in the Hegelian sense, a consciousness in and for
itself that has triumphed over the immediacy of experience and raised itself to
a higher level. The ‘absurd consciousness’ of the creator is no less gratuitous
and limited than existence and the human condition themselves. In art there
ˆ is no escape or refuge from the Absurd, since the work of art is ‘elle-m eme un
 ́ ` ph enom ene absurde’ ( Ess , 174 ) (‘itself an absurd phenomenon’ ( MS , 95 )). As
the simultaneous affirmation of and resistance to the Absurd, Absurd art is
the most fully absurd of all Absurd phenomena, the one most fully engaged
with its irresolvable tensions and contradictions and with the least illusions
about its own ultimate effects.
An Absurd theory of the novel
Camus’s discussion of what could be called the aesthetics of the Absurd cul-
minates with a discussion of the novel, which he considers both the most
philosophical and the most Absurd of all literary genres – the most Absurd
because the most philosophical. Open to and tempted by ideas, novelists
could  be  considered  to  be  failed  philosophers  of  sorts,  but  their  ‘failure’
to think ideas turns out actually to be their strength. As Camus metaphor-
ˆ ically  puts  it,  novelists  write  ‘en  images  plut ot  qu’en  raisonnements’  (‘in
images rather than reasoned arguments’): ‘Mais justement le choix qu’ils
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ ont fait d’ ecrire en images plut ot qu’en raisonnements est r ev elateur d’une
61
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
 ́  ́  ́ certaine pens ee qui leur est commune, persuad ee de l’inutilit e de tout principe
d’explication et convaincue du message enseignant de l’apparence sensible . . .
` Le roman dont il est question est l’instrument de cette connaissance a la fois
 ́ relative et in epuisable’ ( Ess , 178 – 9 ) (‘The choice they have made to write in
images rather than in reasoned arguments is revelatory of a certain thought
that is common to them all, convinced of the uselessness of any principle
of  explanation  and  sure  of  the  educative  message  of  perceptible  appear-
ance . . . The novel in question is the instrument of that simultaneously
relative and inexhaustible knowledge’ ( MS , 101 , translation modified)). ‘To
write in images’ is to have more confidence in experience than in thought,
more certainty in the relativity of description than in the pretensions of log-
ical analysis and systematic explanation. It is to refuse to say more than
experience allows one to say.
 ́ Camus uses identical language in a review he wrote in Alger r epublicain
 ́ ( 20 October 1938 ) of Sartre’s La Naus ee ( Nausea ): ‘Un roman n’est jamais
qu’une philosophie mise en images. Et dans un bon roman, toute la philoso-
 ́  ́ phie est pass ee dans les images. Mais il suffit qu’elle d eborde les personnages
 ́ et les actions, qu’elle apparaisse comme une etiquette sur l’œuvre, pour que
 ́ l’intrigue perde son authenticit e et le roman sa vie’ ( Ess , 1417 ) (‘A novel is
never anything but a philosophy put into images. And in a good novel the
entire philosophy has passed into the images. But the philosophy need only
spill over into the characters and action for it to stick out like a label, the
5 plot loses its authenticity, and the novel its life’). While anticipating a bright
future for this first-time novelist, Camus nonetheless criticises the novel for
 ́  ́  ́ what he claims is ‘ce d es equilibre si sensible entre la pens ee de l’œuvre et les
` images o u elle se joue’ ( Ess , 1418 ) (‘the noticeable lack of balance between
6 the ideas in the work and the images that express them’). In other words,
Sartre, by remaining too philosophical, did not succeed in putting his entire
thought into images. Thus long before their serious political differences sur-
faced, Sartre and Camus disagreed over the relationship that should exist
between philosophy and literature. For Camus, Sartre was too philosophical
a novelist; for Sartre, Camus was too literary a philosopher.
` ` The opposite of the philosophical novel for Camus is ‘le roman ath ese’
 ̈ (‘the  thesis-novel’),  which  Camus  calls  ‘la  plus  ha ıssable  de  toutes’  ( Ess ,
191 ) (‘the most hateful of all’ ( MS , 115 – 16 )). It is the product of ‘philosophes
honteux’ (‘philosophers ashamed of themselves’) who want to illustrate ideas
or prove arguments, not of ‘penseurs lucides’ (‘lucid thinkers’) who know
the limits of all ideas and thus what they do not know and cannot say. The
latter write not to demonstrate truth but to resist the tyranny of established or
imposed ideas; they are the post-Nietzschean literary precursors of ‘l’homme
 ́  ́ r evolt e’ (‘the rebel’).
62
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
The aesthetics of the Absurd, if such a term makes sense, is thus rooted in
the diversity and inexhaustibility of experience and not the unity and finality
 ́ `  ́  ́ of ideas: ‘Toute pens ee qui renonce a l’unit e exalte la diversit e. Et la diver-
 ́ sit e est le lieu de l’art’ ( Ess , 191 ) (‘All thought that abandons unity glorifies
diversity. And diversity is the home of art’ ( MS , 116 )). Given its emphasis
on diversity rather than sameness, on little narratives rather than grand or
meta-narratives, on fragmented, incomplete, open works rather than uni-
fied, finalised forms, and finally its insistence on the relative, the corporal
and the individual rather than the universal, the spiritual and the collective,
Le Mythe de Sisyphe could be considered to lay the aesthetic-philosophical
groundwork  for  the  more  explicitly  political  resistance  to  totalitarianism
which will characterise Camus’s war journalism and post-war essays. For
what the Absurd artist can never accept is the universal applicability of the
Idea itself – any Idea, whether religious, philosophical, aesthetic or political,
whether it be that of God, Being, or ‘Man’, on the one hand, or of a people,
race, class or History itself, on the other.
7 ‘Il faut imaginer Sisyphe heureux’
The concluding line of the short section of Le Mythe that recounts the story
of  Sisyphus  is  as  striking  and  unforgettable  as  the  opening  pages  of  the
essay devoted to suicide. And yet Sisyphus’s happiness remains a perplexing
issue given the fruitlessness of his task and the total lack of hope for any
change in his condition. If the worst punishment invented by the gods, as
Camus claims, is that of ‘le travail inutile et sans espoir’ ( Ess , 195 ) (‘futile
and hopeless labor’ ( MS , 11 9 )) – in other words, what from the perspective
of the Absurd could be considered the human condition itself – how is it
possible to imagine Sisyphus happy with his miserable fate? And how could
we ever be happy if our own condition and fate resemble his? And who are
these gods who condemn Sisyphus (who condemn us) to such a state? And
what if there are no gods and in a godless world our fate nevertheless does
not change? Or if we reject those who present themselves as gods – or as
superhuman humans – and who defeat us in war, dominate and politically
oppress us and appear to have determined our fate once and for all, so that
no act of resistance would appear to have any chance of success? What does
it mean to be happy in such circumstances? And why would Camus end his
essay with such an affirmation of joy?
The specific crime for which Sisyphus is punished is for disobeying the gods
who allowed him to return to earth after his initial condemnation to hell.
In Camus’s version of the myth, Sisyphus’s revolt against the gods is rooted
in his refusal to give up the simple joys and pleasures of earthly existence:
63
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
ˆ  ́ ‘quand il eut de nouveau revu le visage de ce monde, go ut e l’eau et le soleil, les
pierres chaudes et la mer, il ne voulut plus retourner dans l’ombre infernale’
( Ess , 195 ) (‘But when he had seen again the face of this world, enjoyed water
and sun, warm stones and the sea, he no longer wanted to go back to the
infernal darkness’ ( MS , 120 )). Sisyphus’s crime in the eyes of the gods is thus
the terrible crime of enjoying life and scorning the all-powerful gods who
 ́ have condemned him to an after-life of misery: ‘son m epris des dieux, sa
haine de la mort et sa passion pour la vie’ ( Ess , 196 ) (‘his scorn for the gods,
his hatred of death, and his passion for life’ ( MS , 120 )). For his defiance, he
` ˆ ` receives as punishment ‘ce supplice indicible o u tout l’ etre s’emploie a ne rien
achever. C’est le prix qu’il faut payer pour les passions de cette terre’ ( Ess ,
196 ) (‘that unspeakable torture in which his being exerts itself to accomplish
nothing. This is the price that must be paid for the passions of this earth’
( MS , 120 , translation modified)). Camus’s version of Sisyphus is not an epic
‘twilight of the gods’, however, but rather a little narrative of everyday human
resistance. Sisyphus refuses to accept the power of the gods and their control
over his life, but he is also lucid about and thus accepts, as he resists, the
limits of the condition they impose on him, which in any case he cannot
change. And in understanding that everything is not possible and continuing
his meaningless task with this knowledge, he is happy, even if or perhaps
because his work is useless and he ‘accomplish(es) nothing’. The ‘nothing’
he accomplishes each time he pushes his rock up to the very top of the hill
is in fact the ‘something’ of art. Perhaps even the ‘something’ of a politics
of revolt. His work may never in fact be finished and will always have to
be redone, he will never remain at the summit of accomplishment for more
than an instant before he must begin again, but it is the best he can hope for,
and for Camus this is more than enough.
In  a  recent  study Le  Mythe has  been  called  a  post-Marxist  work:  ‘To
Marxism’s claims, Camus’s absurdism replied that none of our labors can
solve the tragedy of death or give sense to the world. There is no direct
mention of Marxism or Communism in The Myth of Sisyphus , but the cri-
tique is everywhere implied . . . (The text) was therefore . . . post-Marxist
8 rather  than  pre-Marxist.’ And  perhaps  nowhere  is  this  characterisation
more appropriate than in the section of Le Mythe devoted to Sisyphus, espe-
cially if ‘post-Marxist’ is meant to be distinguished from anti-Marxist, which
Camus’s post-war political essays become. Sisyphus’s lucidity may be equal
to that of the Absurd artist, but the physical effort necessary to accomplish
his task resembles more closely the labour of the worker. If ‘Sisyphe est le
 ́ h eros absurde . . . autant par ses passions que par son tourment’ ( Ess , 196 )
(‘Sisyphus is the absurd hero ...asmuch through his passions as through
his torture’ ( MS , 120 )), his condition is that of the worker in modern society,
64
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
whose ‘destin n’est pas moins absurde’ ( Ess , 196 ) (‘fate is no less absurd’ ( MS ,
 ́  ́  ́ ˆ 121 )). Sisyphus is the ‘prol etaire des dieux, impuissant et r evolt e, (il) conna ıt
 ́  ́ toute l’ etendue de sa mis erable condition . . . La clairvoyance qui devait faire
ˆ son tourment consomme du m eme coup sa victoire. Il n’est pas de destin qui
 ́ ne se surmonte par le m epris’ ( Ess , 196 ) (‘proletarian of the gods, powerless
and rebellious, [he] knows the whole extent of his wretched condition . . .
The lucidity that was to constitute his torture at the same time crowns his
victory. There is no fate that cannot be surmounted by scorn’ ( MS , 121 )).
Sisyphus’s fate is sealed, his situation without hope, tragic. But the worker is
` also described by Camus as a tragic figure, but only ‘aux rares moments o uil
devient conscient’ ( Ess , 196 ) (‘at rare moments when he becomes conscious’
( MS , 121 )). Le Mythe says nothing more as to where such a proletarian
consciousness could lead in the case of the worker, however, especially if he
were to join with others in active protest and then resistance. Sisyphus, how-
ever, is lucid and thus tragic at all times, but especially each time he walks
back down the hill to begin his task anew. His resistance to the gods and his
condition is thus more psychological than active, more a will to resistance
than resistance itself. And in Camus’s story his resistance is solitary, that of
an (the) individual not a class or collectivity. It is only a starting point – a
possible origin for another form of history (or histories) different from the
dialectical history of the class struggle and with an end that is unknown and
unknowable.
The consciousness of Sisyphus, at the same time proletarian and artist,
is presented in Le Mythe as both an aesthetic and political value in itself,
even though the conditions of his enslavement are not changed either by
his unceasing labour or his lucidity. Camus makes Sisyphus’s lucidity about
his condition and his scorn for his tormentors indications of his ‘victory’
over both, but his victory is individual and psychological, not collective and
historical. Sisyphus’s happiness is a sublime joy, a feeling of pleasure in or
as pain, but no sense is given in the essay that he is anticipating joining with
others who share his scorn for the gods and want to do more than push rocks
repeatedly up hills. 1942 , the year of Le Mythe ’s publication, was also the
year that ideas of collective resistance finally began to be put into practice in
France on a larger scale than before. Sisyphus’s joy in what could be called
‘passive resistance’ could thus be considered a step, no matter how small,
on the way to active resistance; his will to resist the precondition for actual
resistance. This same will or exigency can be found in Camus’s later work
as well – in both his political and literary texts.
What  could  be  worse  than  Sisyphus’s  fate,  one  might  still  be  inclined
to ask? And yet Camus encourages us to ask at the same time what fate
would in fact be better? As the precondition for other, more active forms of
65
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david carroll
resistance and as an expression of scorn for the gods who control Sisyphus’s
fate but who have not succeeded in destroying his consciousness, his will or
his attachment to life, that is, his freedom, it is perhaps not that difficult to
imagine Sisyphus happy after all. Camus will soon abandon Sisyphus and the
Absurd, but he will not abandon his conviction that all gods and all political
and religious Ideas and ideologies should be resisted. He will never give up
his conviction that the greatest value of all – before politics, before history,
before justice – is human life itself, no matter how limited, oppressive or
tragic the human condition and any particular political situation actually is.
In spite of tuberculosis, in spite of the defeat of France, in spite of the Occu-
pation and Vichy collaboration, in spite of philosophical nihilism – faut-il
imaginer Camus heureux ?
NOTES
1 .  Preface to the first American edition of The Myth of Sisyphus , reproduced in the
English edition cited on p. vi.
2 .  Jean-Paul Sartre, ‘Explication de L’Etranger ’, in Situations i (Paris, Gallimard,
1947 ) (originally published February 1943 ), p. 99 ; ‘Camus’s “The Outsider” ’,
in Jean-Paul Sartre, Literary and Philosophical Essays , trans. Annette Michelson
(New York, Criterion Books, 1955 ), p. 24 , translation modified.
3 . Situations i , pp. 101 – 2 ; Literary and Philosophical Essays ,p. 26 .
4 .  I would argue that the most interesting and suggestive reading of Le Mythe de
Sisyphe is still that of Maurice Blanchot, ‘Le Mythe de Sisyphe’, Faux Pas (Paris,
Gallimard, 1943 ).
 ́ 5 .  ‘On Jean-Paul Sartre’s La Naus ee ’, in Albert Camus, Lyrical and Critical Essays ,
trans. Ellen Conroy Kennedy (New York, Vintage Books, 1967 ), p. 199 , transla-
tion modified.
6 . Ibid. ,p. 201 .
7 . Ess , 198 ; ‘One must imagine Sisyphus happy’ ( MS , 123 ).
8 .  Roland Aronson, Camus and Sartre (Chicago and London, University of Chicago
Press, 2004 ), p. 73 .
66
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

5
CHRISTINE MARGERRISON
Camus and the theatre
Although Camus’s essays and prose fiction had a profound impact on the
post-war generation in France and elsewhere, this is less true of his theatrical
works, which had mixed success during the author’s lifetime. His second play,
Le Malentendu , in which the returning, unidentified adult son is murdered
by his mother and sister, had a difficult reception in 1944 . Caligula , Camus’s
earliest play, was more successful in 1945 , seeming to chime with audiences
who had undergone the horrors of Nazi occupation, and it ran for almost a
` year. L’Etat de si ege , a collaboration with Jean-Louis Barrault, closed after
only seventeen performances in 1948 and has rarely been staged since, but
Les Justes was well-received in 1949 , running for over 400 performances.
Although Camus wrote no more plays, he continued his lifelong involvement
with the theatre, producing six adaptations which he helped to stage, and
thinking not only of writing a play on Don Juan, but of reworking Le Malen-
` tendu and L’Etat de si ege . His theatrical works are still produced throughout
the world and since the turn of the millennium Les Justes , Caligula and Le
Malentendu have been on the London stage. Yet such productions are rare
and although articles on single plays have been published and new editions
produced, the few book-length studies of the theatre date mainly from the
1 1960 s and 1970 s.
The  contrast  between  the  reception  of  Camus’s  other  writings  and  his
plays  is  even  more  marked  when  one  considers  his  enduring  passion  for
the theatre. In particular, he stressed his pleasure in working with others,
a form of collaboration he associated with his time at Combat , or earlier
 ́ ˆ when he was involved in amateur theatre in Algeria with the Th e atre du
 ́ ˆ Travail in 1936 , and the Th e atre de l’Equipe, which he founded in 1937
and for which he began to write Caligula with a view to acting the leading
role. It is particularly ironic that the only area of his creative production
involving direct engagement with others was also the least successful, for
reasons which seem partly related to the interactive or dialogical nature of the
theatre itself, which requires engagement with others on a number of levels
67
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

christine margerrison
besides those entailed in putting on a play. Some of the greatest strengths
of the fictional writings become weaknesses on the stage; whereas Camus’s
fictional first-person narratives are a source of fascination, the sometimes
long theatrical monologues caused complaints of didacticism and inaction.
Moreover, Camus seemed unable to put himself in the place of his spectators
and anticipate their reactions, or visualise the effect his scenes might have.
The major challenge Camus faced as a playwright (one that he consistently
rejected, seeing it as a resort to ‘psychology’) lay in putting himself in the
place of others to bring opposing views to life.
Although aware of the audience’s importance, including them in the collab-
 ́ orative enterprise when speaking in the Equipe ’s manifesto of the ‘complicit e
de l’acteur et du spectateur’ ( TRN , 1692 ) (‘complicity of the actor and spec-
tator’) in consenting to the same illusion, Camus seems not to have envisaged
the measure of audience autonomy this theatrical pact entailed in practice. In
1940 he wrote that the theatre was subject to a universal suffrage and must
receive the agreement of all ( Ess , 1405 ), but these remarks were made before
Camus’s own plays were put to that ‘vote’. By this standard he judged that,
as Le Malentendu had been rejected by the majority of audiences, it was ‘in
2 plain terms, a failure’. This reaction is to Camus’s credit, and he tried to
modify Le Malentendu accordingly, but such audience responses provoked
an increasingly difficult relationship with his public and the critics. In this
sense, Camus’s enthusiasm for collective activity in the theatre was marred
only by others’ capacity for independent judgements.
Paradoxically, on the one hand, like sport (with which he often compared
it), Camus valued the theatre’s collective and egalitarian nature. On the other
hand, he also called it his monastery ( TRN , 1715 ), a means of escaping oth-
ers. Increasingly, it became a haven from the burdens of fame and fellow
intellectuals in whose company he felt unease ( TRN , 1723 ). Camus’s com-
ments recall his attitude in his youthful writings towards art itself, which
he saw as an escape from sordid reality into a more perfect world, a view
 ́  ́ reflected some twenty years later in L’Homme r evolt e , where the creation
` of a closed universe enables the artist to ‘refai[re] le monde a son compte’
( Ess , 659 ) (‘reconstruct the world to his plan’ ( R , 221 )). One might add that
like sport or the monastic life, this self-enclosed theatrical universe, with
pre-determined rules of behaviour, is more predictable, more easily circum-
scribed than wider society. Moreover, in the theatre others are playing a
role defined and to some degree controlled by the artist himself, without
the threatening impenetrability they posed the young author in his youthful
3 writings and earliest essays.
Camus’s general emphasis on egalitarianism and interdependence in the
theatre contrasts with his views on the artist’s position. From his readings
68
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and the theatre
in the early 1930 s, in particular Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy , Camus
was developing a conception of the god-like status of the artist. When in the
` Equipe ’s manifesto he introduces the theatre as ‘un art de chair qui donne a
des corps vibrants le soin de traduire ses lec ̧ons’ (‘an art of the flesh which
gives vibrant bodies the task of translating its lessons’), satisfying also the
` ‘besoin de construction qui est naturel a l’artiste’ ( TRN , 1692 ) (‘need for
construction that is natural to the artist’) one detects echoes of Nietzsche’s
Apollonian artist god, the divine sculptor shaping this world, creating form
from the ‘flesh’ of humanity. Similarly, in the section on the actor in Le Mythe
de Sisyphe where the actor is compared to a sculptor, Camus asserts that ‘La
loi de cet art veut que tout soit grossi et se traduise en chair’ ( Ess , 160 ) (‘The
rule of that art requires that everything be magnified and translated into
 ́  ́ flesh’ ( MS , 76 , translation amended)), while in L’Homme r evolt e he claims
that the greatest sculpture seeks to capture ‘le geste, la mine ou le regard vide
 ́ qui r esumeront tous les gestes et tous les regards du monde’ ( Ess , 660 ) (‘the
gesture, the expression, or the empty stare which will sum up all the gestures
and all the stares in the world’ ( R , 222 )). Spanning the course of Camus’s
career, such comments reveal a continuity in his view of the privileged role
of the artist. They indicate, moreover, a feature of Camus’s theatrical works
that has been a perennial focus of criticism, the reduction of the Other to an
empty vessel, a receptacle for the artist’s vision. The reference to the ‘empty
stare’ seems less a distillation of humanity than the transformation of others
into soulless bodies, obliterating all that makes the individual distinctively
human.
One  might  take  issue  with  Camus’s  definition  of  the  theatre  as  ‘la
 ́  ́ r ealisation collective de la pens ee d’un seul’ ( Ess , 1405 ) (‘the collective real-
isation of the thought of a single individual’), but this may explain why he
was quick to correct what he perceived as misinterpretations of his work, or
to insist on what he had ‘really’ meant. Although most notably the case with
L’Etranger , Camus was likewise anxious to clarify the meanings of Caligula
and Le Malentendu in ways which seem didactic, retrospectively giving the
plays moral connotations at odds with the original context in which they
were written, as when he claimed that Le Malentendu contained an underly-
ing optimism or that Caligula was an illustration of the dangers of overstep-
ping the limits. If audiences of the 1940 s saw connections between Caligula
and the war, Camus rejected such associations, writing to Jean Paulhan in
4 1943 that it had given the play an unintended meaning. Such attempted
corrections may explain his continuing insistence that Caligula was written
in 1938 . As originally conceived, Caligula, in whom the young playwright
saw himself, was a heroic figure whose tragedy lay precisely in his status as
a superior, yet mortal individual standing above the masses in the manner
69
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

christine margerrison
of the Nietzschean artist-god or poet. However, as the research of A. James
Arnold has documented, the play underwent several revisions before its 1944
publication and as he was working on the final version in the summer of 1943
Camus shifted the balance towards Caligula as a tyrant, strengthening the
role of Cherea in opposing the murderous Emperor (CAC 4 , 168 – 70 ). The
play’s strongly Nietzschean dimension was toned down (perhaps because
of Nietzsche’s appropriation within Nazi ideology) and Camus’s developing
preoccupation with revolt was reinforced – although we see little evidence
of the social solidarity which was to be integral to the writer’s later theory
 ́ of revolt, as expressed in the slogan ‘Je me r evolte, donc nous sommes’ ( Ess ,
432 ) (‘I rebel – therefore we exist ’( R , 28 )). These successive reworkings have
left contradictory traces, for Caligula remains a heroic and even Christ-like
or Dionysian figure who acquiesces in his own death, yet his character is also
regarded as a penetrating study of a dictator, which was not Camus’s original
intention. Indeed, in Arnold’s opinion this remodelling of the play made it
a hybrid text; what started out as the third part of a triptych on the Absurd
(with L’Etranger and Le Mythe de Sisyphe ) became instead the second cousin
 ́  ́ to L’Homme r evolt e (CAC 4 , 171 , 175 ). At the same time, Camus was mak-
ing similar changes to Le Malentendu , developing the role of Jan’s wife (who
did not originally appear until the final act) in opposing his course of action.
 ́ Maria’s ‘Ta m ethode n’est pas la bonne’ ( TRN , 128 ) (‘Your method isn’t the
right one’ ( COP , 11 7 , translation amended)) thus echoes Caligula’s ‘Ma lib-
 ́ ert e n’est pas la bonne’ ( TRN , 108 ) (‘My freedom isn’t the right one’ ( COP ,
103 )). But if Cherea proves an ambivalent opponent because he understands
Caligula, Maria is mystified by Jan’s behaviour. Generally regarded as the
only ‘human’ presence in the play (however stereotypical), she is not inte-
grated on the same intellectual level as the other characters and her more
emotional reactions seem the only ones with which an audience is likely to
sympathise. Camus’s retrospective claim that in an unjust world a man can
save himself and others through sincerity ( TRN , 1731 ) – a claim voiced by
Maria alone – is even less convincing if we believe Martha’s declaration that
she would have killed her brother even had he identified himself ( TRN , 168 ;
COP , 146 ).
Conflicts between authorial intention and audience reception may be more
stark in the theatre where, uniquely amongst Camus’s writings, the recipi-
ent of the message is present and may openly react, threatening Camus’s
notion of harmonious ‘complicity’. If the solitary reader may sometimes feel
coerced by Camus’s prose, as Colin Davis argues elsewhere in this volume,
a different dynamic operates in the theatre, where unexamined assertions
may provoke resistance in the audience, thus threatening the theatrical illu-
sion. Although Camus later denied it was a philosophical play ( TRN , 1730 ),
70
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and the theatre
this seems to me to be the case in Caligula , with its rather inflated claims
concerning Caligula’s ‘philosophy’ and the unrelenting ‘logic’ of his actions.
Cherea rejects Caligula’s methods yet deems his philosophy irrefutable, join-
 ́ ing the revolt through self-interest to combat ‘une grande id ee’ (‘a great idea’)
which could destroy everything ( TRN , 34 ; COP , 53 ). As to that philosophy,
although Cherea refers directly to the Absurd we are told only that it threat-
ens his wish to live and be happy; in order to be free he sometimes desires
ˆ the death of those he loves, or women forbidden to him: ‘Pour etre logique,
 ́ je devrais . . . tuer ou poss eder’ ( TRN , 78 ) (‘Were logic everything, I’d kill or
fornicate’ ( COP , 82 – 3 )). But ‘logic’ is not the issue here. Likewise, Caligula’s
discovery that ‘Les hommes meurent et ils ne sont pas heureux’ ( TRN , 16 )
(‘Men die; and they are not happy’ ( COP , 40 )) elides empirical fact and sub-
jective opinion, seeming to confer on each equal value as a universal truth.
Yet there is no logical connection between the two, and neither can any log-
ical consequences be derived from them, and the spectator irritated by such
idiosyncratic uses of the term ‘logic’ may only become more alienated by its
repetition.
The reception of the plays seems to have caused a rift between Camus and
his audience, and at least one critic has detected an irritability in some of
his prefaces, particularly in the 1958 American edition of the plays where
he attempts to prescribe the criteria by which Caligula should be judged
5 ( TRN , 1730 ). In a different illustration of what Colin Davis sees as Camus’s
radical exclusion of reader dissent, the author then effectively dismisses those
who do not share his particular model of the ‘true’ theatre, recommending
that they spare themselves the trouble of reading further, whilst pointedly
welcoming those who remain. Abandoning the youthful ideal of harmonious
‘complicity’, Camus firmly prioritises the wishes of the playwright over those
of  the  audience,  warning  that  his  preference  is  for  the  classical  tradition
and Greek tragedy, which deals with human destiny. Although psychology,
ingenious anecdotes or piquant situations might amuse him as a spectator,
they leave him, he says, indifferent as an author ( TRN , 1733 – 4 ). In some
ways, these words might be seen as an attempt to deflect criticism away
from the plays themselves by relocating the problem in the minds of those
who do not appreciate the classical theatre.
 ́ In his 1955 Athens lecture on ‘L’Avenir de la trag edie’ (‘The Future of
Tragedy’) Camus sees the psychological as undermining the tragic genre and
identifies Euripides as the playwright responsible for the decline of Greek
tragedy through his concentration on individual psychology ( TRN , 1707 ;
SEN , 198 ).  Camus  claims  in  his  lecture  that  the  material  conditions  for
the rebirth of tragedy are favourable, beginning with the reforms of Copeau,
6 who returned power into the hands of playwrights ( TRN , 1703 ; SEN , 194 ).
71
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

christine margerrison
Camus suggests that the two great periods of tragedy in Western history,
ancient  Greece  and  eighteenth-century  Europe,  each  marked  a  transition
from forms of religious thinking to individualism and rationalism, reflected
in the movement from the sacred to psychological tragedy. Claiming that
tragedy is born in the West each time civilisation is halfway between a soci-
ety regulated by religious belief and one built around man, he suggests this
stage has been reached in contemporary society, where man’s faith in the
power of reason is challenged by the recognition that he has limits. The idea
 ́  ́ of the ‘limit’ or ‘balance’ recurs in L’Homme r evolt e and is central in his
Athens lecture to his definition of tragedy where ‘les forces qui s’affrontent
 ́  ́  ́  ́  ́ dans la trag edie sont egalement l egitimes, egalement arm ees en raison’ ( TRN ,
1705 ) (‘the forces confronting each other in tragedy are equally legitimate,
equally  justified’  ( SEN , 196 )).  He  suggests  an  equal  tension  between  the
divine order and man’s rebellion against that order, illustrating this by refer-
ence to Aeschylus’ Prometheus Bound ; Prometheus is both just and unjust,
but his oppressor, Zeus, also has right on his side. In melodrama, by contrast,
only one side is justifiable. Thus, for Camus the constant theme of tragedy
is of a balance which must be maintained and a limit which must not be
transgressed; those who, through blindness or passion, destroy this balance
are heading for disaster.
Considering the events of the first half of the twentieth century, Camus’s
conviction that he and his contemporaries lived in a tragic age was entirely
understandable, but his attempts to establish a specific parallel between this
and earlier periods of tragedy are problematical. Camus’s perhaps anxious
method is less to persuade or explain than to instil agreement through a
series of assertions (a method adopted, at times, in his plays). The comment
that with Racine the tragic movement concludes in the perfection of cham-
ber music ( TRN , 1708 ; SEN , 200 ) may impress, but carries no explanatory
7 power unless the listener is familiar with its source. Although problems
arising  from  Camus’s  attraction  to  vague,  overarching  theories  of  social
 ́  ́ change (or stasis) are more pertinent to discussions of L’Homme r evolt e ,
this approach also seems to characterise his theatrical aims, where he pri-
oritises the abstract ‘rule’ or definition over the particular, speaks of ‘forces’
to the detriment of dialogue or viewpoint and prefers abstraction to speci-
ficity. Despite his lifelong emotional and ideological attachment to an ideal
of Greece, it is unclear whether Camus was as familiar with Greek tragedy
8 as his references to the subject might lead some to believe. Those familiar
with Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy (which Camus had read by 1932 ) will
detect clear echoes of this work in Camus’s lecture, and the strong continu-
ity in his thinking about the theatre stems partly, in my view, from his alle-
giance to Nietzsche: his rejection of psychology, which he redefined in 1937
72
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and the theatre
as ‘action’ rather than introspection ( C i , 48 ), coincides with the beginnings
of his writing career; and his modifications to Caligula and Le Malentendu
are attributable to his redefinition of tragedy as a balance between equally
legitimate forces in 1943 ( C ii , 103 ).
Nietzsche identifies Wagner as the source for a rebirth of tragedy in the
West; Camus looks to the work of contemporary French playwrights, and
associated himself with this enterprise, claiming at different times that all
his plays were attempts to create modern tragedy ( TRN , 1715 , 1730 ). As
in his 1958 preface, such are the criteria by which he sought to be judged.
Yet, even in terms of the equilibrium he sought to establish between equally
legitimate forces in confrontation, his plays arguably fail to deliver tragic
greatness: in Caligula all the major characters have sympathy and admiration
for the Emperor, whose main opponents, the patricians, are cowardly and
self-serving; in Le Malentendu all three main protagonists overstep the limit,
and Camus’s adjustments to the role of Maria fail to provide an equal balance
between  opposing  views.  The  writer’s  attention  to  ‘forces’  in  his  Athens
speech cannot disguise the naivety of his understanding of social forces and
structures, as is illustrated by his treatment of destiny, which is reduced on
the level of the everyday to the figure of the old servant who unaccountably
distracts Martha and her mother from discovering Jan’s identity. This hardly
replicates the notorious fickleness of the Greek gods. On the metaphysical
level this force is replaced by the Absurd. But for the audiences of Aeschylus
the workings of the divine order were a familiar and lived reality and it is,
I think, highly questionable whether an abstract and unexplained theory,
whose transfer to the stage robs it of meaning, can adequately substitute for
this fundamental structure of Greek society.
Despite  Camus’s  dismissal  of  melodrama  as  a  simplistic  opposition
between a just and an unjust force, this definition seems in fact to be appli-
` cable to his own plays, particularly L’Etat de si ege , where good and evil
are opposed: La Peste’s slaughter of the townspeople is unambiguously evil,
while Diego’s rebellion against this can only be approved. Similarly, the ide-
als of the Russian anarchists of Les Justes are admirable and the dilemma
is less whether violence is justified in the attempt to create a fair society
than whether it is permissible to murder children in the process. Kaliayev’s
refusal to do so is uncontroversial and the nihilistic Stepan, so blinded by
his emotions that he dreams of destroying all of Moscow, is less a worthy
opponent than a caricature. Camus’s last two plays place greater emphasis
on the personal dimension and some might argue that a more equal ten-
sion between the personal and the political viewpoints is established, yet
` elements of caricature persist. Diego and Victoria in L’Etat de si ege are one-
dimensional characters whose role is clearly to illustrate the playwright’s
73
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

christine margerrison
developing philosophy of limits. But Diego’s love has ethical limits, whereas
Victoria appears to have none, insisting he should put their love before all
heaven and earth ( TRN , 297 ), and she would willingly sacrifice the entire
town in exchange for his life. Marginal figures elsewhere in Camus’s work,
women  occupy  a  more  central  role  in  the  theatre,  where  they  must  nec-
essarily  speak.  The  simplistic  assumption  arising  from  this  that  Camus’s
theatrical women voice a powerful critique of masculinity is mistaken, in
my view, and only sustainable in isolation from a consideration of Camus’s
thought as a whole. Victoria’s claims illustrate that hers is far from an equally
legitimate opposing viewpoint. Without ties of affection to friends, children
or family, without allegiance to any social institution, this solitary woman
represents private life with a vengeance. There is no social solidarity in this
personal sphere and Kaliayev and Diego, each concerned with ethical consid-
erations, must withdraw from the all-consuming love of the couple in favour
of collective political action. An extreme version of other female characters,
Victoria shares the contempt of Maria, or the Grand-Duchess of Les Justes ,
for men’s refusal to place love before duty and honour. Although the lack
of psychological depth in Les Justes seems an impediment, considering the
play’s treatment of emotional extremes (love and hatred), the portrayal of
Dora is less crude in the sense that she struggles between her commitment to
the cause and her love for Kaliayev. But his death resolves this conflict with
her decision to rejoin him by volunteering to die throwing the next bomb.
Placing her emotions before justice, she comes to resemble Stepan – as he
helpfully points out. Indeed, despite some internal evidence in the play, the
very lack of psychological depth makes it unlikely that the audience would
arrive independently at this conclusion without Stepan’s comment. Follow-
ing Camus’s definition of tragedy, Dora, like Victoria or Stepan and unlike
Kaliayev, is driven by passion to transgress the limit ( TRN , 1705 ; SEN , 196 ).
But this does not make her tragic. One critic, David Bradby, who does not
hesitate to apply the term ‘melodrama’ to all Camus’s theatre, observes that
tragic characters must be torn apart by their contradictions, but (like Dora)
Kaliayev also resolves these in his ‘limited revolt’, dying not as a tragic figure
9 but as an exemplary rebel.
As in the case of Dora’s transformation, internal contradictions require
psychological depth rather than external ‘direction’. It is difficult, however,
to feel emotional involvement with some of Camus’s characters, who seem
little more than mouthpieces for abstract ideas. For the sake of credibility
the extraordinary events of Le Malentendu demand a focus on character
and  motive,  yet  the  audience  is  asked  to  be  satisfied  with  a  metaphysi-
cal interpretation of a situation which is, from the outset, barely accept-
able in human terms. Camus’s comments on Euripides show he assigned
74
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and the theatre
‘psychology’ a pivotal role in the decline of tragedy, although this critique
could be read as masking his own inability to create an individual from the
inside. His approach to the theatre overlaps with everyday life when, in an
echo of his 1958 preface to the plays, he says in his preface to L’Envers et
l’Endroit that he has learned less about others than about himself because
 ́ ` `  ́ ‘ma curiosit e va plus a leur destin qu’ a leurs r eactions et que les destins se
 ́ ` r ep etent beaucoup. J’ai appris du moins qu’ils existaient’ ( Ess , 10 ) (‘I am
interested more in their destiny than in their reactions, and destinies barely
differ one from another. I have at least learnt that other people do exist’
( SEN , 23 )). It is tempting to think that Camus was making a virtue of neces-
sity with his emphasis on the universal as opposed to the particular, on form
over content, on the ‘empty stare’ rather than human complexity, seeking
refuge in universal rules rather than face the challenge of the Other. Yet,
this recourse does not absolve the playwright of the need to create inter-
nal coherence in his stage characters, or to endow them with recognisably
human qualities. The problem here lies not in the presence or absence of a
‘psychological’ dimension, but in the atrophy of the Other.
In my view, Camus declines a dialogue with his audience, denying them
sufficient information to participate actively in the interpretative process.
This stands in sharp contrast to the tragedies of Aeschylus, where we under-
stand the motives of characters and empathise with their plight; above all,
they  have  personalities  and  histories  which  lend  their  behaviour  internal
coherence. The Oresteia is not devoid of a human dimension and, however
elevated its protagonists, they invite our involvement. Within defined param-
eters, Aeschylus engages his audience actively in the interpretative process,
encouraging independent judgement and debate rather than the requirement
passively to accept.
The unpredictable external world of others seems to have been threat-
ening to Camus, and one cannot doubt his vulnerability, expressed in his
increasingly defensive reactions to criticisms of his work. Camus’s tendency
to compartmentalise his life and other people, reflected in the division of his
work into genres (fiction, plays and essays), appears to have been necessary
to his writing practice. In each area, only he has complete knowledge and
the illusion, at least, of control. In choosing to write plays, he set himself, I
think, the greatest challenge, not because of his proclaimed aims but for the
more practical reason that this entails bringing other people to life and being
able to put oneself in the place of the Other. Not that Camus was unable
to create fascinating characters; that of Meursault has fuelled debate about
L’Etranger since its publication and the dramatic monologue delivered in La
Chute offers a complex psychological portrait. Likewise, interest in Caligula
sustains the play but, as I have noted, the young playwright passionately
75
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

christine margerrison
identified  with  Caligula  in  his  everyday  life;  equally,  for  Jean  Grenier,
Camus’s former teacher, mentor, and lifelong friend, Camus likewise saw
himself as the solitary and dominating Don Juan he dreamed of putting on
10 stage. Just as Rieux and Tarrou voice aspects of the author’s thoughts,
` Cherea also expresses Camus’s opinions as articulated in Lettres aunami
allemand . Thus, the main characters of the plays engage in the ‘dialogues’
of a universe where all men (if not all women) are cast in the image of their
Creator.
It is perhaps not surprising that Camus defended his two least successful
plays in terms of their ‘resemblance’ to him, an expression that points up
11 the coincidence between his life and theatrical involvements. The entire
universe  was  a  vast  theatre  for  Camus,  wrote  Roger  Quilliot,  his  editor
( TRN , 1689 ), while for Grenier Camus saw the man of the theatre as a second
12 ` god. In 1959 Camus said that in solitude ‘l’artiste r egne, mais sur le vide’
(‘the artist reigns, but over a vacuum’), whereas in the theatre he depends
on others to achieve his aims ( TRN , 1723 ). Ironically, as in ‘La Mort dans
ˆ ` l’ ame’, where the speaker fills his world with ‘formes semblables a moi’ ( Ess ,
38 ) (‘forms in my own likeness’ ( SEN , 54 )), he filled his theatrical universe
with either images in his own likeness, or the ‘empty stare’ of bodies on a
stage that was not merely a means of peopling that vacuum, but of creating,
directing and controlling a microcosmic universe.
Paradoxically, it is a work that escapes the self-imposed rules of Camus’s
theatre, namely the prose fiction, La Chute , that provides us with the writer’s
greatest dramatic monologue. There, Clamence, the self-proclaimed actor,
might be speaking for Camus himself when he says that the sports stadium, or
 ́  ́ the theatre ‘que j’ai aim e avec une passion sans egale, sont les seuls endroits
` du monde o u je me sente innocent’ ( TRN , 1520 ) (‘which I loved with an
unparalleled devotion, are the only places in the world where I feel innocent’
( F , 65 )). Here, the space of innocence is that place where truth and falsity
merge, or where the artifice of the Self, openly accepted as such, acquires
authenticity. Although Camus certainly did not identify with Clamence, nev-
ertheless a parallel might be drawn between the latter’s world and Camus’s
theatrical universe:
` Je ne pouvais donc vivr e...qu’ a la condition que, sur toute la terre, tous les
ˆ  ́  ́ etres, ou le plus grand nombre possible, fussent tourn es vers moi, eternellement
 ́  ́ ˆ `  ́ ` ` vacants, priv es de vie ind ependante, pr ets ar epondre a mon appel a n’importe
 ́ `  ́  ́ ` quel  moment,  vou es  enfin alast erilit e,  jusqu’au  jour  o u  je  daignerais  les
` favoriser de ma lumi ere. En somme, pour que je vive heureux, il fallait que
ˆ  ́  ́ les etres que j’ elisais ne v ecussent point. Ils ne devaient recevoir leur vie, de
loin en loin, que de mon bon plaisir. ( TRN , 1510 )
76
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and the theatre
I could live . . . only on condition that all the individuals on earth, or the
greatest possible number, were turned towards me, eternally vacant, deprived
of independent life, ready to respond to my call at any moment, doomed in
short to sterility until the day I should deign to favour them with my light. In
short, for me to live happily it was essential for the individuals I chose not to
live at all. They must receive their life, sporadically, only at my bidding.
( F , 51 , translation amended)
Like Clamence’s Interlocutor, the theatre audience is as integral to the per-
formance as the actors themselves – except that the Interlocutor and audi-
ence follow no script. As Clamence discovers when his circle of admirers
becomes a tribunal ( TRN , 1515 ; F , 58 ), others contain the threatening capac-
ity for judgement. However, as the above quotation suggests, the alternative
is  to  ‘reign’  over  an  empty  and  sterile  world.  Caligula,  the  ‘pedagogue’,
has already realised this. He kills his subjects in order to teach them the
meaning of life – and because he has the power to do so. Yet, Camus sug-
 ́ gests, Caligula’s error lies in his denial of others: ‘On ne peut tout d etruire
 ́ ˆ sans se d etruire soi-m eme’ ( TRN , 1729 ) (‘One cannot destroy everything
without destroying oneself’). Few of us have such power – or inclination –
but (along with the theme of judgement) this theme recurs in Camus’s work.
As one of those rare spaces where such temptations might be played out,
perhaps  the  unlimited  power  offered  by  the  theatre  explains  what  drew
Camus to an arena where the world, and others, might be recreated and
perfected according to the artist’s ‘plan’. Unfortunately for Camus, perhaps,
the final judgement on whether he succeeded in this aspiration lies with his
audience.
NOTES
 ́  ́  ́ ˆ 1 .  Raymond  Gay-Crosier, Les  Envers  d’un echec: etude  sur  le  th e atre  d’Albert
 ́ ˆ Camus (Paris, Minard, 1967 ); Ilona Coombs, Camus, homme de th e atre (Paris,
Nizet, 1968 ); E. Freeman, The Theatre of Albert Camus: A Critical Study (Lon-
 ́ ˆ  ́ ˆ don, Methuen, 1971 ); Virginie Lupo, Le Th e atre de Camus: un th e atre classique?
(Villeneuve-d’Ascq, Presses Universitaires du Septentrion, 2000 ).
2 . Le Figaro , 15 – 16 October, 1944 , cited in English by John Cruickshank in Albert
Camus and the Literature of Revolt (New York, Oxford University Press, 1960 ),
p. 202 .
3 .  See my ‘Struggling with the Other: Gender and Race in the Youthful Writings of
Camus’, in James Giles (ed.), French Existentialism: Consciousness, Ethics and
Relations with Others (Amsterdam, Rodopi, 1999 ), pp. 191 – 211 . More pertinent
to the present discussion is Colin Davis’s treatment of ‘Violence and Ethics’ in
this volume (see chapter 8 ).
 ́ ˆ 4 .  Coombs, Camus, homme de th e atre ,p. 80 .
77
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

christine margerrison
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ 5 .  See Fernande Bartfeld, ‘Le Th e atre de Camus, lieu d’une ecriture contrari ee’, in
 ́ ˆ  ́ J. L evi-Valensi (ed.), Albert Camus et le th e atre (Paris, IMEC, 1992 ), p. 182 .
6 .  The director Jacques Copeau ( 1878 – 1949 ) was an early source of inspiration for
 ́ ˆ Camus, who, when setting up the Th e atre de l’Equipe, saw Copeau’s influence
as providing a dominant theme ( TRN , 1713 ). For Copeau, the text itself was
paramount, taking precedence over staging and actors. He also stressed the active
participation of audiences in the performance.
7 .  One possible source is Oswald Spengler, The Decline of the West , 2 vols. (London,
Allen and Unwin, 1971 ), who characterises chamber music as the summit of
Western art (vol. i ,p. 231 ). Spengler’s ‘morphology’ of history underlies much
of Camus’s thinking, as here.
8 .  For an investigation of this subject and Camus’s use of secondary sources, see
Paul Archambault, Camus’ Hellenic Sources (Chapel Hill, University of North
Carolina Press, 1972 ).
9 .  David  Bradby, Modern  French  Drama  1940–1990 (Cambridge,  Cambridge
University Press, 1991 ), p. 50 .
10 .  Jean Grenier, Albert Camus: Souvenirs (Paris, Gallimard, 1968 ), p. 11 8 .
` 11 .  Camus not only claimed that L’Etat de si ege was the play that ‘resembled’ him
the most ( Ess , 1732 ), he also said this about Le Malentendu . See Olivier Todd,
Albert Camus, une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ), p. 476 .
12 enirs ,p. 11 8 . .  Grenier, Souv
78
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

6
JEANYVES GUERIN
Camus the journalist
From an early age Camus had wanted to write yet it was not by choice that
he became a journalist. His tuberculosis meant that he could not be a teacher
and so he had to find some other pathway. He does not appear to have con-
sidered using his experience as an actor and producer to turn professional.
He was by turns editorial secretary, reporter, leader writer and editor-in-
chief. Camus did not like to claim to be an ‘intellectual’ or a ‘philosopher’.
He called himself an ‘artist’, a ‘witness’, occasionally a ‘professional journal-
ist’. He once admitted that he felt that journalism was ‘une des plus belles
professions que je connaisse’ ( Ess , 1565 ) (‘one of the finest professions that I
can think of’). His friend Jean Daniel added that for Camus, journalism was
1 not an exile but a kingdom, something in which he felt at home. Yetitwas
Camus’s literary successes that were to preserve the record of his journalistic
achievements. If he had not written L’Etranger , La Peste and Caligula , then
Actuelles would certainly not exist as a book. Who, apart from the odd his-
 ́ torian, would ever have heard of an obscure reporter for Alger r epublicain ?
The leader writer for Combat would have been about as well known as fel-
low journalists on the paper such as Marcel Gimont and Georges Altschuler.
L’Express would not have tried to sign him up.
Alger r epublicain  ́
 ́ Alger r epublicain was where Camus cut his teeth. From 6 October 1938 to
28 October 1939 , this was the name of a little newspaper which was the
mouthpiece for the ideals of the Popular Front, which had come to power
in France in 1936 . The paper’s gestation had been a long one and its launch
actually coincided with the signing of the Munich Agreement. But whereas
by then in France the Popular Front was in its death throes, it appears that
in Algiers they remained unaware of this. Thousands of small shareholders
had to be found as owners of the paper. Essentially these shareholders came
from the European middle classes. Amongst them were teachers of all kinds,
79
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
businessmen and government workers who were members of unions. They
included socialists, democrats, republicans and secular groups. What united
them was their opposition to the fascism of Hitler, Mussolini and Franco.
It was a campaigning newspaper but with no declared political affiliation.
From the outset it was short of money and remained so to its dying day: its
circulation fell rapidly from 20 , 000 to 7 , 000 copies. Few of its writers were
professionals; most were beginners but, like Camus, they soon learned the
job.
 ́ Alger  r epublicain had  no  consistent  editorial  line:  its  intention  was  to
appear republican in an ecumenical way. In the autumn of 1939 , the paper
 ́ produced as an offshoot, an evening publication, Le Soir r epublicain . The
journalist Pascal Pia, a former Surrealist and anti-conformist who was close
to Malraux, liked Camus’s writing and made him its editor-in-chief. In this
role,  Camus  carried  on  a  guerrilla  war  against  censorship,  using  tactics
ˆ  ́ not unlike those of the French satirical weekly Le Canard encha ın e , which
since its foundation in 1916 had worked to combat official propaganda. In
 ́ January 1940 , Le Soir r epublicain was banned ( Le Canard itself ceased to
be published between 1940 and 1944 ). For Camus, the adventure was over.
The shareholders thought it was all his fault and he had to leave Algeria, his
homeland.
A  total  of 150 articles  are  attributed  to  Camus.  Some,  for Le  Soir
 ́  ́  ́  ́ r epublicain , were written under various pseudonyms (Alius, D emos, Ir en ee,
Marco, Jean Mersault, Vincent Capable, Zaks etc.). At the time, Camus was
an actor and producer for a theatre group that was affiliated to the Com-
 ́ munist party. Alger r epublicain served as his school of journalism. At first
he was just a rewriter of news despatches, a stringer. It was ‘disappoint-
ing’, he wrote to his teacher, Jean Grenier in 1938 , nothing but ‘les chiens
 ́  ́ ecras es et du reportage’ ( Corr , 33 ) (‘stories about dogs being run over and
bits of reporting’) but he liked the fact that it left him time for his writing.
Camus was a reporter, at times even a great reporter, and certainly a man
who worked in the field. He was a literary critic too and amongst the novels
 ́ and essays reviewed in his literary column we may note Sartre’s La Naus ee
( Nausea ) and Le Mur ( The Wall ), Nizan’s La Conspiration ( The Conspiracy ),
Montherlant’s L’Equinoxe   de   septembre ( September   Equinox )   and
 ́  ́ Bernanos’s Scandale de la v erit e ( Scandal of Truth ). He only wrote about
the books and authors that he liked.
Camus’s  work  was  primarily  that  of  investigating  and  reporting  facts.
He acted as a court reporter, and used such occasions to take the lid off
things. He always made the event his starting point, even if it was just some
minor news item, before trying to explain its social and political implica-
tions.  For  example,  he  wrote  several  reports  about  a  gas  explosion  in  a
80
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus the journalist
working-class district before accusing the Mayor of Algiers of not caring
about the misfortunes of his fellow citizens. ‘Un maire digne de ce nom ne
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ s’ enerve ni ne se f ache. Il s’int eresse au sort de ses administr es, leur fait dis-
 ́  ́ tinguer les vrais responsables, ne leur en veut pas de se trouver d esorient es
par le brusque malheur qui les frappe’ ( FC , 202 ) (‘A mayor worthy of the
name would not get angry or upset: he would take an interest in what hap-
pened to the people who elected him. He would show them who was really
responsible and would not resent the fact that people are disturbed by the
sudden misfortune that has befallen them’). At times it was as a moralist
rather  than  as  a  citizen  that  Camus  wrote  editorials  about  what  he  had
witnessed.
As a campaigning journalist, Camus eschewed the lyrical prose which was
simultaneously the very stuff of Noces . Admittedly the subject did not lend
itself to such treatment, not when he had to talk about the town council’s
budget or report on the agriculture committee. Occasionally, he would go in
ˆ for mockery or polemics; he had his b etes noires , such as the ‘unfortunate’
Mayor of Algiers, Algerian worthies and the then French President, Edouard
Daladier.  When  the  mayor  came  into  conflict  with  municipal  employees,
Camus wrote lengthy justifications of their claims. He was quite scathing
about Daladier, who had won the right to govern by decree. The sacrifices
the President had called for alienated the unions and the civil servants. But
did this really make him a pathfinder for fascism, as Camus asserted, or
the man who dug the grave for the Front Populaire government? The first
2 of a series of articles on Daladier provides facts and figures. The second
3 calls  Daladier  a  dictator’s  apprentice. The  third,  more  interestingly,  is  a
‘dialogue’ in which Camus imagines what the President, who is cunning,
sure of himself and paternalistic, and a humble employee might have to say
to each other. The interview is broken off when, having run out of arguments,
4 the President calls in the guards. As well as Daladier, to whom historians
would consider Camus had been unfair, it was professional politicians that
the young journalist targeted.
Camus followed the pro-Dreyfus tradition, taking a passionate interest in
a number of causes. He devoted eleven articles to the trial of Michel Hodent,
an overscrupulous employee, the victim of a plot by powerful colonial inter-
ests. He then took up the case of Sheikh Okbi (a Muslim dignitary accused
of having instigated the murder of a high-ranking religious official), and sub-
sequently that of a number of locals accused of setting fire to shacks. In all
three cases, Camus was attacking an administration primarily in thrall to
important colonial interests. He had no hesitation about saying ‘I . . .’ and
was discovering the power of his pen: thanks to him, both Michel Hodent
and the sheikh were acquitted.
81
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
In 1958 , when Camus collected together his journalistic writing on Algeria
 ́ in Actuelles iii : Chroniques Alg eriennes (1939–1958) , of those articles writ-
ten before 1940 , he kept only seven of the eleven which go to make up the
` series entitled Mis ere de la Kabylie . These support the view that he did not
wait for the outbreak of war before taking an interest in the land of his birth.
In these articles, he is not trying to write a polemical, anti-colonial political
pamphlet. Neither the time, nor the place nor the supporting material lends
 ́ itself to such an approach. Like Andr e Gide when, in a different genre, he
wrote Voyage au Congo ( Voyage to the Congo )( 1927 ), Camus is presenting
an eyewitness report, things that he has seen and refuses to present with some
5 kind of exotic gloss. Moreover, the verb ‘see’ recurs constantly ( FC , 280 ,
` 285 , 286 , 287 , 289 , etc.). Camus records: ‘J’ai vu a Tizi Ouzou des enfants
` en loques disputer a des chiens kabyles le contenu d’une poubelle’ ( FC , 286 )
(‘In Tizi Ouzou I saw children in rags fighting with Kabyle dogs over the
contents of a rubbish bin’). The reporter confesses that he feels ‘conscience-
stricken’ (‘je me sentais une mauvaise conscience’) ( FC , 280 ). ‘Rien ne vaut
 ́ les chiffres, les faits et l’ evidence des cris’ ( FC , 281 ) (‘Nothing has greater
impact than the facts and figures and the cries of suffering’).
50 % au moins de la population se nourrit d’herbes et de racines. ( FC , 285 )
(At least fifty per cent of the population are living on grass and roots.)
 ́  ́ ` Al’ ecole d’Azerou-Kollal, sur 11 0 el eves, on en compte 35 qui ne font qu’un
` seul repas par jour. A Maillot, on estime a 4 / 5 e de la population le nombre des
indigents. ( FC , 290 )
(At the school in Azerou-Kollal, 35 of the 11 0 pupils have only one meal a day.
It is estimated that four-fifths of the population of Maillot is destitute.)
 ́ Tizi Ouzou a un m edecin communal pour 45000 habitants. ( FC , 305 )
(Tizi Ouzou has one local doctor for 45 , 000 inhabitants.)
Camus provides a wealth of statistics to demonstrate the overpopulation,
the mass unemployment and the derisory wages; in short, what he sees as
` a slave economy ( FC , 295 ). The conclusion that emerges is that ‘la mis ere
[de ce pays] est effroyable’ ( FC , 333 ) (‘the wretchedness of this country is
frightening’). An entire population is being humiliated. The fact that the road
network is in a bad state, that the schools, for which the people are clam-
ouring,  and  the  dispensaries  are  so  few  and  far  between,  that  there  is
a  water  shortage,  all  this  is  the  fault,  not  of  the  inhabitants,  but  of  the
colonial government. Kabylia has been left to rot. A few acts of charity are
no substitute for a constructive social policy ( FC , 291 ). In his conclusion,
82
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus the journalist
 ́ Alger r epublicain ’s reporter claims that it is not an indictment that he has
written. He is asking the politicians to accept their responsibilities for once.
He makes a few suggestions himself for immediate measures to be taken.
Camus’s investigation was to have an impact far beyond the usual reader-
 ́ ship of Alger r epublicain . Significantly, it immediately provoked a reassuring
 ́ ˆ  ́ counter-report in the politically conservative La D ep eche alg erienne .
 ́ It has been said that, when given responsibility for Le Soir r epublicain ,
Camus gave it a libertarian policy and outlook. In his view, it was not only
Nazi Germany that was responsible for the war; neighbouring countries had
to take a share of the responsibility because of their self-interest. In the long
term, their sovereignty had to be reduced. The state of war meant that only
the governments were heard, whereas the people themselves were simply
dragooned into service and required to become mere pawns in the game of
international politics.
At the same time as attempting to conceive international relations in a
very new way, Camus opted for a strategy of harassment and provocation.
The state of war had effectively reintroduced censorship. Now it was less
easy than ever to ‘maintenir une opinion libre’ ( FC , 718 ) (‘uphold freedom
 ́  ́ of thought’), to ‘servir la v erit e’ ( FC , 717 ) (‘serve the cause of truth’), to
preserve ‘les droits de la froide raison’ ( FC , 50 ) (‘the rights of the cold light
ˆ of reason’): now ‘le bourrage de cr ane’ ( FC , 717 ) (‘brainwashing’) was the
order of the day. Camus wrote under a variety of pseudonyms, reprinting
numerous extracts from newspapers, historical documents and both clas-
sics and modern texts (for example the article ‘War’ from the Dictionnaire
philosophique , which was partly censored) in a column headed: ‘A wartime
view of...’Theaimwasto make readers think, to challenge, to point out
the discourse and the truth about war. The inevitable happened: the general
government suspended the publication of the newspaper.
In a letter to his mentor Jean Grenier, Camus confessed to what the Soir
 ́ r epublicain shareholders had accused him of, namely of having carried on a
` personal campaign: ‘J’en ai donc fait un journal a l’usage de ce que je croyais
`  ́  ́ vrai. C’est a dire que j’y ai d efendu la libert e de penser contre la censure
et la guerre sans haine’ ( Corr , 38 ) (‘So I did turn it into the voice of what
I believed to be the truth. That is, I used it to defend freedom of thought
 ́ against censorship and war without hatred’). Le Soir r epublicain found it
ˆ difficult to reconcile the anti-fascism which was its raison d’ etre and the
libertarian pacifism of its young editor-in-chief. Basically, Camus had tried
to fight what he knew all along was a losing battle in support of individual
6 and collective freedoms. He was to take up arms in this battle again later
but in quite different circumstances. In the meantime he had lost his job and
83
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
had to move to France, where Pascal Pia recruited him as ‘ secdac ’, editorial
secretary, on Paris-Soir . While he published nothing at all in this paper, he
found out what a major popular newspaper was like.
Combat
The Liberation of 1944 saw the birth of numerous periodicals, with many
writers  turning  themselves  into  journalists.  Franc ̧ois  Mauriac  considered
 ́  ́ journalism to be a perfect form of litt erature engag ee , or socially committed
literature, and Camus would certainly have agreed. He had joined the active
resistance in 1943 and, at the request of Pascal Pia, became editor-in-chief of
the clandestine newspaper Combat . When liberation happened, he naturally
remained in post. His role was simultaneously to run the editorial team,
to engage in debate and to bring in new ideas. He also fulfilled the role of
principal editorial writer. There was, however, one exception to this: coin-
cidentally in the weeks prior to the bloody quelling of the Algerian uprising
 ́ in S etif, he dispatched himself as a reporter to Algeria and brought back a
 ́ series of eight articles. Six were to be reprinted in Chroniques alg eriennes .
Initially, Combat had a circulation of 200 , 000 . With its youthful, plu-
ralist team, the paper saw itself as the voice of resistance. It was also the
intellectual paper of the period 1944 – 7 or, to quote respectively Georges
 ́  ́ H enein  and  Raymond  Aron,  ‘the  newspaper  for  Saint-Germain-des-Pr es’
and ‘the most highly regarded paper in the capital’s literary and political
7 milieux’. Its readership was young, made up of teachers, students and trade
unionists.
The collaborationist (i.e. pro-Nazi) press had left supporters of the Resis-
tance with feelings of shame and distaste. The press of the 1930 s in particular
had been notoriously corrupt. From the end of August 1944 , De Gaulle was
putting into effect laws governing the press. At the same time, without actu-
ally mentioning these laws, Camus was trying to set a code of practice for a
reformed press. For him, because the mission of the press was to serve the
public, the press had to be freed from financial ties ( Ess , 264 ). ‘Vigilance’
and ‘responsibility’ must be its watchwords. An ‘unflinching objectivity’ must
win out over empty ‘rhetoric’ ( Ess , 265 ).
In a second article, Camus develops the idea of ‘critical journalism’. He
 ́  ́ writes: ‘On veut informer vite au lieu d’informer bien. La v erit e n’y gagne
pas’ ( Ess , 265 ) (‘There are some who want to inform quickly rather than
informing properly. It is the truth that suffers’). It is better to be the second
with accurate information than the first with information that turns out to
` ˆ `  ́ be wrong. ‘On cherche a plaire plut ot qu’ a eclairer’ (‘People try to please
rather than to enlighten’), sacrificing truth in the interests of sentimentality
84
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus the journalist
ˆ  ́  ́ ˆ or scandal. Camus writes that ‘le go ut de la v erit e n’emp eche pas la prise de
parti’ ( Ess , 266 ) (‘a taste for truth does not preclude taking a stance’). In order
 ́ not to be partisan, ‘le commentaire politique et moral de l’actualit e’ (‘political
and moral commentary on current events’) needs ‘distance’, ‘scruples’; ‘une
 ́  ́ id ee de la relativit e’ (‘an understanding of moral relativity’) ( ibid .). In his only
 ́ news report published in Combat , ‘Crise en Alg erie’ (‘Crisis in Algeria’), he
put these principles into effect and studiously avoided echoing the official
8 line, unlike Sartre in the Soviet Union and Cuba.
Making the distinction between fact and opinion was, for Camus, an abso-
 ́ lute rule. In a democracy, ‘le souci d’objectivit e’ (‘a concern for objectivity’)
 ́  ́ prevents any ‘parti pris’ or ‘solidarit e syst ematique’ (‘bias’ or ‘systematic
support’) and likewise obviously, its opposite, systematic opposition. The
important thing is, as Camus presents it, fidelity to one’s own principles and
9 to the promises one has made to oneself. In order to speak the truth you
have to speak clearly and fairly. You can protest without giving offence and
rebuke without resorting to slander.
There was no question at that period of speaking in hackneyed phrases.
Writing undercover had taught authors and writers both the ‘weight’ and
the ‘cost’ that words could have ( Ess , 1489 ). ‘A des temps nouveaux, il faut,
sinon des mots nouveaux, du moins des dispositions nouvelles de mots’ ( Ess ,
267 ) (‘New times need, if not new words, at least using words in new ways’),
‘Un langage clair’ ( Ess , 1524 ) (‘clear language’), ‘un langage respectable’ ( Ess ,
 ́ 264 ) (‘language worthy of respect’), ‘des termes clairs et irr eprochables’ ( Ess ,
1549 ) (‘clear and irreproachable terminology’). This amounts to a leitmotif
which is typical of Camus. Elsewhere he refers to ‘[l’]effort d’exactitude’
(‘the struggle to be precise’) and ‘la recherche de nuances’ ( Ess , 1489 ) (‘the
search for nuance’).
The critical function is opposed to the ideological function. Jean Grenier
had warned Camus against ‘les doctrines absolues et infaillibles’ ( Ess , 282 )
(‘doctrines that were absolutist and claimed to be infallible’). A writer of edi-
torials raises questions; he does not bombard his readers with answers. He
does not provide the light of truth; he just helps people to see clearly. In their
reviews of the press, Le Monde , Le Figaro and Franc-tireur frequently quote
his editorials but not always in friendly terms. His claims to the moral high
ground provoke envy and irritation. Camus found that he had to spell out
` the idea that he did not consider that he had ‘le privil ege de la clairvoyance
 ́  ́ et la sup eriorit e de ceux qui ne se trompent jamais’ (‘the privilege of being
clairvoyant or the advantage of never making any mistakes’) but was simply
`  ́ trying to ‘collaborer a une œuvre commune . . . par l’exercice p eriodique
` de quelques r egles de conscience’ (‘collaborate in a shared project ...by
10 applying, from time to time, a few modest rules dictated by conscience’).
85
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
Rejecting sensationalism, Camus urges journalists to appeal to the intelli-
gence of their readers and not to their ‘sentimentality’.
The articles on journalistic ethics written in the summer of 1944 had a
great impact and seemed utopian. Nevertheless, what strikes one on reread-
ing them is the fact that they are so very general. It is easy to see that the
appeal to the spirit of criticism and to ‘intellectual honesty’, scrupulousness
and vigilance was the better received because it followed on from four long
years in which the press had been subject to orders. Camus laid down a
few principles and requirements. By not being afraid to use high-sounding
phrases, he was, basically, stating that politics should be bound by ethics.
Whether signed Camus, Albert Ollivier or simply anonymous, the Combat
editorials, at least initially, were the result of collective discussion. From 1945
onwards, the editorials follow and sometimes contradict each other. Where
the editorial team of Combat had been of one mind in 1944 , it subsequently
became pluralist. Pascal Pia allowed Camus to express one opinion and, the
next day, Albert Ollivier or Raymond Aron to argue the opposite. Part of
the editorial team, including Camus, Marcel Gimont and Georges Altschuler,
continued to express socialist ideas, whilst it is obvious that another, includ-
ing Pia, Ollivier and Aron, was looking more and more towards De Gaulle.
Whilst rival dailies were churning out reassuring certainties, Combat ’s waver-
ing unsettled its readers.
In 1950 , Camus brought together a carefully chosen selection of his edi-
 ́ torials in a book which he called Actuelles i . ‘Ce volume’, he wrote, ‘r esume
 ́  ́ ˆ  ́ ` l’exp erience d’un ecrivain m el e pendant quatre ans a la vie politique de son
pays . . . Les pages qui suivent disent simplement que, si la lutte est difficile,
les raisons de lutter, elles du moins, restent claires’ ( Ess , 251 – 2 ) (‘This volume
sums up the experiences of a writer who, for four years, got involved in the
political life of his country . . . The pages which follow are simply meant to
say that, whilst the struggle may be a difficult one, at least the reasons for
 ́  ́ struggling remain clear’). At the time when he was writing L’Homme r evolt e ,
he opted to reproduce those articles which were closest to being essays or dis-
sertations and excluded the greater number which were reactions to current
events and which he considered to be ephemera.
Of Camus’s articles for Combat , posterity has retained his debate with
Mauriac. Camus argues for the post-Occupation purge to be directed at the
ruling class which had betrayed or failed the country; such would be the
price  of  its  renewal.  Mauriac,  thought  to  be  inclined  towards  clemency,
was  afraid  there  might  be  blunders,  insisting  that  the  purge  should  be
strictly  circumscribed  and  that  the  rule  of  law  should  prevail.  The  dis-
agreement  of  these  two  leading  lights  from  radically  different  social  and
cultural backgrounds was a political one. The course of events (and General
86
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus the journalist
De  Gaulle)  went  Mauriac’s  way,  and  Camus  acknowledged  his  elder’s
victory.
As an editorialist at Combat , Camus successfully influenced events: he
helped  prevent  a  Communist  Party  takeover  of  the  national  Resistance
movement;  on 17 May 1945 ,  he  protested  successfully  against  delays  in
the repatriation of deportees from Dachau ( Ess , 303 – 5 ), reporting ‘avec joie
et satisfaction’ (‘with joy and satisfaction’) two days later that American
forces  had  supplied  the  means  necessary  to  secure  this.  Elsewhere,  how-
ever, his influence was much less. He devoted several editorials to Franco’s
11 Spain, the great political cause of his generation. Yet Franco was to remain
in power for another thirty years. The eight articles published under the
heading Ni victimes ni bourreaux ( Ess , 329 – 52 ) in November 1946 merit
particular attention. The collection is a reflection on revolt, revolution and
violence (offering an alternative to Merleau-Ponty’s exploration of ‘progres-
sive violence’ in Humanisme et terreur ( Humanism and Terror )of 1947 ),
an appeal to take Marxism out of French socialism, a theoretical consider-
12 ation of the project for reform and a plea for a new international order.
It includes an expression which was to become famous but whose author-
 ́ ship is often erroneously ascribed to Raymond Aron: ‘la fin des id eologies’
(‘the end of ideologies’). Any ‘absolute utopias’ are anachronistic, useless
and dangerous in a rapidly changing world ( Ess , 338 ). To such ideas Camus
 ́ `  ́  ́ opposes a ‘pens ee politique modeste, c’est- a-dire d elivr ee de tout messian-
 ́  ́ isme, et d ebarrass ee de la nostalgie du paradis terrestre’ ( Ess , 335 ) (‘a modest
political philosophy, that is, one free of any messianic ideas or any hankering
after a heaven on earth’). Ni victimes ni bourreaux made his break with the
radical idealist tendency official. In many ways it is a prophetic text which
13 raises the major questions of the twenty-first century.
Pia’s Combat had a lifespan of less than three years. Camus had played
an intermittent role. In June 1947 he withdrew in order to give priority to
literature: La Peste appeared at this time to widespread acclaim. Two plays,
` L’Etat de si ege and Les Justes , were to follow and he was also working
 ́  ́ on L’Homme r evolt e . Thus he was relying on fiction and essay writing to
make his views known. Whereas Camus had stopped commenting on cur-
rent affairs, Sartre had a permanent column in Les Temps modernes and
Raymond Aron and Franc ̧ois Mauriac each had theirs in Le Figaro .
L’Express
In 1955 Camus joined the staff of the then weekly and later daily L’Express
where his column alternated with that of his old adversary, Mauriac. He was
given a free hand and wrote on such subjects as the condition of the working
87
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
class, anti-Arab racism and Mozart’s bicentenary. For the only time in his
` journalistic career, he endorsed a political party, supporting Pierre Mend es
 ́ France’s non-Communist left-wing Front r epublicain in the elections of Jan-
14 uary 1956 . A significant proportion of his thirty-five columns relate to
the Algerian War, which obsessed and tormented Camus. He felt that, in
France, the press – a term he used pejoratively – was doing its job badly,
that it was becoming a channel for prejudice. He considered that his close
personal knowledge of Algeria meant that he had a duty to act as a historian.
His intention was to educate his metropolitan French readers by patiently
explaining little-known truths: first, the social and political frustration of
the Arab masses, who had had quite enough of promises that were never
kept; then the bitterness of the French Algerians (whom he never refers to as
pieds-noirs ) who were always assumed to be wealthy colonialists, whereas
the vast majority of them were ordinary wage-earners or small business-
men. He also pointed out the political responsibilities of the metropolitan
deputies and governments who, by giving way to the powerful colonialists’
representatives, had reduced the Arab elite to despair.
As a columnist and chronicler of the events, he wanted to believe that
it was not too late and that the worst outcome could be avoided (CAC 6 ,
41 ). This is why, once he arrived at his diagnosis, he suggested approaches
and put forward proposals: he was counting on the representatives of the
two communities in Algeria talking to each other (CAC 6 , 87 ). In a second
series of articles, he revealed his plan for a civil truce aimed at avoiding
the shedding of innocent blood and preventing extremism. Yet when Camus
went to Algeria in January 1956 , his courageous but utopian initiative failed.
The government had done nothing to support it. In February 1956 , isolated
and aware of his inability to influence events, he was to leave L’Express .
Several of Camus’s L’Express columns continued the approach that he
had  taken  in  his Combat editorials,  as  if  to  show  that  their  author  had
not changed. His column of 11 November 1955 , for example, discusses the
15 atomic bomb and the balance of terror. It clearly alludes to the celebrated
editorial which had appeared on the day following the Hiroshima bomb in
August 1945 but also to the idea of an ‘end to ideologies’. To pay homage
to Gandhi, who is presented as the anti-Lenin, is once more to affirm non-
violence. The three columns concerned with Franco’s Spain are further proof
of Camus’s faithfulness to his own ideas.
The three periods of journalistic activity that I have briefly presented here
are quite varied. The young former Communist working in Algiers in the late
1930 s plays his part in a militant enterprise – taking up causes, occasionally
engaging in polemic – and clearly enjoys doing so, while also discovering how
88
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus the journalist
complex things can be. At Combat , the Resistance member holds a strategic
position: he has power and influence in public life. And finally, at L’Express ,
the celebrated author lends the weight of his prestige to a newspaper where
he is basically just an extra.
Camus’s first wish was to be a writer, an artist. For him, journalism was
initially a way of earning a living. He acquired a taste for it but did not
 ́ accord it any priority. The editor of Alger r epublicain continued to run the
 ́ ˆ Th e atre de l’Equipe and to work on Caligula . It was because he considered
that Combat left him too little time to write La Peste that he began to take
his distance from the newspaper in September 1945 . And when he came to
leave L’Express , it was in order to finish La Chute .
As for Camus’s novels, they present a critical image of the press. Clamence,
in La Chute , considers that reading ‘the papers’ should be seen as being on the
same level as fornication. In L’Etranger , Meursault too reads ‘the papers’ and
fornicates. Before his trial, a reporter cynically tells Meursault: ‘Vous savez,
 ́  ́  ́ nous avons mont e un peu votre affaire. L’ et e, c’est la saison creuse pour les
journaux. Et il n’y avait que votre histoire et celle du parricide qui vaillent
quelque chose’ ( TRN , 11 85 ) (‘You know, we’ve blown your case up a bit.
The summer’s the silly season for newspapers and there was only your story
and the one about the bloke who killed his father that were any good at all’).
The journalists seem frivolous. Only one appears to pay any real attention.
ˆ  ́ ˆ ‘Et j’ai eu l’impression bizarre d’ etre regard e par moi-m eme’ ( TRN , 11 86 )
(‘I had the peculiar impression that I was being watched by myself’), the
first-person narrator says. It is clear that the artist has portrayed himself in
the corner of the picture.
In La Peste , there is a highly critical, not to say sardonic view of the press.
‘The papers’ (and the expression is meant to be derogatory in this novel)
change from frivolous exploitation of events to embarrassed concealment of
them. ‘La presse, si bavarde dans l’affaire des rats, ne parlait plus de rien’
( TRN , 1245 ) (‘The press, which had had so much to say about the affair of
the rats, now had nothing to say about anything’). The epidemic affecting the
population is referred to allusively. The papers (which significantly neither
Tarrou nor Rieux reads) prevaricate, refuse to name the plague and trot out
 ́  ́ the communiqu es issued by the pr efecture . The narrator of La Peste intends
 ́ his role to be to ‘prendre le ton du t emoin objectif’ ( TRN , 1468 ) (‘to adopt
 ́ the tone of an objective eyewitness’). His ‘task’ is: ‘dire “ceci est arriv e”
 ́ lorsqu’il sait que ceci est, en effet, arriv e’ ( TRN , 1221 ) (‘to say: “this is what
happened” when he knows that this is indeed what happened’).
In the first two parts of La Peste , the narrator often refers to Rambert
as ‘the journalist’. He has arrived from the metropolis to look into the way
of life imposed on the Arabs. Rieux immediately asks him whether he is
89
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
prepared to ‘tell the truth’ and to give an eyewitness report without holding
anything back. At first he tries to think of ways to get away from a town
where he feels himself to be an outsider but then he allows himself to get
involved in the struggle against the disaster. ‘Maintenant que j’ai vu ce que
j’ai vu, je sais que je suis d’ici, que je le veuille ou non. Cette histoire nous
concerne tous’ ( TRN , 1389 ) (‘Now that I have seen what I have seen, I know
that, like it or not, I do belong here. This is a matter which concerns all of
us’). Camus has given Rambert several of his own personality traits: his love
of football and his sense of happiness, for example.
 ́ At Alger  r epublicain ,  Camus  had  been  a  reporter  and  a  literary  critic.
 ́ At Combat , where he had had some power, he had insisted, ‘pour eviter le
 ́ m elange des genres’ ( Ess , 1926 ) (‘so as not to confuse different genres’), on
not appearing as an author. He left the paper in order to write La Peste .
He did not even publish an extract of his novel in it, whereas Pascal Pia
had obtained long extracts of La Lutte contre l’ange ( The Struggle with the
Angel ) from Malraux. Camus’s commentary on Le Malentendu appeared in
Le Figaro . He played no part in any of the literary debates of the period.
One  even  has  the  feeling  that  the  arts  and  letters  page  was  looked  after
by Pascal Pia, who had been writing in the Nouvelle Revue Franc ̧aise as
far  back  as  the 1920 s  and  who  had  already  published  one  work  in  this
field. The paper had an impressive line-up: it had recruited the prominent
critics Maurice Nadeau and Jacques Lemarchand. Although, in the euphoric
atmosphere of the first few weeks, Camus had obtained reportages from Jean-
Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, it was subsequently Pia who succeeded
 ́ in persuading leading writers such as the novelists Andr e Gide and Georges
 ́ Bernanos, the leader of the Surrealist movement Andr e Breton, the left-wing
Catholic philosopher Emmanuel Mounier and others to make occasional
contributions to Combat . Camus’s influence on the literary pages was almost
non-existent.
It has often been said that politics in France is very literary. At Combat ,
Camus tried to be very professional. His editorials are exercises in reflection,
not in rhetoric. They are not adorned with biblical or classical quotations
like  those  of  Mauriac,  which  were  written  at  the  same  period.  Malraux
and Bernanos, the writers whom Camus admires, are referred to indirectly.
Journalistic  writing  and  the  writing  of  novels  are  two  areas  that  Camus
intended to keep separate. This does not mean that the writer completely
forgets that he is an author. For example, he was careful about the end-
ings of his articles. The final word of his Combat editorials is often some-
thing high-flown: justice, injustice, reason, truth. It has also long been noted
that there are strong intertextual links, a process of recycling of formulæ
and images between, for example, Ni victimes ni bourreaux and Tarrou’s
90
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus the journalist
autobiographical revelations. Similarly, the editorial of 22 December 1944 ,
dealing with the enforced separation of loved ones, contains a theme also to
16 be highlighted in La Peste .
Camus remained nostalgic about Combat . He wrote ( 1 September 1944 )
that the journalist is a historian of the day-to-day. Newspaper reporting had
been a school of writing for the future author. When putting together small
news items, he had refined his visual sense. By the end of the 1930 s, he had
learned how to depict characters, to reconstruct a situation, as may be seen
from the eyewitness material recorded in the first volume of his Carnets .
In L’Etranger and La Peste , journalists are chatterboxes. There is nothing
to  prove  it  but  neither  can  we  exclude  the  possibility  that  the  garrulous
Clamence in La Chute might have been a journalist. Whether he is attacking
journalists or politicians, we have seen that Camus generally uses the word
‘rhetoric’ in a pejorative sense. It refers to a discourse that is extravagant,
insincere and inauthentic. His own is concise but elegant. With its strictly
fixed form, the editorial genre fits Camus’s classic talent. As he wrote in his
 ́ Carnets in October 1938 : ‘La v eritable œuvre d’art est celle qui dit moins’ ( C i ,
127 ) (‘The true work of art is the one that says less’). All an editorial needs,
 ́ he says, is ‘une id ee, deux exemples, trois feuillets’ (‘one idea, two examples,
three pages’) and a news report: ‘des faits, de la couleur, des rapprochements’
17 (‘facts, colour and the ability to make connections’).
NOTES
This is an abridged version of the author’s original text in French and has been
translated by Mike Routledge.
 ́ 1 .  Jean Daniel, ‘Le Combat pour Combat ’, Camus (Paris, Hachette, coll. G enies et
 ́  ́ r ealit es, 1969 ), p. 78 .
 ́  ́ 2 .  ‘Chez les travailleurs. La sp eculation contre les lois sociales’, Alger r epublicain ,
12 October 1938 , 231 – 2 .
 ́  ́ 3 .  ‘Les Travailleurs contre les d ecrets-lois’, Alger r epublicain , 27 November 1938 ,
233 .
 ́  ́ ` 4 .  ‘Dialogue entre un pr esident du Conseil et un employ e a 1200 francs par mois’,
 ́ Alger r epublicain , 3 December 1938 , 234 – 7 .
5 .  The survey is accompanied and supported by photographs.
 ́ 6 .  Philippe Vanney, ‘Albert Camus devant la guerre’, Bulletin d’ etudes franc ̧aises
(University of Tokyo) 19 ( 1988 ), 19 – 55 and 21 ( 1990 ), 1 – 30 .
 ́ ` 7 .  Georges  H enein,  ‘Lettre Henri  Calet, 16 avril 1948 ’, Grandes  Largeurs 2 a
 ́ (autumn/winter 1981 ), 66 ; Raymond Aron, M emoires (Paris, Julliard, 1985 ),
p. 287 .
8 . Combat , 13 to 23 May 1945 .
ˆ  ́ 9 .  ‘Il para ıt que Combat a chang e d’orientation’, Combat , 9 February 1945 .
10 .  ‘Autocritique’, CC , 345 .
91
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

jeanyves guerin
` ˆ 11 .  ‘Nos  fr eres  d’Espagne’, Combat , 7 September 1944 , 174 – 6 ;  ‘A  cette  m eme
 ́ place...’, Combat , 5 October 1944 , 231 – 5 ; ‘L’Espagne s’ eloigne’, Combat ,
7 – 8 January 1945 , 435 – 8 . See also ‘Pourquoi l’Espagne?’, CC , 345 . This article
is a reply to Gabriel Marcel, who had reproached Camus for situating L’Etat de
` si ege in Spain rather than in a Communist country.
12 .  For a discussion of ‘progressive violence’, see chapter 7 .
13 .  Philippe  Vanney,  ‘A  propos  d’une  lecture: Ni  victimes  ni  bourreaux d’Albert
 ́  ́ Camus ou la probl ematique r evolutionnaire dans les relations internationales’,
 ́ Bulletin d’ etudes franc ̧aises (University of Tokyo) 17 ( 1986 ), 36 – 67 . See also
 ́ Maurice Weyembergh, ‘Ni victimes ni bourreaux: continuit e ou rupture?’, in
 ́ Jeanyves Gu erin (ed.), Camus et le premier ‘Combat’ (La Garenne-Colombes,
 ́ Editions europ eennes Erasme, 1990 ), pp. 109 – 24 , and in the same volume Joel
Roman, ‘Histoire et utopie dans Ni victimes ni bourreaux ’, pp. 125 – 34 .
‘Explication de vote’, L’Express , 30 December 1955 . 14 .
15 .  ‘Le Rideau de feu’, L’Express , 11 November 1955 , 93 – 7 .
 ́  ́ 16 .  ‘La France a v ecu beaucoup de trag edies’, CC , 402 – 5 .
17 .  Daniel, ‘Le Combat pour Combat ’, p. 91 .
92
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

7
MARTIN CROWLEY
Camus and social justice
Across the range of Camus’s writings, two terms repeatedly ring out as the
expression of his fundamental concerns: ‘man’ and ‘justice’. The two are pro-
foundly linked: Camus’s resolute belief in the importance of social justice,
and his contributions to the global political debates of his time – includ-
ing those concerning the Second World War, colonialism, the atom bomb
and the Cold War – are inseparable from his affirmation of the values he
attaches to the figure of the human. It is impossible to find an example of
a key Camusian intervention in the cause of social justice which does not
argue its case via reference to the human as its core locus of value. This chap-
ter tries to address Camus’s concern for social justice by exploring some of
its moral and conceptual frameworks. I do not propose to detail Camus’s
various interventions as such, as these are discussed elsewhere in this vol-
ume. Rather, with reference to some of these key moments, I will attempt
to draw out something of the values by which Camus is driven. And I will
be  using  the  figure  of  the  human  as  the  common  thread  by  which  these
values are held together (or, at times, by which they are held in tension).
Sometimes, this figure expresses a virile, heroic resolve; sometimes, it can be
pathetically vulnerable. But for Camus, ‘man’ will never quite be effaced;
and the point of this persistence is the call for justice it unceasingly articu-
lates. My aim here will be to provide some sense of this irreducible value of
resistance.
(A note on terminology: as is typical of thinkers of his time, Camus habit-
ually  uses  ‘l’homme’  (‘man’)  to  refer  to  humanity  in  general,  despite  its
effacement of the female part of humanity, an effacement which has since
then quite rightly been subjected to feminist critique. (Indeed, despite this
critique, ‘l’homme’ is still much more widely used in French thought than
‘man’ is in English.) This masculinist bias does more than place him in his
context, however: it is also a part of his particular version of humanism, in
which virility and fraternity are often key values. When delineating Camus’s
93
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

martin crowley
thought, therefore, I will use his term, ‘man’; when discussing matters more
generally, I will revert to less exclusive terms such as ‘humanity’ and ‘the
human’.)
Demanding justice
Camus’s concern for social justice may broadly be divided into two cate-
gories. First, there is the kind of concern most readily identified with the
idea of social justice as such, in which what is at stake is the equitable organ-
isation of social structures, especially as these relate to the distribution of
wealth. Secondly, Camus’s commitment to the idea of justice is also artic-
ulated through his engagement with world historical events. Accordingly, I
will here discuss first, the straightforward egalitarian demand for social jus-
tice in the conventional sense, as expressed in Camus’s early journalism on
colonial Algeria and at the time of the Liberation of France towards the end
of the Second World War; and secondly, the debates concerning the notion
of justice in the context of national and global politics that continue from
 ́  ́ the Liberation via Les Justes to L’Homme r evolt e . In each of these instances,
Camus is also motivated by his sense of the fundamental injustice of the
human condition (put simply: that we suffer and die in the midst of a mean-
ingless universe). I will indicate the influence of this dimension briefly where
appropriate, and will address the problems it introduces into Camus’s posi-
tion towards the end of my discussion of his engagement with the demands
of justice on a world historical scale.
Camus’s concern for social justice in the strict sense receives its most dra-
matic early expression in the articles on poverty in Kabylia published in Alger
 ́ r epublicain from 5 to 15 June 1939 , many of which Camus chose to group
` together in Actuelles iii under the title Mis ere de la Kabylie ( Ess , 903 – 38 ).
 ́ The title of the first of these, ‘Le D enuement’ (‘Destitution’), gives a clear
sense of the thrust of Camus’s reports: his aim is to force recognition of
the bare human suffering in question, in order then more urgently to pose
the question of the political action which ought responsibly to be taken. He
proceeds by a combination of factual, often statistical exposition, intense,
powerfully pathetic description and conclusions expressed in a tone of con-
trolled anger. The moral centre of this method is located in its evocation of
specific instances of terrible impoverishment, such as the children who fight
with local dogs over the contents of dustbins, who arrive at school naked
and infested with lice, or who pass out from hunger while there ( Ess , 907 – 8 ).
Anticipating that of Philippe Othon in La Peste , the scandalous suffering of
these children is a brute fact whose immediate reality demands restitution,
here of the poverty it declares ( Ess , 909 ). Camus’s articles accordingly seek
94
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and social justice
to go beyond the humanitarian response they also evoke. While he accepts
the possible usefulness of charity in such a situation, he is bitterly critical of
what he has seen of the effects of charitable intervention in Kabylia. When
the starving have back taxes docked from their wages, he writes, charita-
 ́ ble works ‘constituent une exploitation intol erable du malheur’ ( Ess , 913 )
(‘constitute an intolerable exploitation of misfortune’). Thus: ‘Je ne crois
 ́ pas que la charit e soit un sentiment inutile. Mais je crois qu’en certains cas
 ́  ́  ́ ses r esultats le sont et qu’alors il faut lui pr ef erer une politique sociale con-
structive’ ( Ess , 912 ) (‘I do not believe that charity is a useless sentiment.
But I believe that in some cases, its results are, and that in such cases we
must prefer constructive social policy’). Camus’s intervention constitutes a
demand for social justice as such, as he denounces the exploitative economic
structure which underpins the immediate crisis. Those in charge of the colo-
 ́ nial administration preside over a ‘r egime d’esclavage’ ( Ess , 915 ) (‘regime of
slavery’), in which ten to twelve hours’ work a day earns six to ten francs, the
low wages justified by various arguments in bad faith. Since ‘l’exploitation
seule est la cause des bas salaires’ ( Ess , 917 ) (‘exploitation alone is the cause
of low wages’), the only solution is not charitable, but rather economic: ‘Il
` n’y a pas d’issue a cette situation. Ce n’est pas en distribuant du grain qu’on
 ́ ˆ ˆ sauvera la Kabylie de la faim, mais en r esorbant le ch omage et en contr olant
` les salaires. Cela, on peut et on doit le faire d es demain’ ( Ess , 918 ) (‘There
is no way out of this situation. Kabylia will not be saved from famine by
distributing grain, but by cutting unemployment and regulating wages. This
can and must be done right away’). Destitution is a result of low wages;
wages are low because unemployment produces competition in a free labour
market; the answer is to increase the numbers employed by the state in major
building works, and to extend professional training, allowing workers a rea-
sonable level of income. More broadly, it will also be necessary to manage
emigration throughout Kabylia, Algeria and the south of France, to regulate
wages properly, and to increase the value of Kabylia’s agricultural produc-
tion by increasing its quantity and quality and stabilising its market price
( Ess , 929 – 33 ). Anticipating by half a century contemporary debates concern-
ing economic relations between the so-called First and Third Worlds, Camus
insists that justice demands not intermittent charity, but structural economic
reform. This position is reaffirmed in the series of articles from Combat in
 ́ 1945 collected as Crise en Alg erie ( Ess , 939 – 59 ), and its moral force echoes
in an important denunciation of racism and torture from 1947 ( Ess , 321 – 3 );
but it encounters its limit in the mid 1950 s, when Camus’s perhaps under-
standable refusal to consider his own class, working-class French Algerians,
as structurally complicit in the injustices of colonialism, provides a powerful
1 factor in the historical failure of his preferred solution to the Algerian crisis.
95
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

martin crowley
` Camus presents his demands in Mis ere de la Kabylie as driven by the twin
principles of good economic sense and human justice, the latter occasionally
rhetorically ceding ground to the former in a subtle assertion of their com-
 ́  ́ bined force: ‘Ce n’est pas seulement l’humanit e qui est foul ee aux pieds par
` les salaires a six francs, mais aussi la logique. Et par les bas prix des pro-
ductions agricoles kabyles, on ne viole pas seulement la justice, mais aussi
le bon sens’ ( Ess , 929 ) (‘It is not only humanity which is trampled on by
wages of six francs a day, but also logic. And the low price of Kabylia’s
agricultural production violates not only justice, but also common sense’).
Are his reports somehow unpatriotic, asks Camus? (This is 1939 , after all.)
Fine; but what is patriotism without justice?
ˆ  ́  ́ Il para ıt que c’est, aujourd’hui, faire acte de mauvais Franc ̧ais que de r ev eler la
` mis ere d’un pays franc ̧ais. Je dois dire qu’il est difficile aujourd’hui de savoir
ˆ comment etre un bon Franc ̧ais . . . Mais, du moins, on peut savoir ce que c’est
 ́  ́ ˆ qu’un homme juste. Et mon pr ejug e, c’est que la France ne saurait etre mieux
 ́  ́  ́ repr esent ee et d efendue que par des actes de justice. ( Ess , 936 )
(Apparently, to reveal the poverty of a part of France is, today, to be a bad
Frenchman. I have to say that it is difficult, today, to know how to be a good
Frenchman . . . But it is at least possible to know what constitutes a just man.
And I persist in thinking that France can be no better represented and defended
than by acts of justice.)
And if we now move forward five years to the demands for social justice
expressed in some of Camus’s editorials for Combat around the Liberation,
we discover that this combination of a language of justice and humanity
with  a  call  for  meaningful  economic  change  has  survived  the  war  years
intact.
On 1 October 1944 , Camus spells out his vision of social justice: an econ-
omy organised on collectivist principles, allied to a guarantee of political
 ́ ` freedoms. ‘Nous appellerons donc justice un etat social o u chaque individu
 ́ `  ́ rec ̧oit toutes ses chances au d epart, et o u la majorit e d’un pays n’est pas
 ́  ́  ́ maintenue dans une condition indigne par une minorit e de privil egi es’ ( Ess ,
1527 ) (‘We shall therefore call justice a social state in which each individual
starts with equal opportunity, and in which the country’s majority cannot be
held in abject conditions by a privileged few’) ( BHR , 57 ). What is needed,
he writes in February 1945 , is the creation of a true popular democracy,
 ́  ́  ́ with a collectivist economy, in the context of ‘une f ed eration economique
` ` `  ́  ́ mondiale, o u les mati eres premi eres, les d ebouch es commerciaux et la mon-
 ́ naie seront internationalis es’ ( Ess , 1551 ) (‘a world economic federation, in
which raw materials, commercial markets and currency will be placed on
an international basis’ ( BHR , 106 , modified)). And in May 1945 , Camus
96
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and social justice
applauds De Gaulle’s plan to bring credit, along with the production of coal
and electricity, under national control ( Ess , 1556 ). The previous month, how-
ever, Camus had been severely critical of De Gaulle’s failure in his speech
of 2 April to celebrate, alongside such national talismans as Joan of Arc
and Henri IV, the nation’s tradition of insurrection ( Ess , 1555 ). At this time,
Camus sees his drive for an authentic popular democracy as a revolutionary
demand, as the true project of the working class ( Ess , 1545 ), and as being,
 ́ ` in the title of a piece published in R esistance ouvri ere in December 1944 ,
‘Au service de l’homme’ ( Ess , 1544 ) (‘In the service of man’), in which a
 ́ properly moral politics will answer ‘ce d esir simple et ardent, ressenti par la
 ́ ` majorit e laborieuse du pays, de voir l’homme remis a sa place’ ( Ess , 1545 )
(‘this simple, burning desire, felt by the country’s working-class majority, to
see man restored to his rightful place’). The aim cannot be human happiness,
wrote Camus in October of that year: the misery of the human condition
would make that a vain aspiration. ‘Il s’agit seulement de ne pas ajouter
` aux mis eres profondes de notre condition une injustice qui soit purement
humaine’ ( Ess , 1528 ) (‘It is simply a matter of not adding human injustice to
all the other profound miseries of our condition’ ( BHR , 58 )). The metaphys-
ical appeal here serves to motivate the economic argument: here, at least, we
can minimise the unhappiness that is our lot. And it is, as ever in Camus, the
metaphysical invocation of ‘man’ that gives the demand for social justice,
expressed in proposals for economic redistribution, its moral validity.
Justified violence
For the broadly progressive reader, all of this is doubtless easy enough to
accept. But Camus’s preoccupations at this time include another, more dif-
ficult topic, which connects his thought to the global politics of his time,
and which will dominate the public presence of this thought for the next
decade. This topic is the problematic link between justice and violence. At
the time of the Liberation, this is famously expressed in the polemic between
Camus and Franc ̧ois Mauriac over the justifiability of execution as part of
 ́ the epuration (the process whereby France sought to purge itself of its collab-
orationist links with Nazism): within this debate, Camus rejects Mauriac’s
invocation of forgiveness, and argues in favour of execution as an instrument
 ́ of justice. France has within it, ‘comme un corps etranger’ (‘like a foreign
ˆ body’), a minority of traitors. ‘C’est leur existence m eme qui pose donc le
` probl eme de la justice puisqu’ils forment une part vivante de ce pays et que la
 ́ question est de les d etruire’ ( Ess , 1536 ) (‘Their very existence poses the prob-
lem of justice, for they constitute a living part of this country, and we must
ˆ decide whether we will destroy them’ ( BHR , 72 )). In the name of ‘le go ut de
97
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

martin crowley
l’homme et l’espoir de sa grandeur’ (‘a belief in man and the hope of achiev-
ing his greatness’), ‘nous avons choisi d’assumer la justice humaine avec ses
ˆ  ́ terribles imperfections, soucieux seulement de les corriger par une honn etet e
 ́  ́  ́ d esesp er ement maintenue’ ( Ess , 1536 ) (‘we choose human justice with all its
terrible imperfections; hoping only to make up for these by holding desper-
ately to our honesty’ ( BHR , 72 , modified)). Arguing for ‘une justice prompte
 ́ et limit ee’ (‘justice . . . applied swiftly and for a limited time’), Camus claims
 ́  ́  ́  ́ that his language is that of ‘une g en eration d’hommes elev es dans le spectacle
 ́ ` `  ́ ` de l’injustice, etrang ere a Dieu, amoureuse de l’homme et r esolue a le servir
 ́ contre un destin si souvent d eraisonnable’ ( Ess , 1537 ) (‘a generation of men
brought up with the spectacle of injustice, men who are strangers to God
but lovers of humanity, men who are resolved to serve humanity despite a
destiny that is so often meaningless’ ( BHR , 72 )). Being ‘in the service of man’
means not just furthering the cause of economic justice: it also means being
prepared to punish the injustice of those who have betrayed him. There is
 ́ an implied continuity between the epuration and the final struggles of the
Resistance: in both cases, violence is not desired, but is the necessary means
to a just end. A couple of months earlier, on 24 August 1944 , amidst the Lib-
 ́ eration of Paris, Camus wrote that ‘Le temps t emoignera que les hommes de
 ́ France ne voulaient pas tuer, et qu’ils sont entr es les mains pures dans une
guerre qu’ils n’avaient pas choisie’ (‘Time will bear witness to the fact that
the men of France did not want to kill and that their hands were clean when
they entered a war they had not chosen’); ‘Une fois de plus’, he concluded,
‘la justice doit s’acheter avec le sang des hommes’ ( Ess , 255 ) (‘Once more
justice must be bought with the blood of men’) ( RRD , 27 ). And the lesson
of this is indeed that force must be embraced when necessary, and hence that
forgiveness will have to give way to just retribution: ‘Qui oserait parler ici
 ́  ́ de pardon? Puisque l’esprit a enfin compris qu’il ne pouvait vaincre l’ ep ee
 ́  ́ que par l’ ep ee . . . Ce n’est pas la haine qui parlera demain, mais la justice
ˆ  ́  ́ elle-m eme, fond ee sur la m emoire’ ( Ess , 259 )  (‘Who would dare speak here
of forgiveness? Since the spirit finally understood that a sword is needed to
conquer a swor d...Itisnot hatred that will speak tomorrow, but justice
itself, based firmly on memory’ ( BHR , 43 )).
Three years later, Camus would come to the conclusion that he had been
on the wrong side in this polemic (see Ess , 371 – 2 ). What is of interest here,
however, is the way in which his rhetoric of ‘man’ and of ‘justice’ can serve
ends which to say the least might be considered in tension. For throughout
the articles written around the time of the Liberation, we can see Camus
starting to wrestle with the question that would preoccupy him over the
coming years, and which constituted the principal frame through which he
would engage with the global politics of this period: the question of justified
98
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and social justice
violence. Even as he adopts a moral economy of regrettable means and justi-
 ́ fied ends in relation to the Resistance struggle and the epuration , he attempts
to deny this same moral economy legitimacy when it is deployed in the name
of a communist realpolitik . Although he wants nothing to do with those who
peddle anti-communism, and so aligns himself with the communists against
their enemies, Camus nonetheless insists that ‘nous ne sommes pas d’accord
avec la philosophie du communisme ni avec sa morale pratique’ ( Ess , 273 )
(‘we agree neither with the Communists’ philosophy nor with their prac-
tical ethics’ ( BHR , 59 )). They may agree on matters of social justice, but
Camus’s Combat and the communists are, he insists, separated by the fact
`  ́ that the communists resort to ‘une philosophie de l’histoire tr es coh erente’
( Ess , 273 ) (‘a very coherent philosophy of history’ ( BHR , 60 , modified)) in
order to justify their political realism. On this, Camus is categorical: ‘Nous
 ́ l’avons dit maintes fois, nous ne croyons pas au r ealisme politique’ ( Ess ,
273 ) (‘As we have said innumerable times, we do not believe in political
realism’ ( BHR , 60 )). (‘Political realism’ describes a position which, from the
premise that complicity with violence is inevitable, justifies its own use of
violence by invoking the necessity of the end it seeks.) This represents the
crucial early appearance of Camus’s rejection of the moral economy of what
he sees as a Marxist political eschatology (in which, according to critics such
as Camus, the claim to have identified in advance the end-goal of history
serves to justify violence seen as serving that end). This rejection is of major
importance in the development of Camus’s thought and political activity;
 ́  ́ it would culminate most famously in the polemic over L’Homme r evolt e
and the justifiability or otherwise of what was referred to as ‘progressive
violence’ (namely, violence which achieves a kind of strategic justification
2 by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  aims  to  rid  the  world  of  violence). ‘La  jus-
`  ́ tice sociale peut tr es bien se faire sans une philosophie ing enieuse’, Camus
declares ( Ess , 281 ) (‘Social justice can be realised without brilliant philos-
ophy’ ( BHR , 85 )). The messianic doctrine of inevitable progress ‘s’autorise
 ́ de l’amour de l’humanit e pour se dispenser de servir les hommes’ ( Ess , 281 )
(‘preaches love of humanity so as to exempt itself from serving men’), as
opposed to an alternative form of socialism, which ‘ne croit pas aux doc-
`  ́  ́ trines absolues et infaillibles, mais a l’am elioration obstin ee, chaotique mais
inlassable, de la condition humaine’ ( Ess , 282 ) (‘does not believe in abso-
lute and infallible doctrines, but rather in the tenacious efforts – perhaps
chaotic but always untiring – to improve the human condition’ ( BHR , 86 )).
In  the  midst  of  what  he  also  presents  as  his  revolutionary  drive,  Camus
reveals that he will have no truck with a revolution which knows that it
is  justified  in  advance  by  an  inevitable  end.  Violence  can  be  justified,  if
at  all,  only  as  an  unwelcome  necessity,  to  be  adopted  in  full  awareness
99
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

martin crowley
of its unacceptability, and not excused by an external, supposedly infalli-
ble, historical law.
 ́  ́ This argument will return in relation to Les Justes and L’Homme r evolt e ,
and I will come back to it shortly. First, though, it is worth briefly consid-
ering the language of ‘man’ through which Camus justifies his position. It
is astonishing, for example, that even as he rejects an eschatological com-
 ́ munism by declaring in November 1944 , ‘Nous savons avec quelle rapidit e
les moyens sont pris pour les fins, nous ne voulons pas de n’importe quelle
justice’ (‘We know how quickly the means become confused with the ends;
it is not just any kind of justice we seek’), he states: ‘Car il s’agit de faire,
 ́ en effet, le salut de l’homm e...Ils’agit de servir la dignit e de l’homme par
des moyens qui restent dignes au milieu d’une histoire qui ne l’est pas’ ( Ess ,
279 ) (‘Indeed, this is a question of saving humanity...This is a question
of serving the dignity of man by methods that remain dignified in the midst
of a history that is not’ ( BHR , 76 , modified)). And we have already seen
that in December 1944 , Camus is not averse to presenting the achievement
of social justice as the historic mission of the working class ‘sans cesse en
marche vers la grande victoire’ ( Ess , 1545 ) (‘ceaselessly marching towards
its great victory’). The next month, however, Camus would adopt his more
usual position in relation to the salvation of ‘man’, declaring that ‘Sans avoir
 ́ ` l’ambition d eraisonnable de le sauver, nous tenons au moins a le servir’ ( Ess ,
287 ) (‘We do not have the unrealistic ambition of saving him; we try only
to serve him’ ( BHR , 105 )). But these two aberrant, unexpectedly messianic
moments signal the struggle here for ownership of ‘man’ as the key term of
value in these debates.
Resituating  these  debates  about  the  morality  of  leftist  political  action
alongside those about just retribution with which they are contemporary,
it is compelling to note that Camus refuses the moral economy of desired
ends and justified means in the former debate and allows it in the latter by the
` very same appeal to ‘man’ as an irreducible value. ‘Si nous consentons a nous
 ́  ́ passer de Dieu et de l’esp erance’, writes Camus in relation to the epuration ,
 ́ ‘nous  ne  nous  passons  pas  si  ais ement  de  l’homme  .  .  .  nous  refuserons
 ́ jusqu’au dernier moment une charit e divine qui frustrerait les hommes de
leur justice’ ( Ess , 287 ) (‘If we consent to do without God and hope, we
cannot so easily do without ma n...wewill refuse until the final moment
a divine charity which frustrates the justice of men’ ( BHR , 105 , modified).
The final irreducible value, ‘man’ is tossed this way and that, here affirm-
ing a messianic faith in social justice or an eschatology (‘jusqu’au dernier
moment’) of just retribution, here refusing precisely this moral economy in
the name of good sense and historical moderation.
100
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and social justice
Camus’s rejection of ‘political realism’ underpins his interventions in the
post-war debates occasioned principally by the existence of the Soviet labour
camps (marked in France notably by the voices of Koestler and Rousset,
denouncing Soviet violence, and Merleau-Ponty’s theorisation of ‘progres-
3  ́  ́ sive violence’). Prior to L’Homme r evolt e , these interventions come pri-
marily in the essays collected as Ni victimes ni bourreaux ( Ess , 329 – 52 ),
and then in Camus’s responses to the criticism of these essays by Emmanuel
d’Astier de la Vigerie ( Ess , 353 – 68 ). In a world dominated by the opposition
between Soviet communism and American capitalism, and still marked by
the injustice of colonialism, Camus attempts to find a position which would
be as little as possible complicit with the violence and exploitation of each
of these regimes. He is not so naive, he says, as to expect a world without
violence: what he wants to achieve is a world in which violence is not given
a false legitimacy by some overarching political project. ‘Murder’ (his synec-
dochic figure for political violence) is inevitable, says Camus, as the only
way one can oppose the world of violence is by running the risk of violence
( Ess , 334 ):
Je ne dirai donc point qu’il faut supprimer toute violence . . . Je dis seulement
 ́  ́ qu’il faut refuser toute l egitimation de la violence, que cette l egitimation lui
 ́ vienne d’une raison d’ Etat absolue, ou d’une philosophie totalitaire. La violence
`  ́ ` est a la fois in evitable et injustifiable. Je crois qu’il faut lui garder son caract ere
exceptionnel et la resserrer dans les limites qu’on peut. ( Ess , 355 )
(So I will not say that all violence should be abolished . . . I say merely that
violence  must  be  refused  all  legitimacy,  whether  this  legitimacy  be  derived
from an absolute raison d’Etat or a totalitarian philosophy. Violence is both
inevitable and unjustifiable. I believe we must keep it as an exception and limit
it insofar as this is possible.)
Camus here develops arguments he had used to justify the Resistance (the
hands of the French are pure because they did not want the war they had to
 ́ fight) and the epuration (the imperfections of human justice can be corrected
by a desperate honesty: see Ess , 255 and 1536 , as discussed above). Violence
is acceptable only if it is known to be unacceptable and practised as such. It
is absolutely unacceptable if it is raised to the level of a principle or erected
into an institution. Thus, with specific reference to the Soviet camps: ‘Les
 ́ camps  ne  me  paraissent  avoir  aucune  des  excuses  que  peuvent  pr esenter
les violences provisoires d’une insurrection’ ( Ess , 365 ) (‘The camps seem to
me to lack any of the reasons which might excuse the provisional violence
of an uprising’). Convulsive violence in response to intolerable injustice is
acceptable (as long as it knows it is wrong); violence justified by appeals
101
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

martin crowley
to ‘historical necessity’ is not. In what is a grave problem for his position,
Camus does not address the problem of a convulsive uprising inspired by an
understanding of historical necessity: the two are, in his terms, incompatible.
Essentially, this problem derives from Camus’s conflation of metaphysical
and social injustice. (This conflation is most clearly at work in La Peste ,in
which, as Simone de Beauvoir and Roland Barthes amongst others observed,
4 human injustice is problematically translated by a metaphysical symbol. )
We have seen above that the drive for social justice may be motivated by
the desire to institute at least the justice that is humanly possible, against a
fundamentally unjust existential condition. ‘La grandeur de l’homme’, for
 ́ ˆ Camus, ‘est dans sa d ecision d’ etre plus fort que sa condition. Et si sa con-
ˆ dition est injuste, il n’a qu’une fac ̧on de la surmonter qui est d’ etre juste
ˆ lui-m eme’ ( Ess , 258 ) (‘Man’s greatness . . . lies in his decision to be stronger
than his condition. And if his condition is unjust, he has only one way of
overcoming it, which is to be just himself’ ( RRD , 30 )). ‘La justice...ne
 ́ va pas sans la r evolte’ ( Ess , 271 – 2 ) (‘There is no justice without revolt’): as
 ́  ́ Camus argues in the opening sections of L’Homme r evolt e , revolt is positive
in itself inasmuch as it affirms a human value, by refusing to accept the absur-
dity of human existence (which Camus habitually terms ‘injustice’). This is
why it is necessary for reactive violence to recognise its own unacceptability:
only by doing so can it continue to affirm the value of life which is at the
root of any movement of revolt authentically in touch with its metaphys-
ical implications. But the justification of any specific revolt is thus derived
from its existential attitude rather than its social basis: if our condition per
se is unjust, it becomes impossible to tell when violent reaction might be
specifically acceptable, what might justify revolt in social terms.
Violence may also be justified for Camus if the perpetrator accepts to pay
the price of its unacceptability by sacrificing his or her own life. The name
which for Camus crystallises the position he is attempting to formulate is
that of Kaliayev, the terrorist Russian revolutionary of 1905 , whose case is
 ́  ́ discussed at length in L’Homme r evolt e and forms the basis of Les Justes .
In the position represented for Camus by the 1905 revolutionaries, murder
 ́ is compensated by suicide: ‘Une vie est alors pay ee par une autre vie et, de
ces deux holocaustes, surgit la promesse d’une valeur’ ( Ess , 575 – 6 ) (‘A life
is paid for by another life, and from these two sacrifices springs the promise
of a value’ ( R , 138 )). These figures are distinguished by the fact that ‘Ils ne
 ́ mettent donc aucune id ee au-dessus de la vie humaine, bien qu’ils tuent pour
 ́ l’id ee’ ( Ess , 576 ) (‘Therefore they do not value any idea above human life,
although they kill for the sake of ideas’ ( R , 138 )). And in a note, Camus
concludes: ‘Deux races d’hommes. L’un tue une seule fois et paie de sa vie.
L’autre justifie des milliers de crimes et accepte de se payer d’honneurs’ ( Ess ,
102
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and social justice
578 ) (‘Two very different species of men. One kills only once and pays with
his life. The other justifies thousands of crimes and consents to be rewarded
with honours’ ( R , 141 )). If it keeps its exceptional quality, murder remains
attached to some kind of personal responsibility, remains uncomfortable,
and so continues to affirm the value it apparently denies (see C ii , 214 ). The
combination of local reaction against a greater evil, convulsive revolt against
metaphysical injustice, and the willingness to give one’s own life, affirms
a value beyond the immediate historical situation and allows violence to
achieve a temporary justification, as opposed to the pseudo-justification of
5 violence in terms of historical process.
Empty justice
Camus’s logic here is dubious, to be sure. Insurrectionary violence is justified
per se, as long as it is convulsive enough to declare its metaphysical roots.
Suicide bombing – of an appropriately guilty target – is justified per se. There
is nothing in Camus’s arguments that would allow us to distinguish between
different instances of reactive violence, to decide whether some might be
justified and others not: the only distinctions to be made are between the
existential attitudes of the perpetrators, which is pretty flimsy ground for
moral debate. The frame here is the problematic Camus derives from Dos-
toyevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov : in the absence of absolute value, how
can we find a principle that might stop us torturing each other? In the Lettres
` a un ami allemand , Camus acknowledges that this absence implies ethical rel-
ativism (and so seems to permit Nazi violence), before insisting that ‘man’ –
indeed, his ‘destiny’, in another moment of aberrant eschatology – constitutes
an irreducible moral limit which justifies localised violence in reaction against
some greater evil (and so justifies the Resistance) (see Ess , 213 – 43 , esp. 228 ).
But claiming that ‘man’ provides an irreducible value which will always jus-
tify resistance to evil does not bring us much closer to understanding what
kinds  of  resistance  are  justified  and  why.  In  this  sense,  Camus’s  ‘justice’
offers little effective purchase on actual decisions. We might contrast it with
Merleau-Ponty’s argument in Humanisme et terreur ( Humanism and Terror )
that, while the victorious are not always justified, justice without victory –
without effective action – is meaningless. Camus’s conception of justice can
seem abstract, and to have little in common with contemporary discussions
of social justice, from which the Camusian tone of desperate metaphysical
extremity is pretty much absent. But this tone reflects the function of this
conception of justice as Camus’s honest response to the extremity of the
events through which it was forged. Its problematic evaluative criteria may
render Camus’s justice empty, or useless; but it at least keeps open a radical
103
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

martin crowley
demand to which any politics which is not just opportunism must somewhere
respond, and highlights the difficulties which beset the necessary attempts to
express this demand in determinate, pragmatic action.
By way of conclusion, we might briefly compare Camus’s conception of
justice with that developed by a more recent thinker, namely the philosopher
Jacques Derrida ( 1930 – 2004 ). Usually associated with the philosophical and
political critiques of the humanism of Camus’s generation proposed by those
who came to prominence in the 1960 s, Derrida nevertheless occasionally
shows fascinating points of convergence with Camus, of which the question
of justice is a particularly intriguing example. Justice, for Derrida, is a radical
demand to which any particular instance of judgement must seek to respond,
6 but which it can never entirely fulfil. To be true to the demands of justice
is never to know that I am being just. Justice, on this reading, must strive
to remain empty, while also reaching determinate decisions: injustice would
precisely be the result of a justice that thought it knew the limits of its duties.
The  difference  between  Camus  and  Derrida  is  that  Camus  has  moments
when he thinks it is possible to know what justice is. But he comes to the
agonised position that justice can only be honoured by a genuine awareness
of and responsibility for the inevitable injustice of my attempts to be just. This
sounds useless, cutely paradoxical and, at times, like a strange form of bad
faith. And we are bound to ask what is the real difference between a ‘progres-
sive violence’ justified by its attachment to its own abolition, and a reactive,
convulsive violence justified by knowledge of its own unacceptability? For
Camus, however, in a world of unavoidable violence, the latter at least has
the simple advantage of being likely to do less damage. And – as for Derrida
(see for example his sustained public participation in the struggle against
apartheid in South Africa) – the demands of straightforward social justice
are not suspended by this metaphysical perplexity. Camus’s justice may well
be empty, then. But to an extent, at least, this might be as welcome as it is
shocking.
NOTES
1 .  On  this,  see  especially Ess , 961 – 1018 ,  and  Roger  Quilliot’s  commentary  ( Ess ,
1839 – 47 ).
2 .  On ‘progressive violence’, see the crucial intervention by Maurice Merleau-Ponty:
Humanisme et terreur (Paris, Gallimard, 1947 ).
3 .  Arthur Koestler, Darkness at Noon (London, Cape, 1940 ), and The Yogi and
 ́  ́ the Commissar (London, Cape, 1945 ); David Rousset, ‘Au secours des d eport es
 ́ dans  les  camps  sovi etiques’  ( 1949 ), Lignes n.s. 2 (May 2000 ), 143 – 60 ;  and
Merleau-Ponty, Humanisme et terreur . On these debates, see Simone de Beauvoir,
La Force des choses (Paris, Gallimard, 1963 ), pp. 121 – 6 , 216 – 22 , and 279 – 80 ;
 ́ Eric Werner, De la violence au totalitarisme (Paris, Calmann-L evy, 1972 ); and
104
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and social justice
 ́ Maurice Weyembergh, Albert Camus ou la m emoire des origines (Brussels, De
Boeck, 1998 ).
4 .  De Beauvoir, La Force des choses ,p. 279 ; Roland Barthes, ‘La Peste’, in CEuvres
` compl etes , ed. Eric Marty, 5 vols. (Paris, Seuil, 2002 ), vol. i , pp. 540 – 5 ; for a critical
account of such responses, see Tony Judt, The Burden of Responsibility (Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1998 ), p. 105 .
5 .  On these problems, see Stephen Eric Bronner, Camus: Portrait of a Moralist (Lon-
don, University of Minnesota Press, 1999 ), pp. 91 – 2 ; and Jeffrey C. Isaac, Arendt ,
Camus and Modern Rebellion (London, Yale University Press, 1992 ).
 ́ 6 .  See especially Jacques Derrida, Force de loi (Paris, Galil ee, 1994 ).
105
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

8
COLIN DAVIS
Violence and ethics in Camus
Act 3 scene 6 of Caligula stages  a  key  encounter  between  Caligula  and
Cherea, Camus’s murderous protagonist and one of his eventual assassins.
Here, the two men articulate the ethical impasse at the heart of the philos-
ophy of the Absurd. Caligula suggests that Cherea must believe in ‘quelque
 ́  ́ id ee sup erieure’ ( TRN , 78 ) (‘some higher principle’ ( COP , 83 )); Cherea does
not entirely accept this, but neither does he entirely deny it:
Cherea: Je crois qu’il y a des actions qui sont plus belles que d’autres.
 ́ Caligula: Je crois que toutes sont equivalentes. ( TRN , 78 – 9 )
Cherea: I believe some actions are – shall I say? – more praiseworthy than
others.
Caligula: I believe that all are on an equal footing. ( COP , 83 )
Cherea  uses  an  aesthetic  term  rather  than  a  moral  one  to  characterise
his position: some actions are ‘plus belles’ (literally ‘more beautiful’) than
others, not inherently better or more just. Caligula’s retort that all actions are
equivalent does not necessarily contradict Cherea’s argument, since neither
man asserts the existence of a higher value which would make it possible
to distinguish between one action and another in strictly ethical terms. It is
also significant here that neither man seriously tries to persuade the other
to change his views. Each states what he believes , but makes no attempt to
offer principles, reasons or explanations which would demonstrate the valid-
ity of his own opinion. We are presented here with the confrontation of two
positions which are coherent within their own terms, but which are utterly
incompatible. One man believes that some actions are preferable to others,
whilst the other insists that no action has inherent value above any other.
Cherea does not regard Caligula as demonstrably wrong, though he deems
his position to be unacceptable. His next speech draws a kind of imperative
ˆ from his views even as he refrains from moral judgement: ‘tu es g enant et
il faut que tu disparaisses’ ( TRN , 79 ) (‘you’re pernicious, and you’ve got to
go’ ( COP , 47 )).
106
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Violence and ethics in Camus
This scene gives dramatic form to one of the central issues of Camus’s
writing: the problem of establishing values and in particular of determining
the conditions under which violence might be justified. Murder appears in
Camus’s texts as an extreme act which causes both horror and fascination.
Faced with the temptation to kill, his characters confront an urgent ethi-
cal question: what is wrong with murder? When, in L’Etranger , Meursault
encounters a man on a beach and shoots him, he may have little justifica-
tion for killing him, but neither can he think of any good reason not to.
Others are perceived as vaguely threatening to the subject’s well being, or
else they impede the realisation of his desires or dreams. So killing, be it
for the sake of political ends or only for self-interest, would seem a natural
response, and one which cannot be authoritatively prohibited if the existence
of universal moral values is denied. The Absurd poses a version of the same
ethical quandary which, later in the twentieth century, would be central to
the debate around what came to be called postmodernity: what values can
there be if none can ever be legitimated in the light of some secure ultimate
truth? Camus states the problem eloquently at the beginning of L’Homme
 ́  ́ r evolt e :
` Si l’on ne croit a rien, si rien n’a de sens et si nous ne pouvons affirmer aucune
valeur, tout est possible et rien n’a d’importance. Point de pour ni de contre,
 ́ l’assassin n’a ni tort ni raison. On peut tisonner les cr ematoires comme on peut
 ́ `  ́ aussi se d evouer a soigner les l epreux. Malice et vertu sont hasard ou caprice.
( Ess , 415 )
If one believes in nothing, if nothing makes sense, if we can assert no value
whatsoever, everything is permissible and nothing is important. There is no
pro or con; the murderer is neither right nor wrong. One is free to stoke the
crematory fires, or to give one’s life to the care of lepers. Wickedness and virtue
are just accident or whim. ( R , 13 )
 ́  ́ Here, Camus sounds uncomfortably like Caligula. In L’Homme r evolt e more
generally though, he will play the role of Cherea, conceding the existence
of an ethical dilemma but endeavouring to overcome it. This dilemma is
dramatised in acute form in Caligula . In the unresolved dialogue between
Caligula and Cherea we see a tension at the root of the play. We know that
Caligula must be wrong, that his project of making people more intensely
aware of the value of living by confronting them with the ever-present threat
of random, meaningless death is insane and inadmissible; but it is not so
easy to produce decisive arguments to prove that he is wrong if we deny
the validity of all established, objective, transcendental values. Moreover, in
opposing him Cherea allies himself with corrupt, reactionary forces, and he
ends up helping to restore precisely the self-blinded condition that Caligula
107
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

colin davis
wanted to abolish. The play does not condone Caligula, yet it draws its
seduction  and  dramatic  power  from  Caligula’s  exorbitant  desire  for  the
impossible.
Perhaps for Camus this seduction was too strong for comfort, because he
would spend much of the rest of his career trying to resist it. The encounter
between Cherea and Caligula is rewritten in the discussion between Stepan
and  Kaliayev  in  Act 2 of Les  Justes ,  but  here  the  ambiguity  has  been
expunged. All sympathy is for the humane revolt of Kaliayev rather than
Stepan’s uncompromising justification of violence in the name of some dis-
tant  ideal.  As  spectators  we  may  feel  more  secure  about  whose  side  we
are supposed to be on than in Caligula . The play offers an intellectually
unthrilling yet sane justification of violence and its limits. Is it legitimate to
assassinate a Grand Duke who symbolises an unjust, despotic regime? Yes. Is
it legitimate to kill young children in the name of a revolutionary ideal? No.
Violence can be ethical as long as its perpetrators accept that, as Dora puts
ˆ it, ‘M eme dans la destruction, il y a un ordre, il y a des limites’ ( TRN , 338 )
(‘Even destruction has a right and a wrong way, and there are limits’ ( COP ,
187 )). Camus has now apparently detached himself from the seduction of
Caligula and positioned his text and his spectators less ambiguously on the
side of Cherea’s sensible restraint. As Camus insists in the course of the con-
troversy occasioned by his Ni victimes ni bourreaux , he does not advocate
complete non-violence. He refers to ‘de terribles violences qui ne [lui] ont
 ́ ` pos e aucun probl eme’ ( Ess , 355 ) (‘terrible acts of violence which posed [him]
no problem’) committed during the Occupation. However, he insists that no
principle or ideal can justify murder; and in his sketches of a philosophy of
 ́  ́  ́ ` limits in L’Homme r evolt e and ‘L’Exil d’H el ene’ he attempts to demonstrate
that violence can have ethical uses, even if it can never be finally legitimated.
Indeed, the rebel’s dilemma is precisely that there can never be final legiti-
mation. The rebel may turn to violence in order to curtail violence, but she
cannot be certain of the justification or outcome of her choices. Actions are
undertaken in risk and contradiction, and ultimate success is never assured.
So the question of violence is at the heart of Camus’s writing and his ethi-
cal deliberations. He was constantly perplexed by the question of whether or
not violence could be justified and what ends it could legitimately serve. His
very public and much discussed rift with Sartre in the early 1950 s served to
delimit the context through which his ethics have been considered ever since,
with critics siding with Camus or Sartre depending on their own inclinations.
Camus’s supporters have admired him for defending the value of human life
over abstract principles, whereas his detractors have criticised him for intel-
lectual inconsistency and for failing to face up to difficult historical and polit-
ical choices, most notably over the Algerian War of Independence. Recently,
108
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Violence and ethics in Camus
though, there have been valuable attempts to escape from the Camus/Sartre
dichotomy, and to suggest different intellectual contexts for understanding
Camus’s ethics; for example, his work has been discussed in conjunction
with the thought of Simone de Beauvoir, Maurice Blanchot or Emmanuel
1 Levinas. Such reassessments have had the benefit of restoring some of the
interest of Camus’s writing, emphasising for example its acute sensitivity to
alterity and its agonised awareness that failure inevitably haunts any eth-
ical project. The aim of this chapter is not primarily to contribute to this
reassessment of Camus’s theoretical conception of the link between ethics
and violence. Rather, I want to suggest that, for all its intellectual serious-
ness, the theoretical and ethical discussion of murder in Camus’s essays can
be understood as an anxious, defensive neutralisation of the fascination with
gratuitous  violence  which  emerges,  sometimes,  in  his  fictional  texts.  The
philosophical question, ‘Under what circumstances is violence justified?’, is
accompanied and endangered by a desire to destroy the Other, a desire which
haunts and remains irreducible to any ethical, moralising discourse.
An illustration of this is provided by the very figure who seems to exemplify
the possibility of an ethical use of violence: Kaliayev in Les Justes . Kaliayev
believes that killing the Grand Duke is justified, but that killing the children
who accompany him on the first assassination attempt is not. He thereby
acknowledges the existence of a limit which restricts the legitimate use of
violence. Blanchot has described Kaliayev’s inability to kill the children in
terms of an encounter with otherness as it is theorised by the philosopher
2 Emmanuel Levinas. In such an encounter the sight of the face reveals the
Other in all its vulnerability and enjoins the subject to do no harm. This
reading, however, overlooks the altogether more ambiguous terms in which
Kaliayev describes the experience. Initially, the prospect of killing the Grand
` Duke gives him real joy: ‘mon cœur s’est mis a battre de joie, je te le jure’
( TRN , 332 ) (‘my heart began to race, with joy . . . yes, with joy’ ( COP ,
182 )). When he sees the children he finds himself unable to act; but he does
not  at  first  attempt  to  explain  this  on  ethical  grounds.  On  the  contrary,
his response to them is only a hair’s breadth from extreme violence: ‘S’ils
 ́  ́  ́ m’avaient regard e, je crois que j’aurais lanc e la bombe. Pour eteindre au
moins ce regard triste’ ( TRN , 332 ) (‘If they had looked at me then I think I
would have thrown the bomb, if only to shut out the sad look in their eyes’
( COP , 182 – 3 )). For Levinas, the encounter with the face of the Other leads
to an acknowledgement of the Biblical injunction ‘Thou shalt not kill’. The
Other’s face forbids murder ‘through the original language of his defenceless
3 eyes’. In Kaliayev’s account, a glimpse of the Other’s vulnerable and sad face
risks provoking murder. Kaliayev’s reluctance to harm the children appears
to be bound up with spontaneous violent impulses towards them. A few
109
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

colin davis
lines later Kaliayev refers to earlier experiences of anxiety about harming
children: ‘Autrefois, quand je conduisais la voiture, chez nous, en Ukraine,
j’allais comme le vent, je n’avais peur de rien. De rien au monde, sinon de
ˆ ˆ ` renverser un enfant. J’imaginais le choc, cette t ete fr ele frappant la route, a
 ́ la vol ee...’( TRN , 333 ) (‘In the old days, when I used to go driving on our
estate in the Ukraine, I always drove like a madman, because I wasn’t afraid
of anything . . . except of running down a child. That was my only fear. I
used to imagine the shock, the small head hitting the ground . . .’ ( COP ,
183 )). His fear of harming a child does not actually cause him to slow down.
Indeed, his vivid, graphic imagining of the effect of an accident on a child’s
head might even suggest that the desire to harm unconsciously outweighs
any  protective  instinct.  So  Kaliayev’s  recollection  of  his  past  in  Ukraine,
which is presumably intended to explain why he could not kill the children
in the Grand Duke’s carriage, might, then, suggest something quite different
from an ethical choice. At the moment of action, he is paralysed by his very
desire to kill , a desire so overwhelming that it destroys the ethical stand-
ing of the subject precisely when an ethical justification is most anxiously
invoked.
This reading is at the furthest possible remove from the ethical positions
 ́  ́ explicitly adopted in Ni victimes ni bourreaux or L’Homme r evolt e . Camus’s
stated concern is to get beyond the ethical impasse of the Absurd. The fact
that there are no given, universal values or principles must not be allowed to
reduce all actions, as Caligula would have it, to equivalence. In Le Mythe de
Sisyphe Camus upbraided a philosophical tradition which acknowledged the
Absurd only in order to turn aside from it. But much of Camus’s own writing
can be read as staging the impossibility of maintaining oneself unflinchingly
in the domain of the Absurd. Even Meursault’s resigned submission to the
mechanisms of the law in the second half of L’Etranger suggests a preference
for a system which judges and condemns, however unjustly, over a sustained
exposure to the Absurd in which no overarching authority or values can
4 be discerned. In Camus’s later essays, revolt serves, if not as a genuinely
transcendental value, then at least as a pseudo-transcendental value, since it
enables the rebel to resist the senselessness encountered in the experience of
 ́ ˆ  ́ the Absurd: ‘La r evolte na ıt du spectacle de la d eraison, devant une condition
 ́  ́ injuste et incompr ehensible. Mais son elan aveugle revendique l’ordre au
 ́ ˆ ˆ milieu du chaos et l’unit e au cœur m eme de ce qui fuit et dispara ıt’ ( Ess , 419 )
(‘Rebellion arises from the spectacle of the irrational coupled with an unjust
and incomprehensible condition. But its blind impetus clamours for order
in the midst of chaos, and for unity in the very heart of the ephemeral’ ( R ,
16 )). Both Camus’s ethics and his aesthetics now become an endeavour to
correct the flaw in the world whereby the human longing for sense, order
11 0
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Violence and ethics in Camus
and coherence is eternally frustrated. Revolt aspires to intelligibility even if
it does not yet know how to establish it; and as such it is in flat denial of the
founding insight of the Absurd, according to which sense is what humankind
both must and cannot have.
Writing itself becomes the creative forum where the prospect of intelligi-
bility will be sustained. Camus’s prose strains to achieve an aphoristic self-
evidence which only the most ill-willed reader could possibly fail to accept.
So, with breathless and (I suspect) anxious rapidity, the opening pages of
 ́  ́ L’Homme r evolt e establish the sole value which will allow us to escape from
the ethical impasse of the Absurd: human life. Camus’s argument is essen-
tially very simple: if I do not kill myself, it must be because I accept that my
own life is a necessary good; if I accept this for myself, then I must accept
it for all others as well, so that if I reject suicide I also reject murder. In
Jill Capstick’s succinct summary, ‘The key term of Camusian ethics is the
given value of human life. Consequently, any act of authentic revolt must
simultaneously reject all that violates human dignity and affirm the worth
5 of all human beings.’ The solitary experience of the Absurd has now been
overcome by the community and solidarity established through Camus’s new
 ́ cogito : ‘Je me r evolte, donc nous sommes’ ( Ess , 432 ) (‘I rebel – therefore we
exist ’( R , 28 )).
How compelling is this argument? Not very, if we are to judge by its sub-
sequent (lack of) influence, and the harsh criticisms to which it was subjected
by Jeanson and Sartre. It is, to say the least, odd that an argument that begins
in the frustration of rationality through the experience of the Absurd ends
by endorsing a form of universalist rationalism as it insists that I extend
to all human beings the values which I assert as valid for myself. More-
over,  the  rhetorical  overkill  that  permeates  Camus’s  argumentative  prose
risks distracting rather than persuading his reader. When discussing the link
between suicide and murder for example, Camus allows his reader no space
for dissent:
ˆ Comment, sans une concession remarquable au go ut du confort, conserver
 ́  ́ ` ` pour soi le b en efice exclusif d’un tel raisonnement? D es l’instant o u ce bien
est reconnu comme tel, il est celui de tous les hommes . On ne peut donner
 ́  ́  ́  ́  ́ une coh erence au meurtre si on la refuse au suicide. Un esprit p en etr e de l’id ee
 ́ d’absurde  admet  sans  doute  le  meurtre  de  fatalit e; il  ne  saurait accepter  le
` meurtre de raisonnement. Vis- a-vis de la confrontation [entre l’interrogation
ˆ humaine et le silence du monde], meurtre et suicide sont une m eme chose, qu’ il
faut prendre ou rejeter ensemble. ( Ess , 416 ; my emphasis)
How can one, without indulging one’s desire for comfort, keep for oneself
the exclusive benefits of this argument? The moment life is recognised as a
111
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

colin davis
necessary good, it becomes so for all men. One cannot find logical consistency
in murder, if one denies it in suicide. A mind that is imbued with the idea of the
absurd will doubtless accept murder that is fated; it could not accept murder
that proceeds from reasoning. In view of that confrontation which they both
render impossible, murder and suicide are the same thing; one must accept
them both or reject them both. ( R , 14 )
The rhetorical question with which this extract begins implies that the answer
is known before the question is even asked, and that no one could deny
it in good faith. The rest of the passage asserts a series of certainties and
impossibilities which allow no margin of doubt. There is here none of the
tension and hesitation inherent in the fraught dialogue between Caligula and
Cherea, with which this chapter began. The issues have now been resolved,
and Cherea has decisively won the argument. We are required only to listen
and to learn. However, perhaps Camus’s prose, through the very markers
of confidence which rule out any possibility of disagreement (‘On ne peut’,
‘il ne saurait’, ‘il faut’) (‘One cannot’, ‘it could not’, ‘one must’), weakens
his case by overstating it. The dissenting reader is rhetorically denied any
valid position from which a counter-argument might be mounted, but we
might end up feeling less persuaded than battered by Camus’s over-confident
prose; and the suspicion may arise that the person Camus is most anxious
to convince is himself.
The assault on the reader here is all the more significant because it con-
tradicts the respect required by Camus’s ethical position. In principle, revolt
entails openness to the Other because it gestures towards a flawless commu-
` nity of all humans: ‘L’individu n’est donc pas, a lui seul, cette valeur qu’il
 ́ veut d efendre. Il faut, au moins, tous les hommes pour la composer. Dans
 ́  ́  ́ la r evolte, l’homme se d epasse en autrui et, de ce point de vue, la solidarit e
 ́ humaine est m etaphysique’ ( Ess , 426 ) (‘Therefore the individual is not, in
himself, an embodiment of the values he wishes to defend. It needs at least all
men to comprise them. When he rebels, a man identifies himself with other
men, and, from this point of view, human solidarity is metaphysical’ ( R ,
22 – 3 ; translation modified)). But this apparent openness to the Other and
the ethical generosity it entails are also disturbingly totalising. Even all men
are not enough, since Camus bizarrely insists that the value to be defended
requires ‘ au moins , tous les hommes’ (‘at least all men’). What is more than
everybody? I assume here that Camus is not, in what would for him be an
unprecedented access of feminist self-critique, taking ‘les hommes’ (‘men’)
to refer only to men, so allowing some women into the sphere of solidarity
as well as all men. The apparent willingness to embrace otherness in fact
leaves no room for the Other who might resist the perspective of the self. All
112
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Violence and ethics in Camus
others have to be the same; all are implicated in the values and in the soli-
darity for which Camus argues. None may be left out: ‘Mais, qu’il manque
ˆ  ́ `  ́  ́ un seul etre au monde irremplac ̧able de la fraternit e, et le voil ad epeupl e’
( Ess , 685 ) (‘But if one single human being is missing in the world of fra-
6 ternity  then  this  world  is  immediately  depopulated’  ( R , 245 – 6 )). Whilst
pleading for inclusiveness, the text is actually performing the radical exclu-
sion of the dissenting reader. It argues for ‘mesure’ (‘measure’) rather than
 ́ ‘d emesure’ (‘excess’), but its own arrogation of a speaking position which
extinguishes all doubt and summons into its orbit all men (at least) is itself
excessive. Or violent even. In calling on us to refrain from murdering the
Other, Camus writes in a manner which is, in the term I have used elsewhere,
altericidal (i.e. Other-killing), because it denies the Other any independent
7 position.
So the language of Camus’s text contradicts its key argument, as it denies
alterity at the very moment that it purports to open up the solitary subject to
the community of others. Solidarity, in this light, turns out to be an exclusive
pact rather than a generously inclusive notion because it is intolerant of dif-
ference. This mismatch between Camus’s language and his message is all the
 ́  ́ more striking when L’Homme r evolt e insists, precisely, on the value of clar-
ity. Revolt aims to achieve an open communication between free subjects,
 ́ whereas  ambiguity  is  associated  with  death:  ‘Chaque equivoque,  chaque
malentendu suscite la mort; le langage clair, le mot simple, peut seul sauver
de cette mort’ ( Ess , 687 ) (‘Every ambiguity, every misunderstanding, leads
to death; clear language and simple words are the only salvation from it’
( R , 247 )). This obviously chimes with the view expressed in La Peste by
Tarrou, according to whom ‘tout le malheur des hommes venait de ce qu’ils
ne tenaient pas un langage clair’ ( TRN , 1426 ) (‘all our troubles spring from
our failure to use plain, clear-cut language’ ( P , 208 )). The demand for clarity
is clear enough; the problem is that it does not reflect Camus’s own perfor-
mance as writer, particularly in his literary texts. In La Peste , to cite a notable
example, Tarrou’s desire for ‘un langage clair’ (‘plain, clear-cut language’)
is frustrated by a text in which sense and interpretability are constantly at
issue. In Tarrou’s own notebooks, Rieux’s chronicle, Grand’s sentence or
Paneloux’s sermons, meaning is never unambiguously given. It must always
be painstakingly extracted from the data of experience, and it must then be
repeatedly re-worked and revised. The novel as a whole is, by common agree-
ment, an allegory, though this designation serves to open up its potential for
interpretation rather than to close it down. The epigraph from Defoe, which
 ́ commends  representing  ‘n’importe  quelle  chose  qui  existe  r eellement  par
quelque chose qui n’existe pas’ ( TRN , 1215 ) (‘anything that really exists by
that which exists not’ ( P , 3 )), potentially shatters any authoritative reading
113
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

colin davis
of the text by implying that it could be about anything . The early consensus
that it was about Evil or the Occupation simplified the novel by overlooking
some of its tensions and ambiguities, and in the process noticeably failed to
provide comprehensive, coherent and persuasive readings. So with passing
years critics seem to be less certain of what the novel means than they were
8 immediately after its publication.
Camus’s writing is at its most challenging and intriguing precisely at the
moments when it disturbs the smooth surface of meaning and reveals, lurk-
ing underneath it, an enigmatic core which resists easy conceptualisation.
The  very  titles  of  his  early  essays  imply  a  context  in  which  meaning  is
unstable: ‘L’Ironie’, ‘Entre oui et non’, ‘L’Envers et l’Endroit’. From Meur-
sault’s disjointed, gap-ridden narrative in L’Etranger to Clamence’s over-
smooth monologue in La Chute , which comes together with the warning
‘Ne vous y fiez pas’ ( TRN , 1500 ) (‘Don’t rely on it!’ ( F , 36 )), Camus explores
ways of disturbing intelligibility and suspending his readers’ sense of inter-
pretative assurance. We are constantly reminded that we have understood
too much or too little; we may be mystified by what was essentially sim-
ple, or we may have hastily simplified what was inherently complex. On
his final canvas, Jonas, the disturbed protagonist of ‘Jonas ou l’artiste au
 ́ travail’ from L’Exil et le Royaume , writes ‘un mot qu’on pouvait d echiffrer,
mais dont on ne savait s’il fallait y lire solitaire ou solidaire ’( TRN , 1654 )
(‘a word that could be made out, but without any certainty as to whether
it should be read solitary or solidary ’( EK , 115 )). The difference between
solitaire and solidaire may be minimal, but it is also crucial. The text insists
on the word’s unreadability, and by extension on its own pervasive ambigu-
ˆ ity. In the same collection, the story ‘L’H ote’ plays on the two meanings of
ˆ l’h ote as guest or host, as it poses the question of which of its characters is
actually at home in Algeria in the violent years prior to independence: Daru,
the white teacher, or the allegedly murderous Arab to whom he plays host
for a night. Each occupies the position of both host and guest, and neither
ˆ occupies either position fully. The ambiguity of the word h ote has come to
characterise their entire relation with the land they inhabit, and it creates a
gulf between them which frustrates any prospect of the seamless solidarity
9 which remained Camus’s driving fantasy.
Camus insists on clarity as an antidote to violence, yet his own argumenta-
tive discourse is bullying and coercive; and he associates ambiguity with mur-
der, whilst his texts are ridden with unresolved interpretative tangles. Either
way, his readers are confronted with texts which do not achieve a placid
 ́  ́ marriage of message and medium. In L’Homme r evolt e , Camus envisages a
meeting of self and Other which leads to community and solidarity. The meet-
ing of text and reader, though, is more akin to the wary, distrustful encounter
11 4
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Violence and ethics in Camus
in what remains the most haunting and enigmatic passage in Camus’s writ-
ing, the scene on the beach in L’Etranger where Meursault shoots the Arab.
This is the very opposite of the Levinasian encounter which Blanchot saw
in Les  Justes when  Kaliayev  refuses  to  kill  the  children,  and  which  may
ˆ be achieved at least momentarily in ‘L’H ote’ when Daru prepares a meal
10 for his Arab guest/prisoner. In such an encounter, the self perceives in the
otherness of the Other an injunction to take responsibility for and to pro-
tect its vulnerability. In L’Etranger , on the other hand, the Arab’s otherness
is seen as an intolerable challenge to the murderous subject’s well-being.
Meursault describes how the Arab ‘avait l’air de rire’ ( TRN , 1168 ) (‘seemed
to be laughing’ ( O , 59 )). It is not even certain that he is actually laughing;
but in any case he is not laughing at Meursault, just laughing, indifferent to
Meursault and at the same time mocking his entire existence, exposing him
to his own absent centre. In the altericidal fantasy lurking behind the scene,
the Other possesses something that I cannot have, s/he is at home whereas I
am in exile, and thus I am robbed of what might have been mine. Meursault
responds with violence to this imaginary theft of being. His action is at a far
remove from Camus’s attempt to found community in revolt through his ‘Je
 ́ me r evolte, donc nous sommes’ (‘I rebel – therefore we exist ’). Rather, the
implicit cogito here is: I kill therefore I am, I kill that which is other than me
so that I can exist as myself.
This  passage  from L’Etranger depicts  the  stand-off  between  self  and
Other as essentially violent. Meursault kills, at least in part, because, like
Caligula, he can see no good reason not to. Later protagonists, such as Rieux,
Kaliayev, or Daru, endeavour to create a space in which ethical responsibility
is possible, but violence continues to lurk in the background of even the most
ethically optimistic texts. In the final pages of La Peste Cottard shoots ran-
domly into the crowd, and is viciously beaten by the police on his capture; in
ˆ ‘L’H ote’ the Arab’s decision to go to prison leads to a threat on Daru’s life.
Even Kaliayev, as I suggested earlier, may be paralysed as much by the awful
force of his desire to kill as by his reluctance to harm the children. Camus’s
texts can be seen as repeatedly re-staging, with greater or lesser lucidity,
the  confrontation  between  Caligula  and  Cherea,  embracing  and  resisting
murder without ever being fully able to justify one response over the other.
Indeed Cherea, like Kaliayev, can only put an end to murder by committing
it himself. His reasons may be different from Caligula’s, at least in as far
as he can articulate them honestly, but the result is the same. The assassi-
nation of Caligula continues the sequence of murders that it is intended to
terminate, so it is no wonder that Caligula’s final words are ‘Je suis encore
vivant!’ ( TRN , 108 ) (‘I’m still alive!’ ( COP , 104 )). He may die, but the prin-
ciple of senseless violence which he embodies is implemented again in the
115
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

colin davis
very moment of his death. Violence is, as Camus puts it in defence of his
`  ́ Ni victimes ni bourreaux ,‘ a la fois in evitable et injustifiable’ ( Ess , 355 ) (‘at
the same time inevitable and unjustifiable’). Camus’s dogged refusal to give
legitimacy to violence may be the foundation of the moral stature he has
acquired amongst his admirers; but it is also, as his texts constantly remind
us both through their depictions of murder and through their suspension
of interpretative certainty, an irrelevance in face of the conviction that vio-
lence against the threatening Other is the subject’s most fundamental form of
self-assertion.
On the one hand, then, there is in Camus’s writing a desire for clarity,
unity, community, coherence and innocence; on the other hand, there is the
knowledge that contradiction, conflict and ambiguity are components of the
condition of humankind. This tension is reflected throughout Camus’s writ-
ing. At moments it insists on a polemical clarity achieved with a schoolboy
swagger which can be irritating or even embarrassing more than it is per-
suasive. But his writing can also be intriguing and disturbing, as it fractures
certainties and launches its reader into areas of ethical and semantic ambigu-
ity which allow no ready resolution. Camus sometimes sides with Cherea; but
Caligula’s terrible melancholy, his sense that only an escalation of violence
could sweep away the nonsense of the world, also hangs over his writing. He
wishes to, but can never quite, expunge the fundamental insight that before
all ethics is the simple desire to kill, to acquire being by annihilating what
endangers my full possession of the world. In its pervasive sabotaging of
his readers’, his protagonists’ and perhaps its author’s hermeneutic security,
his writing makes a mockery of the desire for stable identities, values or
concepts. At its most paradoxically intense, the best it can offer is a melan-
 ́ cholically fraught prospect: if we are lucky we might achieve a ‘culpabilit e
raisonnable’ ( Ess , 420 ) (‘limited culpability’ ( R , 17 )), or aspire to be ‘meur-
triers innocents’ ( Ess , 700 ) (‘innocent murderers’ ( R , 260 )). But we can never
know for sure that we are Cherea rather than Caligula, Kaliayev rather than
Meursault.
What is fascinating about Camus’s writing are not the answers that his
essays attempt to offer us, but the intellectual deadlocks in which his texts
engage his readers. The contradictions and uncertainties are sometimes sub-
merged beneath a polemical flourish, but sometimes they re-surface through
the very rhetorical confidence which aimed to stifle them. Without its ten-
sions, Camus’s writing would be blandly, bloodlessly assertive; with them,
it maintains its raw, uneasy bewilderment in face of its inability to answer
its and its century’s founding question: why not kill? Faced with the Other,
why shouldn’t I just destroy it to preserve my own being?
116
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Violence and ethics in Camus
NOTES
1 .  See in particular two ground-breaking doctoral theses, which have informed the
discussion throughout this chapter: Jill Capstick, ‘Re-reading Camus’s Ethics’,
unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Oxford ( 2003 ), and Elizabeth Hart,
‘Levinasian Ethics and the Works of Albert Camus’, unpublished doctoral the-
sis, State University of New York ( 1997 ). On Camus and Levinas, see also Colin
Davis, Ethical Issues in Twentieth-Century French Fiction: Killing the Other (Bas-
ingstoke, Macmillan, 2000 ), and ‘The Cost of Being Ethical: Fiction, Violence,
and Altericide’, Common Knowledge 9 . 2 ( 2003 ), 241 – 53 .
2 .  See Maurice Blanchot, ‘Tu peux tuer cet homme’, La Nouvelle Revue franc ̧aise
3 ( 1954 ), 1059 – 69 . I am indebted to Jill Capstick’s ‘Re-reading Camus’s Ethics’
for drawing my attention to this article.
3 .  Emmanuel Levinas, Basic Philosophical Writings (Bloomington, Indiana Univer-
sity Press, 1996 ), p. 12 .
4 .  For a more detailed reading of this aspect of L’Etranger , see Davis, ‘The Cost of
Being Ethical’.
5 .  Jill Capstick, ‘Mastery or Slavery: The Ethics of Revolt in Camus’s “Les Muets” ’,
Modern and Contemporary France 11 . 4 ( 2003 ), 453 – 4 .
6 .  Camus   is   alluding   here   to   a   well-known   line   from   Lamartine’s   poem
ˆ  ́  ́ ‘L’Isolement’: ‘Un seul etre vous manque, et tout est d epeupl e’ (‘One single being
 ́ ` is missing, and everything is depopulated’) ( CEuvres po etiques compl etes , Paris,
 ́ Gallimard (Pl eiade), 1963 ), p. 3 .
7 .  See Davis, Ethical Issues and ‘The Cost of Being Ethical’.
8 .  On problems of reading La Peste , see for example Edward J. Hughes, Albert
Camus: Le Premier Homme/La Peste (Glasgow , University of Glasgow French
and German Publications, 1995 ); John Krapp, ‘Time and Ethics in Albert Camus’s
The Plague ’, University of Toronto Quarterly 68 . 2 ( 1999 ), 655 – 76 ; and Colin
Davis, ‘Interpreting La Peste ’, Romanic Review 85 : 1 ( 1994 ), 125 – 42 .
ˆ 9 .  For more developed ethical readings of ‘L’H ote’, see Jill Beer (Capstick), ‘ Le
ˆ Regard : Face to Face in Albert Camus’s “L’H ote” ’, French Studies 56 . 2 ( 2002 ),
`  ́  ́ ˆ 179 – 92 ; and Elizabeth Hart, ‘Face a face: l’ ethique l evinasienne dans “L’H ote” ’,
in Lionel Dubois (ed.), Les Trois guerres d’Albert Camus (Poitiers, Les Editions
du Pont-Neuf, 1995 ), pp. 172 – 7 .
` 10 .  See Hart, ‘Face a face’, pp. 176 – 7 .
11 7
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

9
CHARLES FORSDICK
Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
When,  during  a  speech  on  the  future  of  Europe  delivered  in  Brussels  in
February 2005 , President George Bush cited a sentence from La Chute ,itis
unlikely that he intended to stir up memories of the infamous quarrel between
Camus and Sartre that had occurred over fifty years before. However, by
evoking Clamence’s understanding of freedom as ‘a long-distance race’ ( F ,
97 ) (‘une course de fond’ ( TRN , 1544 )), Bush unwittingly cited from Camus’s
clear and bitter parody of Sartre in which the protagonist presents himself as a
 ́  ́ ‘partisan eclair e de la servitude’ (‘an enlightened advocate of slavery’), before
claiming that he used to spread the word ‘freedom’ on his toast at breakfast
( TRN , 1543 ; F , 97 ). Bush’s neo-conservative appropriation of Camus as a
critic of terrorist violence accordingly backfired, for the author aims to indict
those – Sartre and his colleagues at Les Temps modernes included – who,
he claims, babble on about freedom whilst at the same time exploiting its
rhetoric as a convenient smokescreen for their own oppressive purposes.
The anecdote is telling for a number of reasons: not only does it suggest the
enduring, resonant legacies of the Camus–Sartre dispute; it also serves as a
warning to those who ignore the ambiguities of that dispute, and attempt
1 instead to present its principal players in reductively ideological terms.
Despite the persistent presence of Camus and Sartre in French culture, it is
difficult five decades on to imagine the public interest generated by the philo-
sophical, literary and ideological debates underpinning their very personal
quarrel. The 1952 exchange of articles nevertheless achieved the status of
a national dispute, continuing a Gallic tradition of high profile intellectual
feuds. There was wide press coverage of the acrimonious exchanges, and
Francis Jeanson, in the initial article that had effectively sparked the contro-
versy, stated accurately that the disagreement encapsulated some of the most
2 urgent issues of his time. The quarrel remains a defining element in contem-
porary perceptions of the two men. In addition, it has persisted as a model
of oppositionality, with Camus’s role instrumentalised in a variety of subse-
quent interpretations for seemingly abstract purposes: allowing exploration
11 8
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
of contemporary approaches to trauma and the ‘crisis in witnessing’; permit-
ting an anti-communist and anti-totalitarian critique of the residual patterns
of Cold War political thought in Mitterrand’s France; or positing, through
the contrasting presentation of a vindicated Camus and a demonised Sartre,
3 the possibilities of moderation within revolutionary thought. It is, how-
ever,  in  postcolonial  debates  that  these  processes  have  been  most  appar-
ent, for the renewed prominence of a series of key anti-colonial intellectuals
(e.g. the Martinican-born psychologist and theorist of anti-colonial strug-
gle Frantz Fanon ( 1925 – 61 ) and the Tunisian novelist and essayist Albert
Memmi ( 1920 -)) has triggered a reassessment of certain French metropoli-
tan figures in the light of postcolonial concerns, occasioning in certain cases a
marked change in critical fortunes. Camus’s regular denigration as nostalgic
imperialist has, for instance, been matched by a progressive rehabilitation of
Sartre as a leading anti-colonial thinker, and while Camus’s 1950 s equivoca-
tion, self-contradiction and prevarication over Algeria have attracted criti-
cal reactions from prominent commentators such as Conor Cruise O’Brien
and  Edward  Said,  Sartre’s  anti-colonial  activity  has  permitted  his  steady
reassessment.
The quarrel between Camus and Sartre is customarily situated around the
 ́  ́ publication of the former’s L’Homme r evolt e ( Ess , 407 – 709 ), relating the
irreparable breakdown of their relationship to the increasingly acrimonious
exchanges in Les Temps modernes regarding the book. Despite the undeni-
able impact of this episode, explored in detail in a recent study by Ronald
Aronson, the aim of this chapter is to suggest that the quarrel has a much
longer history, not only stretching back to embryonic incompatibilities found
in criticisms the two men made of each other’s work before they actually met,
but also reflected in the divergent positions they adopted on the Algerian War
in the aftermath of their public rupture. It is possible, the chapter argues,
to see Camus and Sartre engaging in a continued if indirect dialogue over
the war, which itself began over two years after relations between them had
irreconcilably broken down, and ended two years after Camus’s premature
death in 1960 .
Despite the regular conflation of Camus and Sartre under a banner of post-
war existentialism, significant differences separated the two men. Indeed,
they were increasingly unwilling to accept any connection in terms of intel-
lectual schools, with Camus endeavouring – from 1945 onwards – to avoid
the status of junior partner by distinguishing his own personal take on the
Absurd from Sartre’s more systematic existentialism. In biographical terms,
the differences between Sartre (from a bourgeois family and with a pres-
tigious Parisian education) and Camus (born to working-class parents in
Mondovi and brought up in colonial Algeria) are marked; in philosophical
11 9
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

charles forsdick
terms these distinctions are equally clear, with Peter Royle presenting Sartre
as an ‘existential phenomenologist in the grand European philosophical tra-
4 dition’, and Camus as a ‘disabused heir of the Enlightenment’.
The  initial  contact  between  Camus  and  Sartre  was  indirect,  for  they
reviewed each other’s books, in 1938 and 1943 respectively, with a shared
mix of admiration and reserve. Camus, a young and politically active literary
 ́  ́ critic for Alger r epublicain , found in La Naus ee echoes of his own concern
with absurdity, but distanced himself from what he saw as the novel’s philo-
sophical abstraction as well as Sartre’s failure to put to any clear purpose the
freedom achieved by his characters ( Ess , 1417 – 19 ). It is unknown whether
Sartre was aware of this judgement, but his review of L’Etranger in Les
Cahiers du Sud five years later was a generous one, granting the text the
status of a philosophical novel in a Voltairean tradition. With professorial
overtones, he questions Camus’s understanding of Jaspers, Heidegger and
Kierkegaard, but goes on to celebrate the anti-conventional humanism of
the text’s absurdist hero, highlighting the success of the style adopted by the
5 author. In Sartre’s view, therefore, Camus is successful as a novelist, but not
as a philosopher: the triumph of style over intellectual content is an accusa-
tion that would surface in the exchanges leading to their rupture a decade
later.
` The pair first met at the premi ere of Sartre’s re-working of the Electra
story, Les Mouches ,in 1943 , and their instant rapport led to a seemingly
close friendship and fruitful collaboration. Sartre initially invited Camus to
appear in his existentialist drama Huis clos , although the play was even-
tually adopted by a professional company and produced in 1944 ; and in
the final stages of the war, Camus involved Sartre in writing for Combat ,
requesting from him a prominent article to mark the Liberation of Paris
and sending him in 1945 as its correspondent to the United States (where
ˆ he openly praised Camus’s political commitment). As they emerged as f eted
post-war celebrities, the pair planned a co-edited journal and other collab-
orative  projects  (both  intellectual  and  political).  When  Sartre  had  earlier
suggested that Camus join the editorial board of Les Temps modernes in
1944 , however, Camus declined, and although he cited in explanation his
own editorial commitments at Combat , it is possible to track a series of
divergences  of  opinion  during  the  immediate  post-war  years  that  culmi-
nate in the 1952 quarrel. Camus, for instance, wrote in August 1945 one
of  the  only  critiques  in  the  French  press  of  the  bombing  of  Hiroshima,
avoiding  the  apocalyptic  overtones  of  Sartre’s  comments  on  the  event  in
Les Temps modernes three months later; the appearance of the Hungarian
novelist, philosopher, historian and essayist Arthur Koestler ( 1905 – 80 )in
 ́ their intellectual milieu, and his expos e of Stalinist practices, led Camus to
120
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
become an opponent of Soviet communism to an extent that Sartre himself
rejected; and in 1948 the pair first quarrelled publicly, in an exchange of
articles over the nature of democracy in Jean Daniel’s monthly publication
Caliban .
In these Caliban texts, there is already a sense of the two men shaping
their  views  in  relation  to  each  other,  with  the  reformist  Camus’s  moder-
ation  and  respect  for  what  he  perceived  as  the  positive  aspects  of  bour-
geois democracy accentuating the revolutionary Sartre’s increasing radical-
ism. Indeed, whereas in the 1940 s fundamental differences over important
philosophical questions may have been disguised by shared vocabulary and
an evident mutual respect, close examination of the decade preceding the
1952 quarrel suggests that their rupture was in many ways inevitable, even
 ́  ́ pre-programmed. It was the publication of L’Homme r evolt e in 1951 that
brought these tensions to the fore. Camus’s text presents revolt as a means
of transforming individual resistance into collective solidarity; at the same
time, it suggests that the potential of revolt had been blunted by the French
Revolution, and – in line with the tendency of revolutionary movements to
adopt an increasingly totalitarian direction – been transformed into violence
and oppression. As a reflection on the nature of history and the role of the
politically committed intellectual, the study questions whether the taking of
another’s life can ever be justified, and – in an important divergence from a
Sartrean view of revolutionary violence – claims that the ends should be seen
as sanctified, and not justified, by the means. The connections Camus creates
between revolutionary history and its aftermath in Stalin’s Russia are clear,
and although he attempts to resurrect a French ‘syndicalist’ tradition, his
book rapidly became the target of French communists and their fellow trav-
ellers, for whom it epitomised a naive, utopian and ultimately conservative
intervention in one of the principal debates of the day.
In the political climate of the Cold War, with the collapse of any hopes of
social revolution in France, Sartre (and to a lesser extent Camus) had briefly
flirted with the idea of creating a third political force, the ‘Rassemblement
 ́  ́ d emocratique et r evolutionnaire’. When this project faltered, it became clear
that any middle ground was rapidly disappearing: Sartre, in his desire to
take sides in a country he perceived as increasingly anti-communist, drifted
towards the French Communist Party (PCF); Camus, struggling to transcend
politics, found himself increasingly unwilling to align himself with any ortho-
doxy or common cause. It was this self-imposed solitude that meant that
Camus’s position in the 1950 s would become one of extreme personal diffi-
culty, a situation accentuated by his apparent refusal to clarify his views on
those very phenomena – freedom, justice, violence and revolt – on which he
had previously commented at length. Sartre’s angry response to L’Homme
121
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

charles forsdick
 ́  ́ r evolt e was not surprising, for (although Sartre is never mentioned directly
by name) Camus’s study may be read as a direct challenge to him and to his
emerging views on revolution. Indeed, these oblique allusions set the tone
for the subsequent dispute, in which communication was conducted either
by proxy or in distinctly impersonal terms. Sartre, seemingly offended by
Camus’s failure to name him, refused to comment in print on the book.
 ́  ́ L’Homme r evolt e was eventually reviewed in Les Temps modernes by his
ˆ  ́  ́ secretary Francis Jeanson, whose ‘Albert Camus, ou l’ ame r evolt ee’ (‘Albert
Camus, or the Rebellious Soul’) is an acerbic, even violent text, accusing
its subject of quietism and aloofness, abstractions reflected in what Jeanson
saw as Camus’s excessively elegant literary style. Central to the review was a
critique of anti-historicism, an observation that not only implied that Camus
had failed to understand Marx, but also that he had rejected the commitment
to justice implicit in his Resistance activity.
Camus himself interpreted Jeanson’s review – from its highly ironic title
onwards – as a calculated act of humiliation. He responded provocatively –
addressing his own text to the impersonal: ‘Monsieur le Directeur’ (‘Dear
Editor’) – as if Sartre and not Jeanson had written the piece. Reminding Sartre
of their friendship and of his own political activism, Camus charged exis-
tentialists with complicity with Stalinism, and accused Les Temps modernes
of  wilfully  misunderstanding  his  central  theses.  In  self-defence,  he  stated
that the book did not deny history but instead engaged with those whom
history blinded to present suffering (alluding here to Soviet work camps).
In a damning statement, Camus claimed that the reviewer supported revolt
against everything ‘sauf contre le parti et l’Etat communistes’ (‘except the
6 Communist Party and the communist state’). In fact, Sartre’s radicalism
never led him – or Les Temps modernes – to approve of the violent political
extremes of the Soviet Union, and a January 1950 editorial co-authored with
Merleau-Ponty had even denounced work camps. However, as a result of the
vehemence of the dispute, its participants ended up representing positions
they did not necessarily espouse – positions that go far beyond Sartre’s exis-
tentalist interpretation of Marxism, attempting to reconcile freedom with
predetermination,  and  Camus’s  left-leaning  rejection  of  communism  –  in
order to transform the two men, respectively, into unapologetic Stalinist and
reactionary apologist for Western expansionism. Sartre’s response, which
appeared in the same issue as Camus’s, was moreover highly personal and
reflects the extent to which he had been riled. His magisterial, if occasion-
ally snide dismissal of Camus’s philosophical competence ignores the ethical
 ́  ́ ambitions of L’Homme r evolt e , and proceeds to demolish the work’s author.
Accusing Camus of arrogance and disengagement from struggles for justice
as well as abstention from historical action, he tracks the shifts in his now
122
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
former friend’s thought, damningly concluding that his morality had been
7 transformed into moralism.
8 Jeanson concluded the quarrel with a second, lengthy article, and Camus
drafted a final defence of his text, only published after his death ( Ess , 1702 –
16 ), but the obviously public side to the dispute was already over. Moreover,
the  controversy  was  eclipsed  by  the  growing  Algerian  crisis,  in  the  con-
text  of  which  it  is  now  increasingly  understood.  Such  an  analysis  is  not
simply  the  interpretation  of  contemporary  concerns  through  a  historical
situation. Although tensions between Camus and Sartre manifested them-
selves in opposing attitudes to Marxism, their quarrel was at the same time
underpinned by a growing awareness in the early 1950 s of the role of anti-
colonialism in post-war French culture. Jeanson’s initial salvo in the dis-
pute had, for instance, included reference to Camus’s failure to account for
the Madagascan revolt of 1947 , US napalm attacks on Vietnam and the
treatment of a Tunisian arrested by the Foreign Legion.
The  widening  of  the  debate  is  thus  clear  from  the  outset.  Camus  was
piqued by the intimation that he was disengaged from questions of colonial
justice, reminding Jeanson that he had been involved in them for almost
two decades. In his analysis of the bad faith underpinning Jeanson’s review,
this  focus  on  racism  and  colonialism  is  presented  by  Camus  as  a  means
of avoiding discussion of Stalinism, for him the issue central to L’Homme
 ́  ́ r evolt e .  In  response,  Sartre  saw  in  Camus’s  would-be  fraternal  relation-
ship  with  indigenous  Algerians  a  bourgeois  paternalism  replacing  direct
action with rhetoric (a point reiterated in Jeanson’s second article, where
he accurately foresees Camus’s alarm at anti-colonial nationalism); he even
claims that Camus’s embarrassment over the Vietnamese independence strug-
gle is generated by his confusion over the Marxist allegiances of colonial
nationalism: as enslaved subjects, the Vietnamese have the right to revolt;
but their communist-inspired revolution turns them, for Camus, into tyrants.
Focussing on the Neo-Destour Party’s challenge to French colonial rule in
Tunisia in late 1951 , Sartre criticises Camus’s abstract comments on history,
` ˆ claiming that ‘le probl eme n’est pas de conna ıtre sa fin mais de lui en donner
9 une’ (‘the problem is not to know its end, but to give it one’).
Camus and Sartre’s friendship had been overshadowed from the outset
by politics, in which it is likely that Sartre initially considered Camus his
superior.  For  while  the  former  had  spent 1934 – 5 in  Berlin,  studying  the
work  of  the  phenomenologist  philosopher  Edmund  Husserl  ( 1859 – 1938 )
and lacking any apparent interest in his immediate political context of the
rise of Nazism, Camus was already active in the Algerian Communist Party,
leading its theatre troupe (before eventually being ejected from the party in
1937 for refusing to accept the termination of its campaign for indigenous
123
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

charles forsdick
civil rights) and indicting the social conditions of colonial Algeria in Alger
 ́ r epublicain ( Ess , 903 – 38 ). During the Occupation, it was Camus who took
risks as an anti-fascist editor at the Resistance daily Combat , while Sartre
 ́ concentrated on completing L’Etre et le N eant ( Being and Nothingness ). By
the 1950 s, however, it was as if the tables had turned. Sartre, who had once
admired Camus as the epitome of the committed intellectual, found himself
politicised, whilst Camus withdrew increasingly from direct engagement in
 ́  ́ politics. Moreover, the publication of L’Homme r evolt e may be seen to have
played a catalytic role, for it was in the year following the quarrel over the
text that Sartre publicly sided with the French Communist Party – the PCF –
without  becoming  a  party  member.  It  was,  however,  his  break  with  the
Party in November 1956 over its support of the Soviet invasion of Hun-
gary that led to his increased anti-colonial radicalism. A series of key articles
(subsequently published as Situations v ) appeared over the next six years,
and Sartre also provided prefaces for texts by Albert Memmi and Frantz
10 Fanon.
Although, following their dispute, Sartre’s public silence on Camus was
not broken until the latter’s death in 1960 , it was clear that the break had
had a profound effect on his thinking; conversely, the dispute led to Camus’s
increasing public silence and his growing sense throughout the 1950 s of iso-
lation and betrayal. Moving beyond PCF positions on colonialism, Sartre
emerged as a Third World activist whose public pronouncements and writ-
ings, aiming to analyse colonialism whilst arguing for decolonisation, can be
interpreted as a clear retort to Camus’s own silence and indecision. Nowhere
` is this clearer than in Sartre’s ‘Le colonialisme est un syst eme’ (‘Colonialism
is a System’), a lecture delivered at the Salle Wagram in Paris on 27 Jan-
uary 1956 , shortly after Camus’s own address in Algiers calling for a civilian
truce ( Ess , 991 – 9 ). The text may be read to contain a series of veiled refer-
ences to Camus, whose neo-colonial mystification of the colonial system is
indicted in Sartre’s critique of socio-economic explanations and of notions
of ‘Franco-Muslim fraternity’. Mocking the idea of reform, Sartre under-
lines the systemic nature of colonialism, gesturing already towards Fanon’s
advocacy of violent anti-colonial struggle that Sartre himself would later
espouse. Recognising that any liberal solution to the Algerian situation was
impossible, Sartre’s anti-colonial writings are concerned with the reassertion
of the agency (or direct, independent actions) of the colonised. Despite its
reliance on an apology for violence, which he would later partially attenuate,
Sartre’s alternative insight into the situation allowed him to see the major
shifts underway, leading – as he saw it – to the decolonisation not just of
Algeria but also of France itself. In Sartre’s analysis, colonialism operated as
a system that dehumanised both coloniser and colonised, drawing the French
124
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
into a self-destructive cycle of oppression: ‘il est notre honte, il se moque de
nos lois ou les caricature; il nous infecte de son racisme’ (‘It is our shame; it
11 mocks our laws or caricatures them. It infects us with its racism’).
It is on this point that he differs from Camus, whose engagement in ques-
tions  of  Algerian  identity  dated  back  to  the 1930 s,  when  he  had  devel-
oped an understanding of Mediterranean culture that celebrated Algerian
space as one marked by diversity and reciprocal enrichment. However, as
Peter Dunwoodie has demonstrated, this new model tended to include a
Muslim presence merely strategically, and was characterised by an implicit
12 Eurocentrism. The possibility of a shared, hybrid culture is not broached,
and the social divisions regulating colonial society are accordingly perpet-
uated. As the Algerian War progressed and Arab agency in North Africa
became irrefutably apparent, this fraternal Mediterranean ideal foundered;
but  Camus,  doggedly  consistent  in  his  approach  and  refusing  any  major
change, failed or refused to acknowledge such a shift, preferring to dismiss
Algerian (and wider Arab) nationalism as a Soviet-inspired plot. Camus had
nevertheless been one of the first pieds-noirs to address the poverty of the
indigenous population and advocate social change, privileging in his 1939
articles the need for education as well as social and economic (if not polit-
 ́ ical) equality with the French. Moreover, in 1945 , reporting on the S etif
massacres, Camus was one of the few French journalists to discuss the impli-
cations of colonial violence, although he persisted in assuming that any solu-
tion to the current situation would have to be framed in the traditions of
French republican democracy: ‘C’est la force infinie de la justice, et elle seule,
`  ́  ́ qui doit nous aider a reconqu erir l’Alg erie et ses habitants’ ( Ess , 959 ) (‘It is
the infinite force of justice, and that alone, that must help us to reconquer
Algeria and its inhabitants’). Despite their challenge to contemporary ortho-
doxies, these texts – by presenting a colonial situation in socio-economic
terms and refusing to countenance an Algeria outside French control – reject
the politicisation Sartre would subsequently foreground, and reveal a per-
sistently reformist belief in the values of colonial France’s ‘civilising mis-
sion’ and the old assimilationist ideal (forcing the colonised to adjust to and
adopt the values and cultures of the coloniser) on which this was based.
What Conor Cruise O’Brien and Edward Said have seen as Camus’s failure
to incorporate Algerians into fictional writing is accordingly matched by an
ultimate refusal of Algerian subjecthood in the political works.
This is surprising, for the analyses proposed by Camus and Sartre emerge
from similar initial premises. In his 1955 articles in L’Express , for instance,
 ́ Camus presents S etif as a reflection of colonial intransigence, which is partly
responsible for a descent into violence ( Ess , 969 – 98 ). So far, his analysis
seems similar to that of Sartre; yet he continues by questioning the grounds
125
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

charles forsdick
on which the Algerians could use violence to further their cause. It is at this
juncture that, advocating the peace conference whose principal aim should
be a civilian truce, Camus reveals a failure to understand the implications of
French defeat in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu (the final battle of the Indochinese
War, that effectively ended the colonial presence of France in the region)
and the inexorable movement towards the dismantling of Empire in its then
present form. Even revelations about torture in Algeria, to which Sartre’s
response was swift and savage, failed to alter his opinions. Whereas Sartre’s
analysis was impersonal and reliant on the identification (and dismantling) of
overarching systems, Camus resorted to an increasingly ambiguous, personal
and even autobiographical tone, describing his engagement as ‘la longue con-
frontation d’un homme et d’une situation’ ( Ess , 900 ) (‘the long confrontation
of an individual and a situation’). Willing to criticise the oppressive Soviet
occupation of Hungary in October 1956 as well as the use of the guillotine
in France, he failed to acknowledge parallels between this situation and the
continued French presence in Algeria, and increasingly retreated into public
silence.
This silence marks an end to constructive solutions once it had become
apparent to Camus that his earlier assimilationist beliefs increasingly lacked
viability. Angered by Sartre’s repeated allusions and attacked for his con-
 ́ tinued silence, Camus finally published in 1958 the self-justificatory ‘Alg erie
1958 ’, whose aim was to demonstrate that he could be faithful to the concept
of universal justice which underpinned his œuvre , whilst at the same time
remaining a member of his community of origin. Any attempt to occupy
a median position was, however, undermined by a refusal to recognise the
legitimacy of Arab nationalism – whose romantic prematurity was dismissed
 ́ in the claim that: ‘Il n’y a jamais eu . . . de nation alg erienne’ ( Ess , 1012 )
(‘There has never been an Algerian nation’). Camus seemed incapable of
acknowledging the impossibility of replacing colonialism with a system of
co-existence that would leave existing French authority intact. Moreover,
despite  his  condemnation  of  FLN  violence,  his  commentary  appeared  to
preclude criticism of either the French government or the destructive actions
of his own French Algerian community.
Camus’s understanding of the Algerian situation had thus evolved little
since the 1930 s, when a social and economic critique of the colonial situation
had presented the French presence as a guarantee of fairness. His analyses in
the 1950 s reflect a continued paternalism and failure to accept the feasibility
of Algerian independence; they project an imaginary Algeria that does not
so much negate historical reality as offer a utopian reconfiguration of it,
dependent on a contradictory fiction of community characterised by a shared
culture and the harmonious co-existence of different ethnic groups. Camus’s
126
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
notion of a country grounded in Mediterranean culture tended to downplay
any indigenous Arab contribution, not least because any shared culture to
which he alluded was predominantly French. In the 1958 ‘Avant-propos’ to
 ́ Chroniques alg eriennes , Camus honours the pied-noir tradition in Algeria as
one of working-class patriotism ( Ess , 897 – 9 ), seeming to approve the end of
colonialism whilst failing to accept any deracination of the community into
which he was born. Moreover (and surprisingly given his critical reactions to
the French massacres in Madagascar in 1947 ; Ess , 321 – 3 ), he continued to
ignore an impending sense of historical inevitability, ‘seeing’, in Emily Apter’s
terms, ‘one nation where there were at least two, [projecting] continental
13 holism in the face of incipient binational antagonism’.
An outburst at a press conference in Stockholm in December 1957 , during
which Camus had been repeatedly interrupted by an Algerian student in
the audience, is often cited as evidence of his abdication of universal justice
in favour of the interests of the social group from which he originated: ‘Je
`  ́ ` crois a la justice, mais je d efendrai ma m ere avant la justice’ ( Ess , 1882 ) (‘I
believe in justice, but will defend my mother before justice’). Far from being a
spontaneous expression of emotion, this comment echoes earlier sentiments
14 expressed by Camus, and the sentence is customarily read as a statement
of solidarity with the pieds-noirs or as a retreat from rational politics into
 ́ affective autobiography. The pied-noir poet Jean S enac immediately attacked
Camus for failing to acknowledge his duty to defend both his mother and
15 justice, but the statement may also be interpreted as a criticism of those for
whom abstract principles were more valuable than human interrelationships,
a group into which, in Camus’s eyes, Sartre would certainly have fallen. This
critique of Sartre surfaces elsewhere, for instance in comments on those who
are willing to ‘excuser de loin l’une des violences et de condamner l’autre’
( Ess , 895 ) (‘to excuse from a distance one type of violence and condemn
another’). Moreover, after the Stockholm event, Camus attempted to diffuse
the controversy by claiming greater solidarity with the student than with
 ́ ˆ ‘beaucoup de Franc ̧ais qui parlent de l’Alg erie sans la conna ıtre’ ( Ess , 1883 )
(‘many French people who speak of Algeria without direct knowledge’), a
phrase by which he again seems to target French intellectuals such as Sartre.
Camus’s inability, despite his professed commitment to a universal notion
of justice, to see beyond a French colonial mindset, was analysed astutely
by a largely sympathetic commentator, Albert Memmi, who dubbed him
16  ́ a ‘colonisateur de bonne volont e’ (‘coloniser of good will’). The phrase
is a useful one, for it encapsulates the contradictions of Camus’s position:
incapable of imagining a future for Algeria outside the frame of colonial-
ism, he nevertheless strove to avoid the intransigent and increasingly vio-
lent conservatism of extremists in the pied-noir community by envisaging
127
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

charles forsdick
worthy yet ultimately implausible solutions such as the civilian truce in early
1956 . Despite the fact that advocacy for this cause earned him the hostil-
ity of extremists in his own community, Camus persisted in his refusal to
accept either the Algerians’ right to self-determination or their inherent abil-
ity for self-government (seeing the independence struggle as part of a Nasser-
inspired  Arab  imperialist  project).  Even  as  diplomatic  answers  became
increasingly unfeasible, Camus proposed – as he had in the late 1930 s – eco-
nomic and social solutions to what was an unambiguously political situation.
Aronson sums up the tensions underpinning the colonial dimension of the
quarrel: ‘In the name of serving the oppressed, Sartre accepted oppression.
In loving his people, Camus muted his usual denunciation of oppression.
Each one was half-right, half-wrong, locked into two separate but mutu-
ally supporting systems of bad faith. No longer could either learn from the
17 other.’ It is arguable nevertheless that in his fictional writings Camus faced
a changing situation in a way that he could not in his essays and journal-
ism. Le Premier Homme may attempt to create an uneasily nostalgic fiction
of the pied-noir community’s rootedness in Algeria, but the short stories of
L’Exil et le Royaume seem to suggest a more ambiguous position, acknowl-
edging the ineffectiveness or even potential complicity inherent in ambiva-
lence or neutrality, suggesting an inevitability of history, and delineating the
impossibilities of the community outlined in his non-fictional work. James
Le  Sueur  describes  Camus’s  seeming  dislocation  from  the  political  main-
stream during the Algerian War as a ‘posthumous blessing’ since his fears
over Algeria’s future (and in particular over the anti-democratic tendencies
18 of the FLN) have become increasingly true. Indeed, there is a tendency to
present Francophone Algerian literature as a cultural phenomenon spanning
the war of 1954 – 62 , in which connections are to be found between colonial,
anti-colonial and postcolonial writers. The Algerian novelist, historian and
film-maker Assia Djebar ( 1936 –), for instance, places Camus at the head of
 ́ the three processions of the dead in Le Blanc de l’Alg erie ( The White of
Algeria ), associating him accordingly not only with three very different key
figures who also died in the period immediately before independence (Frantz
Fanon, Mouloud Feraoun and Jean Amrouche), but also with the victims
19 of later assassinations during the 1990 s civil war in Algeria. As a pied-
noir author, Camus’s prominence here is striking if not controversial, but
Djebar, presenting herself as an intellectual heir to Camus, transforms him
 ́ into the leader of a multilingual gathering of writers challenging int egrisme
(politics informed by a radical interpretation of Islam, and the imposition
of a single language or identity that accompanies this) and providing an
alternative vision of Algerian literature in the twentieth century. In Camus
`  ̈ aOran ( Camus  in  Oran ),  Abdelkader  Djema ı  explores  more  closely  the
128
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
relationship between Camus and the place of his birth, and Aziz Chouaki,
in Les Oranges ( The Oranges ), similarly weaves Camus back into his unruly
pageant of colonial and postcolonial Algeria.
Whether these recent relocations of Camus are either evidence of post-
colonial reappropriation or of a reforging of fraternity in the face of con-
temporary history, what they suggest is a move beyond the stalemate inher-
ent in partisan approaches to the Camus–Sartre debate, according to which
commentators tend to present themselves as Camusian or Sartrean, obliged
accordingly to be condemnatory or laudatory by turn. In a text written in
the aftermath of Camus’s death, Sartre describes their violent disagreement
as ‘just another way of living together without losing sight of one another in
20 the narrow little world that is allotted us’. In his unpublished and undated
response to Sartre’s article in Les Temps modernes , Camus concedes a simi-
lar point about the two men’s relationship, implying that his adversary was
 ́  ́ ‘une de nos voix int erieures que nous serions tent es de faire taire et qu’il
 ́ faut que nous ecoutions’ ( Ess , 1716 ) (‘one of our interior voices to which we
must listen despite any temptation to silence it’). It is this sense of reciprocity
or complementarity, presentable even as a dialectical interdependence, that
perhaps best illuminates the clash between Camus and Sartre, as well as the
continued resonances of their exchange throughout the five decades that have
followed. Not only does the Camus–Sartre quarrel reveal the complexities
of the decolonisation process, and the often violently opposed affective and
intellectual positions this bespoke; but also it suggests the need to reconsider
their explosive relationship in our current context. Despite the end of the
Cold War, Camus’s dispute with Sartre retains an urgency since it involves
issues unresolved by decolonisation that continue to shape the present: strug-
gles for national autonomy within structures of globalised power; the role of
violence in political action; the hegemonic relationship of the northern and
southern hemispheres; questions of homelessness, marginalisation, identity
and self-situation, of displacement and postcolonial cohabitation.
NOTES
1 .  A series of accounts of the relationship between Camus and Sartre has been
published: Ronald Aronson, Camus and Sartre: The Story of a Friendship and the
Quarrel that Ended It (Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press, 2004 );
 ́ Germaine Br ee, Camus and Sartre: Crisis and Commitment (London, Calder and
Boyars, 1974 ); Leo Pollmann, Sartre and Camus: Literature of Existence , trans.
Helen and Gregor Sebba (New York, Ungar, 1970 ); and Peter Royle, The Sartre–
Camus Controversy: A Literary and Philosophical Critique (Ottawa, University
of Ottawa Press, 1982 ). For an English translation of the principal texts in the
dispute, see David A. Sprintzen and Adrian van den Hoven (eds.), Sartre and
Camus: A Historic Confrontation (Amherst, Humanity Books, 2004 ).
129
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

charles forsdick
ˆ  ́  ́ 2 .  Francis Jeanson, ‘Albert Camus, ou l’ ame r evolt ee’, Les Temps modernes 79
( 1952 ), 2070 .
3 .  See Shoshana Felman, Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in Literature, Psycho-
analysis  and  History (New  York,  Routledge, 1992 ),  pp. 172 – 8 ;  Claudie  and
 ́ Jacques Broyelle, Les Illusions retrouv ees: Sartre a toujours raison contre Camus
(Paris, Grasset, 1982 ); and Susan Dunn, ‘From Burke to Camus: Reconceiving
the Revolution’, Salmagundi 84 ( 1989 ), 214 – 29 .
4 .  Royle, The Sartre–Camus Controversy ,p. 87 .
5 .  See Jean-Paul Sartre, ‘Explication de L’Etranger ’, in Situations i (Paris, Galli-
mard, 1947 ), pp. 92 – 112 .
6 .  See Albert Camus, ‘Lettre au directeur des Temps Modernes ’, Les Temps mod-
ernes 82 ( 1952 ), 331 .
 ́ ` 7 .  See Jean-Paul Sartre, ‘R eponse a Albert Camus’, Les Temps modernes 82 ( 1952 ),
334 – 53 .
8 .  See Francis Jeanson, ‘Pour tout vous dire’, Les Temps modernes 82 ( 1952 ), 354 –
83 .
 ́ ` 9 .  Sartre, ‘R eponse a Albert Camus’, 352 , emphasis in the original.
10 .  See Jean-Paul Sartre, Situations v (Paris, Gallimard, 1964 ).
11 . Ibid ., p. 48 ; Colonialism and Neocolonialism , trans. Azzedine Haddour, Steve
Brewer and Terry McWilliams (London, Routledge, 2001 ), p. 47 .
12 .  Peter  Dunwoodie, Writing  French  Algeria (Oxford,  Clarendon  Press, 1998 ),
pp. 188 – 9 .
13 .  Emily Apter, ‘Out of Character: Camus’s French Algerian Subjects’, in Continen-
tal Drift: From National Characters to Virtual Subjects (Chicago and London,
University of Chicago Press, 1999 ), pp. 65 – 6 .
14 .  Mark Orme, ‘ Retour aux sources : Crisis and Reappraisal in Albert Camus’s Final
Pronouncements  on  Justice’, Modern  and  Contemporary  France 11 . 4 ( 2003 ),
466 – 7 .
15 .  See James D. Le Sueur, ‘The Unbearable Solitude of Being: the Question of Albert
Camus’, in Uncivil War: Intellectuals and Identity Politics during the Decoloni-
sation of Algeria (Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001 ), p. 11 4 .
 ́ 16 .  See Albert Memmi, ‘Camus ou le colonisateur de bonne volont e’, La Nef , Decem-
ber 1957 , 95 – 6 .
17 .  Aronson, Camus and Sartre ,p. 225 .
18 .  See Le Sueur, ‘The Unbearable Solitude of Being’, p. 87 .
19 .  Written in the context of the violent civil war that divided Algeria throughout the
 ́ 1990 s, Le Blanc de l’Alg erie (Paris, Albin Michel, 1995 ) is the author’s attempt
to write an alternative narrative of her country that presents its past (and by
extension its present) according to a re-configured set of memories. On the com-
plex, contradictory meanings of Djebar’s title, see Elizabeth Fallaize, ‘In Search
 ́ of a Liturgy: Assia Djebar’s Le Blanc de l’Alg erie ’, Frenc  h Studies 59 . 1 ( 2005 ),
60 – 1 .
20 .  Cited in Bernard Murchland, ‘Camus and Sartre: the Anatomy of a Quarrel’, in
Michel-Antoine Burnier (ed.), Choice of Action: The French Existentialists on
the Political Front Line , trans. Bernard Murchland (New York, Random House,
1968 ), pp. 175 – 94 (p. 175 ).
130
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

10
DANIELLE MARX-SCOURAS
Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
Although countless books have been written on Albert Camus, critical mono-
graphs devoted to portraits of women in his works are extremely limited in
number. To date, only two books have appeared on the subject: Anthony
Rizzuto’s Camus: Love and Sexuality and Geraldine Montgomery’s Noces
 ́  ́ pour femme seule: le f eminin et le sacr e dans l’œuvre d’Albert Camus ( Nup-
tials for Woman Alone: the Feminine and the Sacred in the Work of Albert
Camus ). Nevertheless, a number of articles have been devoted to the femi-
nine, and especially the maternal, in Camus’s fiction and theatre. With the
posthumous publication of Le Premier Homme in March 1994 , consider-
able attention has once again focussed on the mother figure in his work,
associated, more than ever, with Camus’s beloved homeland, Algeria.
The mother figure is central to Camus’s work, even when she is more
absent than present, as in L’Etranger . In fact, a number of absent women
haunt Camus’s fiction: Rieux’s wife in La Peste and the woman on the bridge
in La Chute , to cite but two examples. As for supposedly secondary char-
acters like Marie and even more so the Arab nurse in L’Etranger , they are
anything but minor figures. Camus himself remarked in 1959 that the charac-
 ́  ́ ters dearest to him were, along with C eleste, the caf e-owner in L’Etranger ,
Marie and, from Les Justes , Dora ( Ess , 1 922 ). With respect to the nurse,
whom very few critics have considered, Patrick McCarthy devotes an elo-
quent albeit brief essay to this woman – watching over the French-Algerian
dead – who, in her association with Meursault’s mother, already foreshad-
ows the psychoanalytical and political dimension that will characterise the
1 second part of the novel. Although women are rarely the protagonists in
Camus’s works, they, nonetheless, play key roles in refining his philosophical
and political thought. Nevertheless, while they occupy centre stage in such
theatrical works as Le Malentendu and Les Justes , their presence is much
more emblematic in the prose fiction. Their absence-presence has often been
interpreted in terms of the Arab-Other, a key subject of postcolonial studies.
131
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
The precarious status of women is thus viewed in relation to that of the
2 indigenous, Algerian population.
Clearly, the three women in Le Malentendu and Dora in Les Justes , piv-
otally associated as they are with the fundamental notions of desire and
violence, are central to Camusian thought. Furthermore, that a short story
` is entitled ‘La Femme adult ere’ is no small matter. This is, in fact, the only
Camusian fictional text to have a woman as its leading protagonist.
` Both Les Justes and ‘La Femme adult ere’ illuminate, in a highly person-
alised manner, Camus’s conflicting positions with respect to the ideological
climate of the post-war and Cold War years. These texts shed important
light on the Camus of the later part of his career, the twentieth-century icon
who  managed  to  become,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  one  of  the  most
criticised, ridiculed and hated French intellectuals. This is the Camus who
refused to surrender to the absolutist politics of the Cold War era, a refusal
 ́  ́ brought to the intellectual fore by the publication of L’Homme r evolt e in
1951 and the ensuing polemic that pitted Camus against other French intel-
lectuals. Before he could recover from this polemic, Camus had to deal with
the Algerian crisis. Even though many French intellectuals turned to Third
Worldism  to  salvage  Marxism  in  the  wake  of  Soviet  repression  in  Hun-
gary in 1956 , Camus was not obliged to take this route for he had not been
afraid to deal with the burning questions of totalitarianism and ideologically
supported terrorism in the late 1940 s and early 1950 s. Furthermore, while
many French intellectuals like Sartre ‘discovered’ Algeria after 1 November
1954 , Camus had already spoken out against colonial policy in the mid and
late 1930 s. Unlike Sartre, he would not side uncritically with the Algerian
Liberation Front. After his anti-communism, Camus thus estranged him-
self  further  in  French  and  Algerian  intellectual  and  political  circles  with
his positions on Algeria. Camus’s original proposal that an Algerian gov-
ernment  be  comprised  of pieds-noirs and  Arabs  was  seen  by  the  Left  as
 ́ a continuation of colonialism and by the Right as a betrayal of l’Alg erie
franc ̧aise .
Comparing the political stances of Camus with those of his disciple, Jean
 ́ S enac, during the Algerian war, Hamid Nacer-Khodja claims – as many critics
before him have done – that with respect to such concepts as justice and
violence, Camus always places himself on a strictly moral, even sentimental
3 level. In dismissing Camus’s political stances, Nacer-Khodja refers to Les
Justes in light of the outbreak of the Algerian revolution five years later. With
the advent of postcolonial theory – and to some degree, even earlier, with
such precursor critics as Conor Cruise O’Brien – it has become common
practice to reread Camus’s works prior to 1 November 1954 in terms of
this historical watershed. As a result, we tend to forget that a novel like
132
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
L’Etranger was not always read as colonial fiction. Furthermore, that an
already emblematic character like Meursault could become the rebellious
hero of the post-war, Vietnam and even punk eras, before becoming the bogey
man of postcolonial studies, is unusual, to say the least. Neil Oxenhandler
even claims that he identified with Meursault in 1945 , because as a young
American soldier, he had killed a German: ‘we had both changed our lives
by an act of violence . . . This set us apart, giving us a destiny that could
4 never be justified’.
Camus always maintained that violence was both inevitable and unjusti-
fiable ( Ess , 355 ). In order to make his case, he often centred his argument on
the cost of civilian lives, particularly the unnecessary suffering of children, a
trope that he borrowed from Dostoyevsky and which is also at the heart of
La Peste . If Camus is not about to tolerate a God that allows the suffering
of children, he is even less willing to accept the justification of terrorism
and violence in the name of another abstract entity, such as History. ‘Nous
 ́  ́ sommes au temps de la pr em editation et du crime parfait’ (‘We are living in
the era of premeditation and the perfect crime’), wrote Camus in the open-
 ́  ́ ing lines of L’Homme r evolt e ( Ess , 413 ). In the wake of the Second World
War, what fascinated Camus about the young Russian terrorists of February
1905 was the fact that for the last time in Western history the spirit of revolt
encountered that of compassion ( Ess , 573 ). The poet Ivan Kaliayev in Les
Justes has often been considered a spokesperson for Camus’s ideas on the
exceptional character of violence and the need for limits. Nevertheless, these
ideas are essentially fashioned by his companion, Dora Doulebov. Kaliayev’s
refusal to kill innocent children definitely raises moral questions that a hard-
core revolutionary like Stepan Fedorov is not willing to accept. Stepan does
not suffer from a tender heart; he believes that the revolution will triumph
only when they stop worrying about the children ( TRN , 336 ).
In his memoirs on the Battle of Algiers, Yacef Saadi, the Algerian militant,
who plays himself in Gillo Pontecorvo’s 1966 film classic, La Bataille d’Alger ,
explains  the  bomb  mission  of 30 September 1956 to  Zohra  Drif,  Samia
Lakhdari and Djamila Bouhired, and asks whether they have any objections.
` One of the women, ‘encore prisonni ere de la morale qu’on enseigne aux
 ́ ecoliers’ (‘still subject to a school children’s morality’), exclaims that there
are also civilians, that is, women and children, in the places they must bomb.
After acknowledging that this is indeed the case, but that the French have sub-
jected them to violence for over a century, Saadi concludes: ‘Bien! Revenons
 ́ maintenant aux choses s erieuses. Vous avez devant vous trois bombes. Une
pour chacune d’entre vous’ (‘OK! Let’s get back to serious matters now: in
5 front of you are three bombs, one for each of you’). In Les Justes , Stepan
too remarks that only the bomb is revolutionary ( TRN , 311 ). Obviously
133
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
Saadi does not share the moral, even sentimental, concerns of these women
who would go down in history as the first Algerians to plant bombs that
killed civilians. Their concerns are not very different from those of Kaliayev
and Dora, ‘the delicate murderers’, or those of Camus himself in his ‘Appel
ˆ pour une tr eve civile’ ( 22 January 1956 ), which preceded, by only months,
the escalation of violence that would go down in history as the Battle of
Algiers.
Les Justes predates the Algerian revolution by several years. It drama-
tises  the  concerns  Camus  wrote  about  in Ni  victimes  ni  bourreaux and
 ́  ́ L’Homme r evolt e , post-war reflections on the ensuing Cold War years and
their Manichean polarities. Les Justes is a dramatisation of historical events,
which are also discussed in the section on individual terrorism, ‘Terrorisme
 ́  ́ Individuel’, in L’Homme r evolt e . For Camus, the ‘delicate murderers’ are the
last men and women, in the history of revolt, to refuse no part of their con-
dition or their drama ( Ess , 573 ). In the foreword to the play, Camus explains
that he preserved Kaliayev’s name, out of respect and admiration ‘pour des
ˆ hommes et des femmes qui, dans la plus impitoyable des t aches, n’ont pas
 ́ pu gu erir de leur cœur’ ( TRN , 1834 ) (‘for those men and women, who, in
the most merciless of tasks, were not able to recover from their heart’). Not
being able to let go of the heart is a noble enterprise in the eyes of Camus,
for whom happiness was as vital as justice. In Soleils d’hiver ( Winter Suns ),
another French Algerian, Jean Daniel, reiterates the central place of happi-
ness in Camus’s work, noting that without this extraordinary love of life, we
would not be able to understand the need for conceptualising what assails
6 this love. Already in Combat ( 22 December 1944 ), Camus had asked what
would be the point of justice if we did not have the chance to be happy ( Ess ,
299 ).
The  quest  for  happiness,  rooted  in  the  corporal  and  not  dissipated  in
some abstraction, possesses such feminine protagonists as Dora and Janine,
` the heroine of ‘La Femme adult ere’, and allows us to understand why a play
devoted to revolutionary terrorism was also meant to be a love story; or why
` a woman’s unsatisfied yearnings in ‘La Femme adult ere’ foreshadowed the
end of French Algeria, which is also central to Le Premier Homme . The public
and the private, the political and the personal, are never really disassociated
in Camus, and allude to a different ethic, which we shall discuss shortly.
Roger Quilliot maintains that in writing Les Justes , Camus wanted to cre-
ate a successful love scene ( TRN , 1823 ). This was a rather unusual propo-
sition for a play devoted to ‘delicate murderers’. Although Camus’s lyrical
texts such as Noces are highly erotic, love scenes are not the norm in his
work, and, when present, usually evoke other questions, often philosophical
or political in nature.
134
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
Often considered to be one of the most impressive dramas of post-war
France, Les Justes , the critic John Cruickshank argues, not only provided
Camus with a subject that ‘permitted a harmonious relationship between his
ideas and his dramatic talent, but enabled these two elements to strengthen
7 one another and combine to produce a powerful theatrical experience’. In
effect, historical events like the failed and the successful assassination of the
Grand Duke occur offstage, whereas discussions of justice, terrorism and
love take centre stage. We could easily dismiss such a theatrical strategy by
claiming that Camus’s theatre was essentially a theatre of ideas and, thus,
it would have been difficult to stage the two assassination attempts. While
certainly  plausible,  the  staging  or  non-staging  of  certain  dramatic  events
` also underscores Camus’s ideas. Eug ene Kouchkine remarks that the most
beautiful love scene that Camus ever wrote, which already appears in the
8 Carnets in 1949 , comprises the structural epicentre of the play. It appears
in Act iii , several days after Kaliayev’s aborted assassination attempt and
before his second, successful one. Kaliayev seeks to distinguish himself from
Stepan, who places justice above life itself. He claims that he, on the contrary,
became a revolutionary because he loved life ( TRN , 320 ). Although Kaliayev
is interested in a revolution that will give life a chance, Dora will reveal the
inherent contradiction of this idealist belief: ‘Et pourtant, nous allons donner
la mort’ ( TRN , 322 ) (‘And yet we are going to administer death’). As Kaliayev
continues to justify the revolutionary act in the name of life, noting that they
consent to being criminals so that the innocent will inherit the earth, Dora
 ́ sounds the death knell: ‘Et si cela n’ etait pas?’ ( TRN , 322 ) (‘What if it does
not work out like that?’). Ironically, it is a young woman who questions the
revolutionary ideals of this young poet, claiming she has more experience in
the organisation. Geraldine Montgomery rightly notes that Dora’s scepticism
concerning  the  terrorist  action  comes  from  her  profound  instinct  of  life,
9 which safeguards her from the too abstract reasoning of Kaliayev. Dora is
not more naive, idealistic or sentimental than Kaliayev; rather, she is more
coherent. She does not avoid reason, but rather pushes it to its logical limits,
which happen to apply to life itself here.
As  Kaliayev  fervently  assumes  his  mission  of  assassinating  the  Grand
Duke, Dora reminds him that he will have to look at the man he is about
to kill; he will need to realise that he is indeed killing a man and not just
ˆ a  despot:  ‘Un  homme  est  un  homme.  Le  grand-duc  a  peut- etre  des  yeux
compatissants. Tu le verras se gratter l’oreille ou sourire joyeusement. Qui
ˆ ` sait, il portera peut- etre une petite coupure de rasoir. Et s’il te regarde ace
` moment-l a...’( TRN , 325 ) (‘A man is a man. Perhaps the Grand Duke
has gentle eyes; perhaps you’ll see him smiling to himself, scratching his
ear. Perhaps – who knows? – you’ll see a little scar on his cheek where he
135
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
cut himself shaving. And, if he looks at you, at that moment . . .’). Dora
is not exactly shouting out revolutionary slogans here, but rather speaking
as though she were thinking of a loved one. The Algerian freedom fighter
 ̈ Le ıla Djabali adopts a similar perspective in her poem, ‘Pour mon tortion-
naire, le Lieutenant D . . .’ (‘For my torturer, Lieutenant D . . .’), composed
10 at Barberousse prison in December 1957 . After describing the torture she
underwent there, she addresses her torturer, asking him whether his wife
stirred his coffee that morning; whether his mother thought he looked well;
and whether he caressed his children’s hair. In juxtaposing the exceptional
(revolution) or the parenthetical (torture) with normal, everyday life, Djabali
reminds us that torturers and executioners are also ordinary people, capable
of love and compassion. By appealing to the human in Lieutenant D, Djabali
sets a discourse of compassion and tenderness against a reality of cruelty and
violence. She does not seek to dismiss the horrors associated with war acts.
Her oppositional discourse is no less effective than one founded on hatred.
Furthermore, Camus’s Dora is not all that different from the protagonists
of Arab women writing on war, such as Evelyne Accad, Assia Djebar or
Yamina  Mechakra,  who  affirm  life  over  death.  Something  very  different
occurs when life is put back into the arena of war, and revolution, for that
matter. When Act 1 ends with Kaliayev’s remark that he will kill with joy,
an oxymoron if there were ever one, we are left wondering as to whether
he has not already fulfilled what both he and Dora ultimately fear: they will
then end up ‘spitting in the face of beauty’ ( TRN , 322 ).
Dora is the only revolutionary woman in Camus’s work. Although Camus
 ́  ́ wrote sympathetically in L’Homme r evolt e about Kaliayev and Voinarovsky,
terrorists who refused to kill children and women, he also alluded to the
young girl Vera Zassulich, who in 1878 gave rise to Russian terrorism, by
shooting down General Trepov, the governor of Saint Petersburg ( Ess , 571 ).
The essential contradiction that Dora embodies as both a woman (technically
a civilian) and a revolutionary relates, in fact, to the tension between love
and justice, which marks Camus’s ‘second cycle’ (the one of La Peste , Les
 ́  ́ Justes and L’Homme r evolt e ). Michael Walzer argues that Camus ‘attempted
different formulations, always maintaining an antinomy that he might better
have avoided by stating simply that a justice without room for love would be
itself unjust. I think that is what he believed; it is what his critics commonly
11 deny.’
If Dora and Kaliayev’s relationship is hampered by the revolutionary cause,
the contradictions of the latter are also unravelled by the very existence of
their amorous relationship. Kaliayev was unable to kill because of the pres-
ence of the Grand Duke’s young niece and nephew in the carriage. Maurice
Blanchot  maintains:  ‘Les  enfants,  la  femme,  leur  innocence  ne  sont  rien
136
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
d’autre que le visage du grand-duc, ce visage nu que Dora avait par avance
12 ` fait voir a Kaliayev’ (‘The children, the woman, their innocence are nothing
other than the face of the Grand Duke, that bare face that Dora had shown
Kaliayev previously’). It is Dora who has called attention to that key moment
when Kaliayev must acknowledge the human being of flesh and blood before
him, who could very well be his alter ego. Recognising limits means recog-
nising the precarious threshold that separates life from death. Stepan, on
the other hand, has little tolerance for such trifling human matters. For him,
there are no limits if one truly believes in the revolution. In fact, his so-
called love for the Russian people is constructed upon a logic implying end-
less killing. When Dora refuses to accept such a philosophy in the name
 ́ of love, Stepan replies, ‘Tu es une femme et tu as une id ee malheureuse de
l’amour’ ( TRN , 336 ) (‘You are a woman and you have an unfortunate idea
of love’).
This ‘unfortunate’ love, which makes Dora a woman, is at the heart of
Act 3 . Dora wants Kaliayev to admit that he is capable of loving her in
a concrete, selfish, even unjust way: ‘il faut bien une fois au moins laisser
parler son cœur. J’attends que tu m’appelles, moi, Dora, que tu m’appelles
 ́ par-dessus ce monde empoisonn e d’injustice...’( TRN , 353 ). (‘One has to
pour out one’s heart, at least once. I’m waiting for you to call me, Dora, to
choose me over this world poisoned by injustice . . .’). Dora wants Kaliayev
to come to terms with the fact that ‘L’amour est injustice, mais la justice ne
suffit pas’ ( C ii , 31 8 ) (‘Love is injustice, but justice is not enough) ( N ii , 250 ).
Love places limits on revolt. When in the final act, Dora asks if she is still
a woman ( TRN , 392 ), considering that she has volunteered to set off the
second bomb, Stepan is quick to remark that she is like him now. However,
this is far from being the case. Dora has not become an actual bomb carrier,
and consequently a candidate for execution, because of lofty ideals – like
Stepan, who loves humanity in the abstract – but because she loves Kaliayev
and wishes to be reunited in death. The last line of the play belongs to Dora:
ˆ ‘Yanek! Une nuit froide, et la m eme corde! Tout sera plus facile maintenant’
( TRN , 393 ) (‘Yanek! A cold night . . . and the same rope. Everything will be
easier now’).
According to Cruickshank, ‘this is her solution now that she cannot have
Kaliayev’s love, just as it was his solution to the conflict between his con-
13 science and his political actions’. Obviously, revolutionaries would ques-
tion her motives and Camus’s final statement on individual terrorism. For
Dora will finally acknowledge that it is much easier to die from one’s inner
conflicts than to live with them ( TRN , 385 ). Montgomery argues that Dora
cannot go any further in love. In desiring to be hanged by the same rope as
that of her lover, Dora also dies for the revolution. Ultimately, however, it is
137
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
her love for Kaliayev that allows her to become an actual bomb carrier and
not just a bomb maker. Montgomery perceptively notes that without this
love she could have remained ‘a woman’, for she would not have set off the
bomb. Although the revolution may have jeopardised her femininity, to the
point of even claiming her lover, Dora – in asking whether she is a woman
now that she has agreed to be a bomb carrier and in consequently asking for
the right to die in the name of her negated femininity – becomes once again
14 a lover, and thus a woman, in death.
In the final analysis, Dora is the only one acting in the name of love. A
number of critics would argue that she is no longer a revolutionary, but a
mere woman; or, worse, that there is no place for women in Camus’s philos-
ophy of revolt. Such is the opinion of the critic Jeffrey Isaac, who claims that
there is not a single female rebel or hero in Camus’s work. This is because
women stand for ‘stability, nurturance, happiness, the private – for comfort
and safety. The characters of Cæsonia in Caligula , Victoria in State of Siege ,
and Dora in The Just Assassins refuse the rebellious logic of their male part-
15 ners, admonishing them in the name of intimacy and simple love.’ Although
Isaac concedes – in a footnote – that Dora may be the exception, insofar as
she is a political agent, and thus a co-equal of Kaliayev and the other men, he
nevertheless concludes that even she ‘manifests characteristically “feminine”
16 traits and concerns’. Yet it is precisely her politics of the body that allows
Dora to cut through the idealistic rhetoric of both Kaliayev and Stepan. By
her very body, through her intimate being, Dora unravels the contradictions
that plague these revolutionaries. From the so-called private space where
17 ‘love is injustice’ – since love always favours the near and the few – Dora
questions the so-called public space where ‘justice is not enough’.
In an original study on Camusian rebellion and feminist thought, Eliza-
beth Ann Bartlett demonstrates that, contrary to what a number of male
critics have claimed, Camus’s women ‘secure a rebellion that is faithful to its
origins’, one that is not ‘disembodied’. Bartlett takes issue with Isaac when
he claims that it is men with integrity who forsake their bodies and their
women in the name of justice. For Bartlett, rebels who separate ‘their bodies
from their minds, their passions from their ideas, love from justice’ forget
their  origins  and,  as  a  result,  allow  their  rebellion  to  become  something
18 else. By bringing feminist theory (one that dismantles the dichotomy in
Western political thought between public and private) to bear on Camusian
revolt, Bartlett is able to claim that Camus does not isolate the sphere of
family and love in a non-political realm; rather, ‘the values represented and
19 nurtured therein are fundamental to rebellion’. In many respects, Bartlett’s
perspective sheds further light on Walzer’s incisive theoretical development
of what was initially a curt dismissal of Camus by Simone de Beauvoir, who
138
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
had remarked that the humanist in Camus had given way to the pied-noir .
This talk about justice that masks a merely local love is viewed in a positive
light by Walzer. In defending his mother over justice, Camus committed the
20 crime of love.
Of course, not everyone thought like Camus, who was too often dismissed
as politically incorrect. Decades later, Algeria would give birth to fundamen-
talist terrorists who thought nothing of raping their sisters and slitting the
throats of their mothers, of bashing the heads of babies in the name of ‘jus-
tice’. In the light of the ‘second’ Algerian War, that is to say the civil war
of the 1990 s, who today would not choose one’s mother over justice? How
ironic that Camus has been so often condemned in the name of sentimental
moralism, when, for him, the only serious moral question was murder itself
( C ii , 172 ).
With the publication of Le Premier Homme in 1994 , international atten-
tion once again turned to Camus and the discovery of a ‘lost world’: French
21 Algeria. However, as Jean Daniel aptly noted in Le Nouvel Observateur ,
Camus’s unfinished novel appeared at a time when the French in Algeria
were forced to leave, once again, fearing for their lives in a war that would
22 leave thousands of civilian casualties in its wake. What a tragic twist of
fate that a work kept in the closet for so many years by those close to Camus
who feared that he would once again be misread with respect to Algeria,
was published at the height of the second Algerian War. Furthermore, the
 ́ quasi-simultaneous publication of R eflexions sur le terrorisme ( Reflections
 ́ on Terrorism ) and Denis Salas’s La Juste R evolte ( Just Revolt ), along with
 ́ the first Folio edition of Actuelles iii (Chroniques alg eriennes) in 2002 only
serves to reinforce Camus’s pertinence as a thinker in the wake of 9 / 11 and
23 other recent manifestations of terrorism.
Actuelles iii was met by a glacial silence at the time of its first publication
in 1958 . Critics of Camus – who were legion at that time – felt that he had
nothing of worth to say about Algeria, when he broke his vow of silence
in  publishing  this  collection  of  essays  dating  back  to 1939 .  In  hindsight,
the  most  bitter  illusion  with  respect  to  Algeria,  shared  by  both  Algerian
and French elites, was perhaps less the Third-Worldist, Marxist slant of the
revolution than the vision of a pluralist Algeria based on the co-existence and
equality of her different ethnic, religious and linguistic communities. Camus
 ́ shared this illusion, even if, unlike S enac, he did not support independence.
 ́ It is even articulated in Actuelles iii . Launched by S enac in June 1953 , the
literary magazine Terrasses advocated a pluralistic Algeria that no longer
distinguished between French and Arab or Berber writers. The sole issue
` ever to appear contained texts by such writers as Emmanuel Robl es, Jean
Daniel, Mohammed Dib, Kateb Yacine, Mouloud Feraoun and Camus. The
139
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
fragile and ephemeral nature of this cultural enterprise foreshadowed what
would subsequently take place on a political front.
 ́ ` Camus gave S enac ‘Retour a Tipasa’, a stunning essay on the beloved site
of his youth, where he first learned not to negate what his hands could touch
and what his lips could caress, as he wrote in the much earlier piece ‘Noces
` a Tipasa’ ( Ess , 59 ). It is there that he first learned to love without limits.
Surrounded by barbed wire now, the Roman ruins of Tipasa to which he
returns years later mark an original plenitude marred by the barbed wire of
tyrannies, war, policings, the time of revolt ( Ess , 870 ). Although his love for
Tipasa has been mitigated by the lessons of History, Camus can still affirm,
in 1952 , that no matter how arduous the enterprise, he will seek never to be
unfaithful to either beauty or the humiliated ( Ess , 875 ). These humiliated
include  Camus  and  his  beloved,  those  who,  in 1962 ,  would  become  the
 ́ rapatri es (‘repatriated’) or pieds-noirs .
Camus’s passion for Algeria was notorious. On 15 January 1943 , he made
 ́ the  following  seductive  remark:  ‘Pour  l’Alg erie... c’est  la  passion  sans
`  ́ frein et l’abandon a la volupt e d’aimer. Question: Peut-on aimer un pays
comme une femme?’ ( C ii , 73 ) (‘For Algeria . . . I have unbridled passion
and I surrender to the pleasure of loving: Can one love a country like a
woman?’ ( N ii , 54 )). Perhaps we could attribute a double meaning to this
` question in conjunction with ‘La Femme adult ere’, where the story is told
from the perspective of the female protagonist. A highly erotic undertone
pervades this short story, where the representation of the female body and
desire itself exist not only in opposition to the colonial paradigm associated
with the institution of marriage, but also in conjunction with what the female
protagonist Janine cannot attain: the Algeria of Algerians.
While literary critics – and university students for that matter – have pon-
dered endlessly over Janine’s curious intercourse with the elements atop the
terrace parapet, I have always been more interested in what was taking place
below: the social intercourse, or lack thereof in this Algerian hinterland, mod-
elled on Laghouat, which Camus visited in December 1952 . There is that
remarkable scene – just screaming to be filmed – in the square, beginning
with the moment in which Janine’s husband, the pied-noir travelling sales-
man Marcel, rubs his hands, while looking affectionately at the trunk in front
of them. Janine then calls out ‘Look’. From the other end of the square, a
proud and distinguished Arab is advancing towards them. He reminds Janine
of the French officers that she has occasionally admired. Although the Arab
is coming towards them, he is looking beyond them, carrying himself, with
the dignity of a general: ‘Oui, ils avaient tous ici cet air d’orgueil, mais celui-
`  ́ l a, vraiment, exag erait’ ( TRN , 1568 ) (‘Yes, all of them here had that look
of pride; but this one, really, was going too far’). The square may be empty,
140
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
but he walks straight towards the trunk without seeing it, and without see-
ing them. As the distance separating them rapidly decreases, Marcel seizes
the handle of the trunk, pulling it out of the way. The Arab passes with-
out noticing and heads toward the ramparts. Janine catches her husband’s
despondent look as he asserts: ‘Ils se croient tout permis, maintenant’ ( TRN ,
1568 ) (‘They think they can get away with anything now’). Although Janine
does not say anything, she despises the Arab’s arrogance and suddenly feels
unhappy.
The Arabs clearly have the upper hand here. Whoever said that Arabs – and
women – were neglected characters in Camus’s writing obviously failed to
consider the truly disruptive space they occupy in this story. How humiliating
it must be for this French Algerian male to bend down and move the infamous
trunk so that the ‘proud’ Arab can pass! Judging by the manner in which
Marcel also holds tightly to the little canvas suitcase set between his knees in
the opening scene of the story, it is clear that his affection is for his material
possessions, not his wife; whereas Janine’s admiration is for the Arab Other,
not her colonial spouse. The fact that the Arab crossing the square looks like
French officers Janine has admired is not perchance either. For, in the opening
scene of the story, while Marcel’s attention is focussed on his suitcase, Janine
feels the gaze of a French soldier and eventually blushes. Her first reaction
upon noticing the gaze was to note that the man looking at her was not an
Arab ( TRN , 1561 ).
Unlike Marcel, who is desperately clinging to his material possessions, for
his colonial identity is bound up with them, Janine is eager to be rid of her
excess baggage, which is personified by her very body. She longs for a body
that will take up less space, like the Algerians she observes around her: a
body bound to the earth and deemed worthy of local recognition. Taking
up less space means being an integral part of the land, from which Janine
feels visibly detached. Ironically, though she feels conspicuous, no one is
returning her gaze. Her physical discomfort ends up assuming a seductive
quality. However, at best, she only can take frightened pleasure from the
burnouses that brush against her as three Arab men cycle past. She races
towards the fort, where, with her body leaning heavily against the parapet,
she will consummate the sexual act alone.
Identity, for Camus, has always been associated with an acute sense of
place, even when it is articulated in terms of non-belonging or exile. The
plight of Marcel and Janine as pieds-noirs without bearings in the Algerian
hinterland clearly reveals the connection between space and identity. Their
identity is challenged by an ever-shrinking space. For Marcel, it is reduced
to the space of the canvas bag and trunk to which he desperately clings; for
Janine, it is interiorised in her body. Her marriage in this colonial society
141
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
has made her an undesirable being. It is therefore not surprising that she will
seek to consummate the sexual act beyond the walls of the conjugal room,
in a landscape apparently devoid of colonial markers.
The  insatiable  thirst  for  beauty,  and  the  sensual  happiness  that  comes
` with it, which still haunts Camus in ‘Retour a Tipasa’ ( Ess , 871 ), cannot
easily  be  quenched  in  this  parched  interior,  far  from  the  Mediterranean
coast that marks the youthful Camus of the mid 1930 s. Here, in ‘La Femme
` adult ere’, everything is stone. The Algerian landscape, which critics claim
Camus hid behind, actually spells out a barren nature, which parallels the
barrenness of one of its characters. Janine and Marcel are childless. Rizzuto
fittingly remarks that ‘Camus’s characters, for the most part, have no biolog-
24 ical future’. Could this fictional reality be hinting at the impossible future
haunting the pieds-noirs ?
` The setting for this short story is clearly not that of ‘Noces a Tipasa’. In
fact, the metaphor of marriage takes on oppressive, even bloody connota-
tions in Actuelles iii , where it is used to represent the difficult relationship
between ‘French’ and ‘Arabs’ in Algeria. Conceived in 1952 and initially
` published in 1954 by Charlot in Algiers, ‘La Femme adult ere’ anticipates
ˆ the impossible dialogue Camus would advocate in his ‘Appel pour une tr eve
civile’ in January 1956 .
An unsatisfied yearning for love, which can only be consummated in the
orgasmic present of adultery with the beloved land, reveals another side of
Algeria, both geographically and historically. For the Algeria of the 1950 sis
no longer that of the 1930 s, and a new backdrop (as well as a new nation) is
in order. If Assia Djebar could claim that Camus had only embraced the coast
in Noces , whereas she, as an Algerian woman writer, had claimed the entire
region, including the hinterland, what could be said then about ‘La Femme
25 ` adult ere’, which takes Camus even further south than Djebar’s writings? At
that time, Djebar was obviously dismissing Camus’s legitimacy as an Algerian
writer. It would take the Algerian Civil War of the 1990 s for Algerian writers
 ́  ́ and critics to give Camus back his Alg erianit e . Nevertheless Camus’s identity
crisis as a French-Algerian writer has not yet been resolved. In Albert Camus.
Assassinat post-mortem ( Assassination Post-Mortem )( 2005 ), the Algerian
critic Mohamed Lakhdar Maougal laments the visible absence of Camus in
 ́  ́ the 2004 Franco-Algerian encounter, ‘L’Ann ee de l’Alg erie’ (‘The Year of
Algeria’). That Algeria continues to assassinate him post-mortem is not all
that surprising given that she has yet to realise her much desired democracy.
However, that France did not give him a place of honour in this year of
26 commemorations  is  truly  disturbing. Maougal  proposes  to  give  Camus
back to France, at a time when France, perhaps even more so than Algeria,
142
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
 ́  ́  ́ is prey to what the critic H el eB eji refers to elsewhere as a cultural radicalism
27 that cannot accommodate the Other.
NOTES
1 .  Patrick McCarthy, ‘The First Arab in L’Etranger’, Revue CELFAN Review 4 . 3
( 1985 ), 25 – 6 .
2 .  See, for example, Louise Horowitz, ‘Of Women and Arabs: Sexual and Racial
Polarization in Camus’, Modern Language Studies 17 . 3 (Summer 1987 ), 54 – 61 .
 ́ 3 .  Hamid Nacer-Khodja, Albert Camus. Jean S enac ou le fils rebelle (Paris, EDIF,
2004 ), p. 64 .
4 .  Neil Oxenhandler, Looking for Heroes in Postwar France . Albert Camus, Max
Jacob,  Simone  Weil (Hanover,  Dartmouth  College/University  Press  of  New
England, 1996 ), p. 20 .
5 .  Yacef Saadi, La Bataille d’Alger (Algiers, Entreprise Nationale du Livre, 1984 ),
p. 284 .
6 .  Jean Daniel, Soleils d’hiver. Carnets 1998–2000 (Paris, Grasset, 2000 ), p. 219 .
7 .  John  Cruickshank, Albert  Camus  and  the  Literature  of  Revolt (New  York,
Galaxy Books/Oxford University Press, 1959 / 1960 ), p. 215 .
` 8 .  Eug ene Kouchkine, ‘ Les Justes : le tragique de l’amour et du renoncement’, in
 ́ ` Jacqueline  L evi-Valensi  and  Agn es  Spiquel  (eds.), Camus  et  le  lyrisme (Paris,
Editions SEDES, 1997 ), p. 161 .
 ́ 9 .  Geraldine   F.   Montgomery, Noces   pour   femme   seule.   Le   f eminin   et   le
 ́  dans  l’œuvre  d’Albert  Camus (Amsterdam/New  York,  Rodopi, 2004 ), sacr e
p. 272 .
10 .  Denise Barrat (ed.), Espoir et parole (Paris, Seghers, 1963 ), pp. 99 – 100 .
11 .  Michael Walzer, ‘Albert Camus’s Algerian War’, in The Company of Critics (New
York, Basic Books, 1988 ), p. 138 .
12 .  Maurice Blanchot, L’Entretien infini (Paris, Gallimard, 1969 ), p. 279 .
13 .  Cruickshank, Albert Camus and the Literature of Revolt ,p. 219 .
14 .  Montgomery, Noces pour femme seule , pp. 283 – 4 .
15 .  Jeffrey C. Isaac, Arendt, Camus, and Modern Rebellion (New Haven, Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1992 ), p. 233 .
16 . Ibid ., p. 307 ,n. 17 .
17 .  Walzer, ‘Albert Camus’s Algerian War’, p. 137 .
18 .  Elizabeth   Ann   Bartlett, Rebellious   Feminism:   Camus’s   Ethic   of   Rebel-
lion    and    Feminist    Thought (New    York,    Palgrave/Macmillan, 2004 ),
pp. 14 – 15 .
19 . Ibid. ,p. 16 .
20 .  Walzer, ‘Albert Camus’s Algerian War’, pp. 138 , 145 .
21 .  See,  for  example,  Tony  Judt,  ‘The  Lost  World  of  Albert  Camus’, New  York
Review of Books 41 . 16 ( 6 October 1994 ), 3 – 5 .
Jean Daniel, ‘Le Suicide d’une nation’, Le Nouvel Observateur 14 – 20 (April 22 .
1994 ), 28 .
 ́  ́ 23 .J.L evi-Valensi and D. Salas (eds.), Albert Camus : R eflexions sur le terrorisme
 ́ (Paris, Nicolas Philippe, 2002 ); D. Salas, Albert Camus : La Juste R evolte (Paris,
 ́ Broch e, 2002 ).
143
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

danielle marx-scouras
24 .  Anthony Rizzuto, Camus. Love and Sexuality (Gainesville, University Press of
Florida, 1998 ), p. 4 .
25 .  Assia   Djebar,   ‘Afterword’,   in Women   of   Algiers   in   Their   Apartment
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1992 ), p. 177 .
26 .  Mohamed  Lakhdar  Maougal  (ed.), Albert  Camus.  Assassinat  post-mortem
(2005) , (Algiers, Editions APIC, 2005 ), pp. 11 – 12 .
 ́  ́  ́  ́  ̈  ́ 27 .H el eB eji, ‘Radicalisme culturel et la ıcit e’, Le D ebat 58 (January–February 1990 ),
47 .
144
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

11
PETER DUNWOODIE
From Noces to L’Etranger
In February 1937 twenty-four-year old Albert Camus delivered the open-
ing  address  at  the  launch  of  a  new Maison  de  la  Culture in  Algiers.  He
placed the undertaking squarely within the cultural debate going on in an
Algiers dominated by a group of well-established European artists and intel-
lectuals known as the ‘Algerianists’, supporters (under the leadership of the
novelists Louis Bertrand and Robert Randau) of the reactionary politics of
` Maurice Barr es and Charles Maurras in mainland France. As Camus’s title
made clear, for the young people launching this new venture – a group of self-
styled ‘left-wing intellectuals’ ( Ess , 1321 ) united through university, amateur
` theatre, political activism – the issue of the day was ‘La culture indig ene. La
 ́  ́ nouvelle culture m editerran eenne’ (‘Indigenous Culture. The New Mediter-
ranean Culture’). To today’s (postcolonial) reader, this title might suggest
an  anthropological  assessment  of  a  colonised  culture  and  its  absorption
into,  and  contribution  to,  a  new,  perhaps  hybridised,  cultural  construct.
The stated objective, announced with a high seriousness scarcely veiled by a
declared modesty, would seem to reinforce this perception: ‘servir la culture
 ́  ́ `  ́  ́ m editerran eenne, contribuer al’ edification, dans le cadre r egional, d’une cul-
`  ́ ture dont l’existence et la grandeur ne sont plus ad emontrer. Nous voulons
` ˆ seulement aider un pays a s’exprimer lui-m eme. Localement. Sans plus. La
1  ́  ́  ́ vraie question: une nouvelle culture m editerran eenne est-elle r ealisable?’
(‘to  serve  Mediterranean  culture,  to  contribute,  within  a  regional  frame-
work, to the construction of a culture whose existence and grandeur are
widely recognised. We simply wish to help a country express itself. Locally.
That’s all. The real question: is a new Mediterranean culture possible?’). To
a listener in 1937 , on the other hand, both title and opening statement would
have been provocative, rather than consensual, because the positions implied
– on what was indigenous, new or ‘Mediterranean’, but also on the make-
up of an indigenous ‘culture’ – were hotly contested. As Camus’s rhetoric
makes clear, his lecture was in fact a manifesto, both polemical and prospec-
tive. The self-contradictions evident therein – a ‘widely recognised’ culture
147
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
somehow still open to questions regarding its feasibility; a Mediterranean
culture, yet the local cultural expression of a specific country – derive, no
doubt, from his dual objective. This was, firstly, to declare the group’s hos-
tility to the Eurocentric, confrontational and somewhat provincial cultural
identity fostered by Algerianism; and secondly, to signal allegiance to an
2 alternative geocultural space labelled ‘Mediterranean’. Camus’s early lyri-
cal essays, L’Envers et l’Endroit ( 1937 ) and Noces ( 1939 ), are grounded in
this engagement, and in reviewing the cultural and political context thereof
in the first part of this chapter my objective is to show how the attitudes
and values embodied therein help us understand the unprepossessing hero
of Camus’s best-known work, L’Etranger ( 1942 ), discussed in the second
part.
It  was  to  Louis  Bertrand  and  the  colony’s  French  historians  (Gaston
Boissier and Stephan Gsell in particular) that the Europeans in Algeria owed
the self-representation which, by the 1930 s, had hardened into the Euro-
centric colonialist doxa that the Maison de la Culture group opposed. At
the heart of this doxa (and of the association of writers it spawned) lay the
notion of ‘Latin Africa’, the racially exclusive bedrock of a European Alge-
rian region of la grande France , a province actively participating in France’s
national saga (though frequently at odds with its republican ideals). The
material base for this ethnically biased notion lay primarily in the wealth of
archaeological remains being mapped throughout Algeria at that time, like
the great ruins at Cherchell and Tipasa, Thimgad and Djemila. The essence
of the construct, for which these vestiges served as anchors, lay in privileging
historical time and anteriority while relegating as insignificant, indeed artifi-
cial and illusory, both the present and the recent past. In the words of Louis
 ́  ́ Bertrand: ‘A travers le M editerran een d’aujourd’hui, je reconnus le Latin de
 ́ tous les temps. L’Afrique latine perc ̧ait, pour moi, le trompe-l’œil du d ecor
 ́  ̈ islamique moderne. Elle ressuscitait dans les n ecropoles pa ıennes et les cat-
 ́ acombes chr etiennes, les ruines des colonies et des municipes dont Rome
3  ́ avait jalonn e son sol.’ (‘Through today’s Mediterranean man I recognised
timeless Latin man. Latin Africa was thrusting through the trompe-l’œil of
 ́ the modern Islamic d ecor. It was being reborn in the pagan necropolises
and the Christian catacombs, in the ruins of the colonies and towns Rome
had spread across the land.’) Even where modified by later Muslim invaders
in a process of adaptation, Bertrand claimed in 1921 , the region remained
4 stubbornly ‘Latin’. Treated as mere surface illusion peddled by a genera-
tion of orientalising Romantic prejudice, the Arab/Berber civilisation of the
Maghreb was derided, then elided within an imaginary geography of ‘virgin
territory’. This was then claimed as the rightful inheritance of the European
settler, mythologised by Bertrand as an aggressive, conquering Man of Action
148
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
who  reconfigured  the  colony’s  imaginary  and  socio-economic  spaces  as
exclusively European, thanks to a ‘Latin spirit’ said to be actively forging an
‘intellectual regionalism’ based on the values and traditions of Athens and
Rome.
This is the discourse – carrier of the selective history and colonialist cul-
tural and economic project operative in pre-war Algeria – that Camus is seek-
ing to counter in his Maison de la Culture speech of 1937 . In the opening
paragraph, his chosen terms, ‘Mediterranean culture’ and ‘Mediterranean
regionalism’, mask the shift that he is proposing, remapping a cultural space
inherited from Greece, and thereby relativising the impact of Rome: ‘Toute
 ́  ́  ́ ` l’erreur vient de ce qu’on confond M editerran ee et Latinit e et qu’on place a
` Rome ce qui commenc ̧a dans Ath enes’ ( Ess , 1321 ) (‘The mistake is caused
by merging Mediterranean and Latin, and locating in Rome what began in
5 Athens’). The anteriority which was the cornerstone of the Algerianist world
view is thus acknowledged, but reappropriated. It was, claimed Camus, the
misunderstanding regarding cultural regionalism that his speech aimed to
dissipate, and the alternative that he proposes is grounded in a systematic
denunciation of the ‘Roman’. It mixes the cultural, political and personal in
a structured polarisation replicated in the essays he was writing at that time
( L’Envers et l’Endroit , Noces ). The ‘race curieuse et forte...[les] hommes
 ́  ́  ́ d ebraill es, [la] vie forte et color ee’ (‘an inquisitive, strong race, carefree men,
a  strong,  colourful  life’)  are  said  to  link  the  various  Mediterranean  peo-
ples in a single community ( Ess , 1322 ), a living reality, and separate them
from Rome and the Romans who constructed only an abstract and conven-
tional Mediterranean ( Ess , 1323 ). The Mediterranean, Camus counters, ‘est
 ́ ˆ  ́ ailleurs. Elle est la n egation m eme de Rome et du g enie latin’ ( Ess , 1324 )
6 (‘lies elsewhere. It constitutes a negation of Rome and the Latin spirit’).
This resounding rejection of the Algerianist line (and its influential right-
wing French metropolitan equivalent) is accompanied by an equally forceful
denunciation of Mussolini and Hitler, purveyors of a ‘Latin order’ driven
by a warlike spirit and a soulless violence ( Ess , 1324 ), on lies, pomp and a
stifling self-restraint totally foreign to the joie de vivre of the peoples of the
Mediterranean basin ( Ess , 1322 ).
The claim to an immediate, direct, personal contact with the vitality of the
region is typical of the ambiguities formulated in Camus’s lecture. Beyond
the opposition to the ‘Romanisation’ of Algerian/Mediterranean history, and
the ready-made and essentialist counter-assertions regarding a vitality sup-
posedly specific to the lucky inhabitants of the Mediterranean region (but
not to ‘Romans’), it is unclear where Camus locates the Mediterranean in the
early texts. It is on these, nevertheless, that critics have repeatedly based the
claim to his ‘mediterraneity’ and his status as an Algerian writer. Elements
149
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
of a response are discernible in the assertiveness, if not the coherence, of the
1937 lecture:
 ́  ́  ́ Bassin international travers e par tous les courants, la M editerran ee est de tous
ˆ  ́ les pays le seul peut- etre qui rejoigne les grandes pens ees orientales. Car elle
 ́ ˆ n’est pas classique et ordonn ee, elle est diffuse et turbulente. Ce go ut triom-
 ́  ́ ` phant de la vie, ce sens de l’ ecrasement et de l’ennui, les places d esertes a midi
`  ́  ́ en Espagne, la sieste, voil a la vraie M editerran ee et c’est de l’Orient qu’elle se
rapproche. Non de l’Occident latin. ( Ess , 1324 – 5 )
(An international basin criss-crossed by numerous currents, the Mediterranean
is perhaps the only country to have links with major eastern doctrines. For it
is diffuse and turbulent, not classical and ordered. The all-embracing taste for
life, the sense of ennui and of being crushed, Spain’s deserted midday squares,
the siesta, these are the real Mediterranean. It is closer to the Orient than to
the Latin West.)
The essays of Noces , written in 1937 – 8 , might be expected to illustrate this
encounter. What their lyricism actually reveals, however, is a Eurocentric
experience mixing the vitality and sensuality of the author, an overt reap-
propriation of the icons of ‘Algerianity’ (the Roman ruins of Tipasa and
Djemila in particular) and the rejection of the ethos (of labour and pos-
session) embodied in the colony’s settlers. Camus’s lyricism articulates the
intensity of subjective experience, the profusion, indeed excess which greet
the individual willing to abandon him/herself to ‘Nature’. It thus privileges
the present, immediacy, spontaneity. And if its poignancy can be heightened
by awareness of the ephemerality of the experience and the inevitable return
of a feeling of loss and separation (key feature of L’Envers et l’Endroit ), it
resolutely excludes the nostalgia of the Romantics, the facile exoticism of ori-
entalising travel-writers and the historicity foregrounded by Louis Bertrand.
Only a historian can seek a history lesson among ruins, Camus protests in
` an unused passage for ‘Noces a Tipasa’, in 1937 – 8 . In fact, he concludes,
what they teach is both more immediate and more spiritual: their function
is not to anchor the individual in time (an Algerianist strategy designed to
legitimise the occupation of space), but to be a privileged, almost sacred,
space, a space outside temporality ( Ess , 1350 ). It is here that the individual
can, unexpectedly, fleetingly, experience the fusion that Camus evokes in ‘Le
`  ́ ˆ ` Vent aDj emila’: ‘Sans arr et, il sifflait avec force a travers les ruine s...Je
ˆ  ́ me sentais claquer au vent comme une m ature. Creus e par le milieu . . . ma
 ́ ` ˆ  ́ peau se dess echait jusqu’ a ne plus etre la mienne; j’ etais poli par le vent,
 ́ ` ˆ  ́ us e jusqu’ al’ ame. J’ etais un peu de cette force selon laquelle je flottais, puis
7 beaucoup, puis elle enfin.’ ( Ess , 62 ) (‘It blew ceaselessly, and with force,
among the ruins. I felt myself flapping in the wind like a sail. Hollowed
150
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
out from within, my skin dried out and felt no longer mine; the wind pol-
ished me, eroded my very soul. I felt a small part of that force on which
I was drifting, then very much part of it, and finally fused with it’). While
such experiences are the rare cases in which Camus’s writing is freed from
the  bounds  of  contemporary  society  (which  swamp  Meursault  in  Part ii
of L’Etranger and, in metaphorical guise, exhaust Rieux and his compan-
ions  in La  Peste ),  the  rhetoric  of Noces generates  a  heady  mix  of  phys-
icality  (indeed  sexualised  contact  with  Nature)  and  mythologising  reflec-
tion posing as philosophical questioning. Voicing the anguished yet satiated
self-consciousness of being-in-the-world, total absorption in the here-and-
now, it fashions a twentieth-century hedonism riven by the awareness that
‘le monde finit toujours par vaincre l’histoire. Ce grand cri de pierre que
 ́  ́ Dj emila jette entre les montagnes, le ciel et le silence, j’en sais bien la po esie:
 ́  ́  ́  ́ lucidit e, indiff erence, les vrais signes du d esespoir ou de la beaut e’ ( Ess , 65 –
6 ) (‘in the end, the world always defeats history. The cry from Djemila’s
stones, echoing around the mountains, the sky and the silence, has a deep
poetic resonance for me: lucidity, indifference, the true signs of despair or
beauty’). What characterises these exceptional experiences of Camus’s narra-
tor, though rarely his characters, is a suspended moment, occasionally one of
stasis, in which consciousness of the self slips imperceptibly into absorption
in immediate surroundings, via the heightened receptiveness of the senses,
8 sexualised as le grand libertinage ( Ess , 56 ). Immersed in the immediacy of a
‘natural’ world, a space in which the timelessness of old stones is paired
with  the  eruptive  growth  of  the  flowers  and  grasses  that  overrun  them,
Camus’s narrator lives an intensely private experience. This counters the
Algerianists’ privileging of the topos of action, the creative destruction driv-
ing settler society, on the one hand; and on the other, it articulates what was
to become a lasting feature of Camus’s thought, namely the cultural divide
between Mediterranean hedonism and northern Europe’s thin-blooded ratio-
nalists, accused of being estranged from both nature and what Louis Bertrand
called the villes solaires (sun-drenched cities), so prominent in Camus’s own
9 writing.
The cultural, intertextual input into the Mediterranean construct elab-
orated in Noces , although essential, can be raised only very briefly here.
It  was  fashionable  in  the 1930 s,  and  can  be  traced  for  instance  in  the
 ́ work of the poet Paul Val ery (including his 1936 Algiers lecture, ‘Impres-
 ́  ́ sions de M editerran een’ (‘A Mediterranean’s Impressions’)) and, especially,
10 in the work of the philosopher and essayist Jean Grenier, Camus’s teacher.
The mediation through art unsettles the once-popular critical argument that
Camus’s Mediterranean imaginary resulted solely from the immediacy and
intensity of existential experience. It serves as a reminder that this imaginary
151
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
was  constructed  in  part  through  a  reworking  of  values  rendered  urgent,
locally, by the unrelentingly polarised nature of colonial relations in Alge-
ria and, globally, by the spread of fascism – especially the Italian version
whose youthful, physical vitality and cult of the body (shorn of Mussolini’s
ponderous Romanisation and grandiloquent theatricality) had been greeted
11 enthusiastically in France by writers like Drieu la Rochelle.
This alternative, Mediterranean humanism was also actively promoted in
Algeria from the 1920 s, especially by Gabriel Audisio, a friend and writer
only a few years older than Camus but greatly admired by Algeria’s young
hopefuls  in  the 1930 s,  not  least  as  an  author  published  by  Gallimard  in
12 Paris. In a series of locally influential texts Audisio roundly rejected the
racially exclusive self-glorification of the 1930 – 1 celebrations marking the
centenary of French colonial rule in Algeria, and turned to a paradigmatic
Mediterranean text, the Odyssey , and a mythical figure, Ulysses, in order
to promote a lively, indeed boisterous, alternative form of mediterraneity,
13 as Camus claimed. The sea, the sun, physicality, adventure and, above all,
movement constituted the essence of this vision, a joyous evocation of youth-
fulness and unbridled appetite. It was expressed through a vocabulary and
an imagery which privilege work and freedom, not in the petty-bourgeois,
grasping embodiment popularised by the colony’s Algerianist novel, but in
picaresque stories of seafarers who share with their mythical Greek ancestor
` the joie de vivre , vitality and camaraderie of ports, ships, travel: ‘ a toute
14  ́ heure, le plaisir du d epart’ (‘at any moment, the pleasures of departure’).
The Mediterranean for Audisio was thus a space of pleasure, indeed excess,
of youthful exuberance, diversity, healthy animality and the cult of satiety.
His texts promoted an expansive, non-conflictual mediterraneity, a space of
freedom ( le large or open sea) in which work merges with seafaring, erasing
frontiers and deviating from the Muslim–European confrontation hardening
in Algeria (and left largely unchanged by the brief period in government in
France of the Front Populaire in 1936 ). Camus’s mediterraneity shared much
of this, but it evoked more easily circumscribed spaces, whether in coastal
Algeria or southern European towns like Florence or Fiesole. This distinction
is important insofar as it helps us recognise that in Algeria the experiences
ˆ ` ˆ mapped in the lyrical essays of Noces , like the solipsistic t ete- a-t ete with the
natural world evoked later in L’Etranger , could be deemed to exist only in
the preserved margins of, and in an artificially suspended time within, the
colonial system:
 ́ Non, ce n’ etait pas moi qui comptais, ni le monde, mais seulement l’accord et
` ˆ le silence qui de lui a moi faisait na ıtre l’amour. Amour que je n’avais pas la
faiblesse de revendiquer pour moi seul, conscient et orgueilleux de le partager
152
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
 ́ avec toute une race, n ee du soleil et de la me r...et[qui], debout sur les plages,
 ́ adresse son sourire complice au sourire eclatant de ses ciels.
` (‘Noces a Tipasa’, Ess , 60 )
(No, I was not what counted, nor the world, but simply the harmony and
silence that awakened love between us. It was a love which I was not naive
enough to claim as my own; I was conscious and proud to be sharing it with an
entire race, born of the sun and sea, standing upright on the shore, and whose
complicitous smile was turned to the bright smile of its skies.)
Camus’s coastal imaginary produced a mythologising evocation of a ‘race’
15 firmly and intensely grounded in leisure time and pleasure. The appeal to
European fantasies on Edenic spaces and to the desire to dissociate the self
from its historical responsibilities via an intense relationship with Nature,
16 was clearly driving this construct. The unsaid on which it was based, how-
ever, is the existence of reserved, protected spaces – marked on Algeria’s
beaches (and, no doubt, its archaeological sites) by signs which read: ‘Inter-
17 dit aux mendiants, aux chiens et aux Arabes’ (‘No beggars, dogs or Arabs’).
As a central signifier, the ‘Mediterranean’ allows an undefined expansion of
such fantasised spaces, thus sidestepping the issue that L’Etranger will later
confront,  namely  the  fact  that  the  pleasure-laden  spaces  invented  by  the
` European are also always spaces traversed by, and claimed by, the indig ene
(as the native inhabitants were called).
If we now look back to Camus’s 1937 Algiers lecture, we can see that while
intellectual acknowledgement, and a congenial hybridisation, of East–West,
Muslim–Christian, are lauded, the evidence called upon to ground the claim
remains strictly Eurocentric: the linguistic unity of Romance languages; the
Guilds  and  Orders  of  medieval  and  feudal  Europe;  a  civilisation  able  to
absorb foreign ideas and doctrines ( Ess , 1325 ). As Jean Sarocchi remarks
tartly in a special issue of the periodical Perspectives devoted to Camus and
ˆ the Mediterranean, the claims made in that lecture-manifesto are ‘un gu epier
d’erreurs et d’inexactitudes’ (‘a hornets’ nest of errors and imprecision’), and
18 Camus’s mediterraneity a problematic dream marred by ethnocentricity.
In  the  same  issue,  one  should  add,  other  critics  wholeheartedly  adhere
 ́ to Camus’s position, on the contrary, eulogising ‘une mythologie du r eel,
 ́  ́  ́  ́ fond ee sur un v eritable mythe de la M editerran ee’ (‘a mythology of the real,
19 grounded in a veritable Mediterranean myth’), and ‘un lieu symbolique,
 ́  ́ source de v erit e, de “vraies richesses”’ (‘a symbolic space, source of truth
20 and “true riches”’).
Camus’s Mediterranean, one has to conclude with Sarocchi, is clearly not
that of geographers, cultural historians, economists or politicians. His lyrical
essays of the period reveal that it is a privileged, imaginary geography, indeed
153
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
arguably a ‘personal myth’ founded, imaginatively, on a number of essential,
defining values: abundance, excess, spontaneity, generosity and sensuality,
21 the Dionysian. The most lucid summary of that Eurocentric paradigm is
provided by Camus himself in 1938 , the year after the opening of the Maison
de la Culture and during which he was finalising the texts of Noces .Inan
introduction to a new periodical, Rivages , launched as an alternative to the
colony’s dominant, Algerianist publications, he wrote:
` ˆ  ́ A l’heure o ulego ut des doctrines voudrait nous s eparer du monde, il n’est
pas  mauvais  que  des  hommes  jeunes,  sur  une  terre  jeune,  proclament  leur
`  ́ attachement a ces quelques biens p erissables et essentiels qui donnent un sens
` ` a notre vie: mer, soleil et femmes dans la lumi ere. Ils sont le bien de la culture
 ́  ́ vivante, le reste etant la civilisation morte que nous r epudions.  ( Ess , 1330 – 1 )
(At a time when the taste for doctrines is striving to cut us off from the world,
it is good that young men, in a young land, proclaim how attached they are
to those few perishable and essential things that give life a meaning: sea, sun,
and women in the light. These things belong to living culture, and the rest is a
dead civilisation that we reject.)
Whereas customarily, economics, labour and commerce constitute the val-
ues shaping colonial space, the easy hedonism of the figures in the quotation
is central to the impact of Noces , no doubt, as the evocation of a carefree
space located not at the margins of colonial life (as might have been expected
when projecting a utopia), but at the centre of a conscious remapping of colo-
nial space. Camus goes beyond that hedonistic alternative and uses Noces
to promote an asceticism which generates its own alternative, stark lyricism.
Moreover, to the colonial theme of rootedness through labour and owner-
ship, and the perception of space solely in terms of profitable transformation,
 ́ Camus opposes a state of permanent ‘d eracinement’ (‘uprootedness’) via the
evocation  of  a  harsh  mineral  world.  In  this  world  the  individual  has  no
place; yet like a mirage, it is tantalisingly offered, as the 1952 short story
`  ́  ́ ‘La Femme adult ere’ makes clear: ‘Au-dessus du d esert, le silence etait vaste
` ` ` comme l’espace . . . L a-bas, plus au sud encore, a cet endroit o u le ciel et
` la terre se rejoignaient dans une ligne pure, l a-bas, lui semblait-il soudain,
 ́ ` quelque chose l’attendait qu’elle avait ignor e jusqu’ a ce jour et qui pourtant
 ́ n’avait cess e de lui manquer’ ( TRN , 1569 – 70 ) (‘Above the desert, the silence
was as vast as the space . . . In the distance, still farther south, at the point
where sky and earth met in a pure line, it suddenly seemed to her that, there,
something awaited her, something of which until that moment she had been
unaware although it had always been lacking’). But this fantasy, that she
could join the desert nomads in a supposedly privileged space, was openly
contradicted in a section of Camus’s 1939 essay ‘Le Minotaure’, entitled
154
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
 ́ ` ‘Le  D esert a  Oran’  (‘The  Desert  at  Oran’),  whose  opening  lines  effect
 ́ a  poignant,  nostalgia-laden  foreclosure:  ‘Il  n’y  a  plus  de  d eserts.  Il  n’y
ˆ a  plus  d’ ıles’  ( Ess , 813 )  (‘There  are  no  more  deserts,  no  more  islands’).
Once again, it is clearly not physical geography that is at issue here. The
loss is that of an imaginary geography – of elemental, primordial space –
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ because ‘le d esert lui-m eme a pris un sens, on l’a surcharg edepo esie’ (‘the
desert itself has acquired meaning, it is now overladen with poetry’) ( Ess ,
814 ).  The  consciousness  and/or  the  quest  of  European  protagonists  like
` ˆ Janine (‘La Femme adult ere’) and Daru (‘L’H ote’), or the narrator who con-
fronts the urban desert in ‘Le Minotaure’, are thus haunted by the awareness
that they do not ‘belong’ in the world they so ardently seek to embrace. In a
tense, disjointed sentence that replicates the heroine’s heightened excitement
and inner tension, Janine comes to realise that ‘ce royaume, de tout temps,
 ́  ́ lui avait et e promis et que jamais, pourtant, il ne serait le sien, plus jamais,
` ˆ sinon a ce fugitif instant, peut- etre’ ( TRN , 1570 ) (‘this realm had been eter-
nally promised to her, and never, however, would it be hers, never again,
except in this fleeting moment, perhaps’). And in the case of Daru, Camus
 ́ grants him a burdensome conclusion: ‘dans ce d esert, personne, ni lui ni son
ˆ  ́  ́ h ote n’ etaient rien. Et pourtant, hors de ce d esert, ni l’un ni l’autre, Daru
le savait, n’auraient pu vivre vraiment’ ( TRN , 1617 ) (‘in this desert nobody,
neither he nor his guest, meant anything. And yet, outside this desert nei-
ther of them could live really’). Camus’s characters, one might conclude,
are  constructed  as  either  outsider  characters,  like  Janine,  typified  by  the
malaise of the threshold always about to be crossed; or insider characters,
like Daru, threatened by the excommunication that challenges their sense of
belonging. Both constructs, however, constitute responses to an existential
drive for rootedness which, as a more openly personal text like L’Envers
et l’Endroit highlights, can be overcome only by divesting the self of such
illusions and consciously adopting the spirit of detachment fostered by the
Absurd:
 ́ ` Ce  qui  me  frappait  alors  ce  n’ etait  pas  un  monde  fait a  la  mesure  de
l’homme – mais qui se refermait sur l’homme. Non, si le langage de ces pays
`  ́  ́ s’accordait a ce qui r esonnait profond ement en moi, ce n’est pas parce qu’il
 ́ `  ́ r epondait a mes questions, mais parce qu’il les rendait inutiles. Ce n’ etait pas
ˆ ` des actions de gr aces qui pouvaient me monter aux l evres, mais ce Nada qui
ˆ  ́  ́ n’a pu na ıtre que devant des paysages ecras es de soleil. Il n’y a pas d’amour de
 ́ vivre sans d esespoir de vivre. ( Ess , 44 )
(What struck me then was not a world made to measure for man – but one
which closed in on man. No, if the language of these countries harmonised with
what sounded deeply within me, it was not because it answered my questions,
155
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
but because it rendered them superfluous. It was not a prayer of thanks that
came to my lips, but the Nada that could only have originated in a country
crushed by the sun. There can be no love of life without despair at life.)
Noces went unnoticed in mainland France. L’Etranger , on the other hand,
published in Paris in 1942 , was an immediate success, thanks largely to an
‘Explication de L’Etranger ’ published by Jean-Paul Sartre in the Resistance
22 periodical Les Cahiers du Sud of February 1943 . For some it was a brilliant
updating of the French novel’s concern with moral issues; for others a defence
of individualism; while yet others read in it an antidote to the guilt, grey-
ness and self-flagellation imposed on a defeated population in Vichy France.
Sartre’s article, and the publication in December 1942 of Camus’s Mythe
de Sisyphe , swept the novel up in the rising enthusiasm for the ‘Absurd’,
an interpretation reinforced by the stark, unrelenting evocation of existen-
tial  angst  driving  the  plays  that  Camus  completed  at  that  time, Caligula
and Le Malentendu . For all of these readings, the spatial setting of the novel
(the colonial arena), recognised as central by today’s reader, remained largely
undiscussed, no doubt because Algiers and the surrounding countryside were
23  ́ merely familiar elements of a sunny French coastal d epartement , and the
lives described were banal, working-class, indeed resolutely unremarkable.
As  for  the  hero’s  crime,  the  text  itself  reflects  ironically  on  the  fact  that
the killing of an Arab is devoid of interest and might make the pages of the
metropolitan press only because their correspondent was filling in time while
awaiting the trial of a parricide ( TRN , 11 85 – 6 ). Today, on the contrary, we
cannot escape the institutionalised violence of that colonial situation, and
when the hero pumps five bullets into the inert body of an anonymous Arab
found occupying the cool space that he had been seeking, it is the challenge to
the beach’s protected status that Meursault confronts, and the stasis lyrically
 ́ evoked in Noces that he disrupts: ‘l’ equilibre du jour, le silence exceptionnel
`  ́  ́ d’une plage o u j’avais et e heureux’ ( TRN , 1168 ) (‘the harmony of the day,
the exceptional silence of a beach where I’d been happy’).
When, in 1959 , Robert Champigny launched a reading of L’Etranger freed
from  the  philosophising  interpretation  prevalent  since  Jean-Paul  Sartre’s
‘Explication’, he convincingly portrayed the protagonist as a ‘pagan hero’.
He was, no doubt, responding to the ‘saveur un peu barbare’ (‘slightly bar-
barian flavour’) that Gabriel Audisio privileged in his own novels and that
Camus foregrounds in the first part of an early essay, ‘Amour de vivre’ ( 1936 ),
24  ́ ` and throughout ‘L’Et e a Alger’ ( 1937 – 8 ). The eschewal of the convention-
ally moral in the face of natural abundance was central to the sexualised lyri-
 ́ ` cism of everyday life evoked in Noces – ‘une pr ecipitation a vivre qui touche
au gaspillage’ ( Ess , 72 ) (‘an appetite for life that borders on wastefulness’).
156
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
It was reasserted in the amicable mockery to which Camus subjects Oran in
the 1939 essay ‘Le Minotaure ou la halte d’Oran’ (published in 1954 ); and
it is encapsulated in a unique moment in L’Etranger where the opacity of
the hero, steadfastly maintained via the subject’s muteness and the ritualised
verbosity of the legal system, is fleetingly penetrated: ‘mes besoins physiques
 ́ d erangeaient souvent mes sentiments’ ( TRN , 11 72 ) (‘my physical needs often
got in the way of my feelings’).
One of the key roles of Part i of the novel is, precisely, the illustration of
the extent to which, in both lifestyle and attitude, the protagonist is indistin-
guishable from the spontaneous, uncomplicated, European barbares devoid
of self-awareness (a ‘peuple sans esprit’), but devoted to sensual satisfac-
tion. These are the people who, Camus’s early essays avow, populate the
25 colony. Meursault’s singularity thus lies more in his reticence than in his
much-discussed amoralism. Such a representation is in marked distinction to
the energetic, conquering heroes of the Algerianist novel who are portrayed
as hard-working, self-sacrificing agents engaging directly, often aggressively,
in  France’s  appropriation  of  Algerian  land  and  wealth.  The  much-hyped
passivity,  laissez-aller  and  indifference  of  the  shipping-office  clerk  Meur-
sault ensure that he can be read as untouched by this colonial economy. His
actions were thus often read by critics merely in terms of psychology (antiso-
cial apathy) or of the philosophy of the Absurd (lucidity in the face of societal
illusion). But to seek no further than this interpretation is to be complicitous
in eliding the political, hence perpetuating the erasure which, for instance,
allows for only European witnesses during the trial (thus marginalising both
the victim and his sister).
To complete the picture, we need to recognise that the hero of L’Etranger ,
in both his (in)action and his perceived inarticulateness, is also the embod-
iment  of  Camus’s  counter-claims  regarding  ‘Mediterranean  man’,  fore-
grounded in characterisations like those referred to earlier. Every episode
detailed in Part i of L’Etranger , located outside the world of work (a sim-
ple backdrop evoked only via summary or incongruous detail), conforms to
this model. Hence, in Part ii , when cogitation and memory replace physi-
cal pleasure and immediacy, the hero’s position is grounded explicitly in the
loss of what Camus called in his Rivages article the few perishable, essen-
 ́ tial things (‘ces quelques biens p erissables et essentiels’ ( Ess , 1330 )) that give
ˆ life a meaning: ‘Par exemple, l’envie me prenait d’ etre sur une plage et de
descendre vers la mer’ ( TRN , 1180 ) (‘For example, I would have the urge to
be on a beach and to go down to the water’); ‘J’ai dit qu’il y avait des mois
ˆ que je regardais ces murailles . . . Peut- etre, il y a bien longtemps, y avais-je
 ́ cherch e un visage. Mais ce visage avait la couleur du soleil et la flamme du
 ́  ́ d esir: c’ etait celui de Marie’ ( TRN , 1209 ) (‘I said I had been looking at these
157
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
walls for months. Perhaps, way back, I had looked for a face in them. But
that face was the colour of the sun and the flame of desire: it was Marie’s’).
This awareness, acquired in prison, derives from the fact that he is now fully
conscious of the inanity of regretting what is no longer accessible, since he
is motivated, on the contrary, by that appetite Camus identified as essen-
tially Mediterranean: ‘je n’avais jamais pu regretter vraiment quelque chose.
 ́ J’ etais toujours pris par ce qui allait arriver, par aujourd’hui ou par demain’
( TRN , 1197 ) (‘I had never really been able to feel remorse for anything. I was
always caught up in what was about to happen, caught up in today or tomor-
row’). When desire is forestalled, as the closing paragraph shows, a ship’s
 ́  ́ siren announces only ‘des d eparts pour un monde qui maintenant [lui] etait
`  ́ a jamais indiff erent’( TRN , 1211 ) (‘departures for a world to which [he] was
now forever indifferent’). Camus’s hero thus confronts (and learns from) the
 ́  ́ truth that the seafaring jeunesse m editerran eenne of his friend and colleague
Audisio had been able to evade, the moment when closure is imposed on an
individual ‘project’ (to adopt Sartre’s term), lived until then as the freedom
` encapsulated in the central Audisian topos referred to earlier: ‘ a toute heure,
 ́ le plaisir du d epart’ ( Hommes au soleil ,p. 62 ) (‘at any moment, the pleasures
of departure’).
The famous a-literary language of L’Etranger , what Roland Barthes called
26 a ‘zero degree of writing’, and the apparent existential uninvolvement of
its hero, mask at first reading this continuity between the novel and Camus’s
lyrical, highly personal, pre-war writing. Its colonial Algerian background
continued to attract little comment until the 1970 s, when the critic Conor
Cruise  O’Brien  subjected L’Etranger to  an  overtly  political  reading.  Yet
O’Brien, in the opinion of a leading postcolonial critic like Edward Said, let
Camus off the hook by granting him a less implicated position ‘on the fron-
27 tiers of Europe’ and ennobling him as the ‘voice of Western consciousness’.
If the reader is to take at face value the hero’s claim that he is ‘absolument
comme tout le monde’ ( TRN , 11 73 ) (‘just like everyone else’) – another rare
insight into his make-up parsimoniously inscribed in the text – then it is
no longer merely as Everyman, in the universalising reading propagated by
many critics. More concretely, it is in his status as ‘colonial man’ that his
self-confessed indistinguishability (hence, problematically, his representativ-
ity) resides. The limits of the much-discussed introspection and lucidity of
Part ii are thus endowed with a collective significance, signalled in two ways
in the text. Firstly, in the hero’s failure to understand the transformation of
 ́ the mundane ‘qualit es d’un homme ordinaire’ ( TRN , 11 96 ) (‘the qualities of
28  ́ an ordinary man’) into ‘des charges ecrasantes contre un coupable’ ( ibid .)
29 (‘crushing accusations against a guilty man’). And secondly, in the narra-
tive’s reticence regarding the hostility born of unwanted European–Muslim
158
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
proximity in Part i . In the second part of the novel, the language of assess-
` ment and reason – ‘j’ai compri s...pour la premi ere fois . . . je peux dire
 ́ que . . . le fond de sa pens ee, si j’ai bien compris . . .’ (‘I understood . . . for
the first time ...Icansay that . . . his argument, if I understood him cor-
rectly . . .’) – overlies the language of physicality, need and desire – ‘j’avais
 ́ chaud...j’avais envie de dormi r...j’avais envie de serrer son epaule
par-dessus sa rob e...’(‘I felt hot . . . I felt like sleepin g...Iwanted to
squeeze her shoulder through the dress’). It announces the stages at which
the genial, unthinking and seemingly passive pleasure-seeker of an Algiers
shipping office is forced into self-reflexive consciousness, yet maintains his
stance of detachment. The manuscript of the novel shows that Camus took
great pains to ensure that his protagonist is condemned not for the (seem-
ingly incidental) killing of an Arab, but for unselfconsciously parading that
attitude of self-satisfied, animal banality (a lack of so-called spirituality peri-
odically denounced in mainland France and, indeed, by colonial intellectuals
themselves when in collective self-flagellating mode). It is on this egotistical,
all-consuming taste for life, emphatically foregrounded in Camus’s 1937 lec-
ture, that Meursault’s closing outburst is founded, in outspoken defiance of
30 State and Church (in)justice. But there is no place in that valorised model
for European–Muslim co-existence and equality, and while ‘il est toujours
 ́ int eressant d’entendre parler de soi’ ( TRN , 11 95 ) (‘it’s always interesting to
hear people talk about you’), there is clearly no interest in talking or hearing
about the victim. Indeed, the protagonist himself concludes that ‘on a beau-
 ́ ˆ coup parl e de moi et peut- etre plus de moi que de mon crime’ ( ibid .) (‘a lot
was said about me, and perhaps more about me than about my crime’).
Camus’s protagonist is characterised more by inattentiveness and confu-
sion, partly as a result of physical discomfort, partly because he has not
(yet) transcended the complacent immediacy he shares with the European
community. In highlighting details in an otherwise depersonalised space in
 ́  ́ which he feels superfluous (‘petit bruit continu de papier froiss e, eventails
`  ́ de paille, costume neuf, bouton de cuivre, l evre inf erieure toujours un peu
 ́ gonfl ee’ ( TRN , 1187 , 1190 , 11 91 )) (‘a continuous low rustling sound, fans
of woven straw, a new suit, a brass collar stud, the little pout of her lower
lip’), the text underlines the extent to which the consciousness of the hero is
focalised on the concrete, the present, the everyday. Camus’s novel, seemingly
in gestation by 1938 , should thus be read in relation to the cultural move-
ment he defined in Rivages , later (somewhat misleadingly) labelled the ‘Ecole
 ́ d’Alger’: ‘un mouvement de passion et de jeunesse [qui] est n e sur nos rivages’
(‘a passionate and youthful movement born on our shores’), marked by ‘une
 ́ barbarie harmonieuse et ordonn ee’ (‘a harmonious and ordered barbarity’)
31 ( Ess , 1330 – 1 ). The childish games played on the street with Emmanuel or in
159
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
the sea with Marie, the absence of ambition and, above all, his apathy, thus
signal a significant reorientation of the colonial hero, positioning Meursault
outside the materialistic economy of the colony, but still within its biased
race relations.
By valorising only the hedonistic ‘jeunes dieux’ (‘young gods’) and ‘bar-
bares’ of this ‘Mediterranean’ settler community, Camus nevertheless forged
an icon for post-war Europe: ‘la jeunesse du monde se trouve toujours autour
ˆ  ́  ́ des m emes rivages . . . [N]ous autres m editerran eens vivons toujours de la
 ́ ˆ `  ́ m eme lumi ere. Au cœur de la nuit europ eenne, la pens ee solaire, la civilisa-
 ́  ́ tion au double visage , attend son aurore’ ( L’Homme r evolt e ( Ess , 703 ); my
emphasis) (‘the world’s youth is always to be found on the same shores . . .
[We] Mediterraneans always live by the same light. In the depth of the Euro-
pean night, solar thought, a double-faced civilisation, awaits the dawn’).
Much critical attention has been paid to the notion of dualism in Camus’s
work, a dualism in which, like Audisio, he privileges lucidity, the awaken-
ing from routine, into the existential (but ahistorical) awareness discussed
 ́ earlier: ‘il n’y a pas d’amour de vivre sans d esespoir de vivre’ ( Ess , 44 ) (‘there
can be no love of life without despair at life’), and its ethical consequence:
ˆ ˆ ‘Ce n’est plus d’ etre heureux que je souhaite, mais seulement d’ etre con-
scient’ ( Ess , 49 ) (‘I no longer wish to be happy, merely to be conscious’).
The contrasting, seemingly less spontaneous style of Part ii of L’Etranger
articulates this evolution, the ‘aventure intelligente’ (‘intelligent adventure’)
of Camus’s hero, leading to his consciously embracing the ‘vie absurde [qu’il]
 ́ avait men ee’ ( TRN , 1210 ) (‘the absurd life he had led’). The pleasures of life
as a free man, the illusion that survival is possible or that others can be made
to understand, the struggle between instinct and intelligence, each is sloughed
off in turn until the hero comes face to face with the truth – with which he
32 had seamlessly coincided in Part i . Lucidity here, in other words, brings
consciousness of the outsiderness proclaimed in the novel’s title, allowing
Meursault to get beyond the danger inherent in convention, in ‘la vie sociale
 ́ ˆ [qui] risque...d’en faire un pantin d epourvu d’ ame’ (‘social life, which
33 risks . . . turning him into a soulless puppet’). In the enforced immobility
of incarceration, Camus’s hero thus reaches the limits of lucid self-awareness
and self-fulfilment (in a radical alternative to Algerianist values): ‘Moi, j’avais
 ́ ˆ ˆ l’air d’avoir les mains vides. Mais j’ etais s ur de moi, s ur de tout . . . Oui,
 ́  ́ je n’avais que cela. Mais du moins, je tenais cette v erit e autant qu’elle me
tenait’ ( TRN , 1210 ) (‘It looked as though I was empty-handed. But I was
confident, about me, about everything. Yes, that was all I had. But at least I
had a hold on this truth just as much as it had a hold on me’).
In the opinion of the French Algerian novelists of the interwar years, the
trait which best categorised their work was ‘muscular’ writing, the reflection
160
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
of a tough, no-nonsense people who, in the words of Louis Bertrand, had
learned to ‘become barbarians again’, and hence could only view with dis-
dain what they had long derided as the effeminate, intellectual output of
34 metropolitan France. In marked contrast to that literary trend in the colony,
in an article published in Confluences in 1943 , Camus voiced his admiration
for the ‘classical’ French novel (of Mme de Lafayette, Stendhal and Proust
` for instance) in which he saw ‘une conception particuli ere de la force’ ( TRN ,
1897 ) (‘a very particular concept of strength’), later defined as an intense,
unwavering concentration on a certain conception of man that intelligence
seeks to highlight via a limited number of situations ( TRN , 1898 ). In his con-
clusion, this conception is identified with an ideal site where the forces of des-
tiny come up against human choice ( TRN , 1900 ). In this perspective the idea
of virility that he holds up as a model to contemporary readers is ‘l’exercice
 ́ sup erieur d’une intelligence qui n’a de cesse qu’elle domine’ ( TRN , 1902 )
(‘the higher exercise of an intelligence which strives until it overcomes’), not
the animal energy deployed, often destructively, in the works of his Algerian
contemporaries. In 1950 , however, he noted that his own work to date did
not actually conform to the model he admired since he had created only
ˆ  ́ ‘des etres sans mensonge, donc non r eels. Ils ne sont pas au monde. C’est
` pourquoi sans doute et jusqu’ici je ne suis pas un romancier au sens o uon
ˆ  ́ ` l’entend. Mais plut ot un artiste qui cr ee des mythes a la mesure de sa passion
et de son angoisse’ ( C ii , 325 ) (‘beings who harbour no lies, hence are not
real. They are not part of the world. And that, no doubt, is why to date I am
not a novelist as commonly understood. Rather, an artist who creates myths
to suit his passion and his anguish’).
That the hero of L’Etranger should have become an iconic figure of the
second half of the twentieth century can, no doubt, be largely attributed
to  myth’s  ability  to  serve  as  vehicle  for  the  zeitgeist  or  world  view  of  a
generation. The tragic (and supposedly Mediterranean) hedonism eulogised
by critics is lodged in an unlikely champion whose ambition is to get through
the working week competently so that he can enjoy the resolutely banal
pleasures of the weekend. To be frustrated by him, as readers often are, is
to believe that there is (should be) more to life. Yet the values promoted in
L’Etranger , and in the early essays, are resolutely grounded in the tangible
and the visible, ‘jouissance’ (‘pleasure’) in a world in which transcendence is
 ́ mere illusion – ‘les fureurs de l’ eternelle adolescence’ (‘the unbridled forces
of  eternal  adolescence’),  as  Camus  was  to  write  later  in  an  unused  page
 ́  ́ for L’Homme r evolt e ( Ess , 1658 ). Hence, perhaps, their resonance for the
post-war period, attracted by the overt amorality and by the inarticulate,
un-thought-through challenge to fixed positions and orthodox perspectives
enacted by the protagonist. In writing La Peste ( 1947 ), Camus was at pains to
161
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
confront the moral consequences of that stance, countering solipsism with
`  ́  ́ social conscience: ‘il n’y [a] pas de honte apr ef erer le bonheur. “Oui, dit
` ˆ Rambert, mais il peut y avoir de la honte a etre heureux tout seul” ’ ( TRN ,
1389 ) (‘there is nothing shameful about preferring happiness. “True,” said
Rambert, “but there can be something shameful about being the only one
who is happy” ’).
In identifying himself as ‘an artist who creates myths’ rather than a con-
ventional novelist, Camus is pointing to an alternative writing strategy, the
importance  of  which  is  perhaps  best  revealed  in  a  little  text  of 1952 on
Herman Melville, whom Camus praises as a creator of myths, indeed of a
single, all-consuming quest myth ‘construit . . . sur le concret, non dans le
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́ mat eriau du r eve . . . [C]hez Melville le symbole sort de la r ealit e, l’image
ˆ na ıt de la perception’ ( TRN , 1909 – 10 ) (‘based . . . on what is concrete, not
on the stuff of dreams . . . In Melville the symbol grows out of reality, the
image springs from perception’). That this description also fits Camus’s own
approach becomes clear when we relate it to a ‘dialogue’ included in his
Carnets of 1942 , triggered by contemporary reviews of L’Etranger : ‘Vous
ˆ  ́  ́ me pr etez l’ambition de faire r eel. Le r ealisme est un mot vide de sens . . .
` S’il fallait donner une forme a mon ambition, je parlerais au contraire de
symbole’ ( TRN , 1933 ) (‘You maintain that I strive for the real. Realism is
a word devoid of meaning . . . If I had to articulate my ambition, I would,
on the contrary, talk about symbols’). The advantage of symbols, one might
argue, is that they constitute nodes of resistance to readings seeking closure
and, on the contrary, embrace the polysemy which encourages a constantly
renewed engagement with the text. It is in this spirit that the present reading
is proposed, a reading which reinserts L’Etranger into the colonial Algerian
 ́  ́  ́ context out of which it developed, and into the problematic m editerran eit e
evoked  in Noces ,  metaphor  for  the  reworked  European–Muslim  contact
zone in which Camus and ‘Ecole d’Alger’ colleagues like Gabriel Audisio
hoped a spirit of fraternity and exchange would reshape the colony’s always
insecure frontiers.
NOTES
 ́  ́ 1 . Jeune M editerran ee , 1 (April 1937 ); in Ess , 1321 – 7 .
2 .  For  details,  see  P.  Dunwoodie, Writing  French  Algeria (Oxford,  Clarendon,
1998 ).
3 .  Louis Bertrand, Preface to Le Sang des races (Paris, Ollendorf, 1899 ), xiii.
4 .  Louis Lambert, in La Revue des deux mondes (December 1921 ), 488 .
5 .  The attack by Gabriel Audisio, Camus’s friend and fellow writer, was no less
 ́ direct: ‘Parmi les provocations de la latinit e il faut ranger ce que j’appelle le
 ́  ́ `  ́ pr ejug e favorable, a savoir que Rome a toutes les vertus, tous les m erites, a tout
162
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

From Noces to L’Etranger
 ́ ˆ invent e, qu’on lui doit tout, et que tout ce qui nous para ıt bien dans le monde, c’est
`  ́ a Rome qu’il faut l’attribuer sans h esitation’ ( Le Sel de la mer (Paris, Gallimard,
1936 ), p. 96 ) (Among the provocations generated by the Latin idea one has to
include what I call positive bias, namely the idea that Rome has every quality,
every merit, invented everything; that we owe it everything; and that everything
we find worthwhile in the world has to be attributed unhesitatingly to Rome).
6 .  This assertiveness again matches Audisio’s bluntness in Le Sel de la mer where
he insists: ‘Le monde ne commence pas avec Rome, et il ne finit pas avec Rome.
 ́  ́  ́  ́ La M editerran ee non plus. Et la M editerran ee n’est pas Rome’ (p. 101 ) (‘The
world did not start with Rome, and it doesn’t end with Rome. Nor does the
Mediterranean. And the Mediterranean is not Rome’).
`  ́ 7 .  In his notes Camus refers to ‘Le Vent aDj emila’ as ‘the essay on ruins’ ( C i , 47 ).
8 .  In  one  of  the  only  reviews  of Noces to  appear  in  France  ( OFALAC , 1939 ),
Gabriel Audisio highlighted ‘a sensitivity and a spirit of meditation which give
North African writing a new accent’, Lottman, Albert Camus. A Biography (New
York, Braziller, 1980 ), p. 194 .
9 .  The villes solaires also explicitly counter the villes d’or (‘cities of gold’) frequently
 ́ evoked by Bertrand; see in particular Les Villes d’or: Alg erie et Tunisie romaines
(Paris: Fayard, 1921 ).
10 .  See  Jean  Grenier, Albert  Camus.  Souvenirs (Paris,  Gallimard, 1968 ).  Grenier
noted in particular that Camus was especially sensitive to ‘la passion du soleil’
 ́  ́ (‘passion  for  the  sun’), Inspirations  m editerran eennes ,p. 30 .  See  also  Toby
Garfitt’s discussion of Grenier in chapter 2 .
11 .  See, for example, Gilles ( 1939 ) and Ecrits de jeunesse ( 1941 ).
12 .  See Camus’s student friend Max-Pol Fouchet, Un jour, je m’en souviens . . .
 ́  ́ M emoire parl ee (Paris, Mercure de France, 1968 ), p. 43 .
 ́ 13 .  Gabriel Audisio, Hommes au soleil ( 1923 ), H eliotrope ( 1928 ) and, most directly,
 ́  ́ Jeunesse de la M editerran ee ( 1935 ) and its second volume, Le Sel de la mer ( 1936 ).
14 .  A typical source of influence in this area for Camus would have been Gabriel
 ́ Audisio.  See,  for  example,  Audisio, Hommes  au  soleil  Le  Mouton (Maupr e,
blanc, 1923 ), p. 62 .
15 .  Gide, for instance, was well aware of the political significance of the displacement
effected by Audisio.
16 .  The insistence on youth, seemingly unremarkable in texts of the 1930 s which
privilege beauty, vitality, and the body, furthers this escapist perspective since
youth is without a past and hence without historical responsibility.
17 .  The selective nature of place in Camus’s lyrical essays is best exemplified by
ˆ contrasting  it  with  a  novel  like Fant omes  au  soleil (Paris,  Gallimard, 1949 ),
written by his demythologising contemporary and friend, Jean-Pierre Clot.
 ́  ́ 18 .  Jean Sarocchi, ‘La M editerran ee est un songe, Monsieur’, Perspectives. Revue de
 ́  ́  ̈  ́ l’Universit eh ebra ıque de J erusalem 5 ( 1998 ), 109 – 29 ( 111 ).
 ́ ` ˆ  ́ 19 .J.L evi-Valensi, ‘Terre faite a mon ame: pour une mythologie du r eel’, Perspectives
5 ( 1998 ), 185 – 97 ( 186 ).
 ́  ́ 20 .  F. Bartfeld, ‘Anti-M editerran ee et lyrisme de l’exil’, Perspectives 5 ( 1998 ), 213 – 25
( 213 ).
 ́  ́  ́ 21 .  See also M. El Houssi, ‘Camus ou le d esir de M editerran ee’, Africa, America,
 ́ Asia, Australia 15  3 ), 29 – 39 ;N.St ephane, ‘La Mer heureuse’, Europe 77 ( 199
(October 1999 ), 132 – 44 ; R. Davison, ‘Mythologising the Mediterranean: The
163
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

peter dunwoodie
Case of Albert Camus’, Journal of Mediterranean Studies 10 . 1 – 2 ( 2000 ), 77 –
92 .
22 .  ‘L’Explication’ was reprinted in Situations i (Paris, Gallimard, 1947 ), pp. 99 –
122 .  For  an  English  translation,  see  ‘Camus’s  “The  Outsider”’,  in  Jean-Paul
Sartre, Literary and Philosophical Essays , trans. Annette Michelson (New York,
Criterion Books, 1955 ), pp. 24 – 41 .
23 .  Algeria was already a holiday destination with an English-language newspaper,
and home to British and French artists’ colonies.
 ́  ̈ 24 .  R. Champigny, Sur un h eros pa ıen (Paris, Gallimard, 1959 ).
25 .  See TRN , 11 86 , 1188 , 11 95 , 11 96 , 1197 , 1199 .
 ́  ́  ́ 26 .  R. Barthes, Le Degr ez ero de l’ ecriture (Paris, Seuil, 1953 ).
27 .  E. Said, Culture and Imperialism (London, Vintage, 1994 ), p. 209 . See also C.
Achour, L’Etranger si familier (Algiers, EnAP, 1984 ). Although Camus’s personal
political involvement in the 1930 s and 1950 s has been comprehensively studied,
it is occasionally still subject to grossly inflated claims like that of Denis Charbit
 ́  ́ in ‘Camus et l’ epreuve alg erienne’ where he is given star status as ‘one of the
first, if not the first French Algerian to draw attention to colonial exploitation
and oppression’, Perspectives 5 ( 1998 ), 157 – 81 ( 160 ).
28 .  A figure the French call ‘Monsieur Tout-le-monde’.
29 .  The issue of guilt in a colonial context, both moral and historical, is treated at
length in Le Premier Homme .
30 .  See C i , 29 – 30 for the importance attributed to this passage.
31 .  The oxymoron shows that barbarie has actually been resemanticised by Camus.
Audisio’s position is remarkably close to Camus’s: ‘quand l’Afrique vous reprend,
elle vous enseigne qu’il ne fallait pas lui demander d’autre style que la vie, d’autre
ˆ  ́ ˆ  ́ tradition que d’ etre , d’autre race que la beaut e des races m el ees’ ( Le Sel de la
mer ,p. 18 ) (‘when Africa seizes you again it teaches you that one should have
asked for no other style than life itself, no other tradition than being , no other
race than the beauty of mixed races’).
32 .  The  instinct/intelligence  tension  is  one  of  the  ‘ambivalences’  Camus,  Audisio
and the Berber poet Jean Amrouche identified as constituents of the ‘Mediter-
ranean spirit’ at a conference in Paris in 1947 – along with action/meditation,
 ́  ́ balance/violence. Camus also makes it a central pole of L’Homme r evolt e : ‘La
 ́  ́ ` ` M editerran ee, o u l’intelligence est sœur de la dure lumi ere’ ( Ess , 702 – 3 ) (‘The
Mediterranean,  where  intelligence  is  the  sister  of  the  hard  light’).  In Ulysse
ou  l’intelligence Audisio  sees  dualism  as  an  essential  factor,  inflecting  their
writings  through  tensions  such  as  Romanticism/Classicism,  euphoria/despair,
material pleasure/the call of the spiritual.
33 .  Camus, L’Express , April 1957 .
 ́  ́ 34 .  See Louis Bertrand, ‘Nietzsche et la M editerran ee’, La Revue des deux mondes
25 ( 1915 ), 181 – 2 . The main targets of the French Algerian novelists were Gide
and Proust.
164
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

12
MARGARET E. GRAY
Layers of meaning in La Peste
`  ́  ́  ́ ‘Deuxi eme  s erie:  le  monde  de  la  trag edie  et  l’esprit  de  r evolte’  ( C i , 229 )
(‘Second series: the world of tragedy and the spirit of revolt’) ( N i , 193 ),
wrote Camus in April 1941 , and the scattered notes and sheets of what was
to become La Peste acquired further shape and context. Having completed
the cycle of ‘the Absurd’, in a France torn by war and enemy occupation,
Camus  had  for  some  time  been  convinced  that  ‘Si  ignoble  que  soit  cette
ˆ guerre, il n’est pas permis d’ etre en dehors’ ( C i , 167 ) (‘However vile this
war may be, no one can stand aside from it’ ( N i , 139 )). Such a conviction is
at work throughout Camus’s second cycle, which includes La Peste ( 1947 ),
 ́  ́ ` the essay L’Homme r evolt e ( 1951 ) and the plays L’Etat de si ege ( 1948 ) and
Les Justes ( 1949 ). In keeping with this cycle’s exploration of tragedy and
revolt, La Peste chronicles the imprisonment, exile, oppression and suffering
experienced by the citizens of Oran when a plague strikes. Yet the novel also
dramatises the victory of human spirit and solidarity over that which would
threaten and dismember it: a plague, an enemy occupation, existence itself.
In alluding to such varied forms of oppression, Camus asserted, referring to
his experience of the German occupation: ‘Je veux exprimer au moyen de la
 ́ ` peste l’ etouffement dont nous avons tous souffert et l’atmosph ere de menace
 ́ et d’exil dans laquelle nous avons v ecu’ ( C ii , 72 ) (‘I want to express by means
of the plague the stifling air from which we all suffered and the atmosphere of
threat and exile in which we lived’ ( N ii , 53 )). Yet, he went on – announcing
the text’s various layers of meaning and their dynamic oscillation between
event and abstraction, literal and figurative meaning, chronicle and allegory –
ˆ  ́  ́ ` ‘Je veux du m eme coup etendre cette interpr etation a la notion d’existence
 ́  ́ en g en eral’ ( C ii , 72 ) (‘I want at the same time to extend that interpretation
to the notion of existence in general’ ( N ii , 53 )). These strata of meaning are
also emphasised in the novel’s epigraph from Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe : ‘Il est
 ́ ` aussi raisonnable de repr esenter une esp ece d’emprisonnement par une autre
 ́  ́ que de repr esenter n’importe quelle chose qui existe r eellement par quelque
chose qui n’existe pas’ ( TRN , 1215 ) (‘It is as reasonable to represent one
165
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

margaret e. gray
kind of imprisonment by another, as it is to represent anything that really
1 exists by that which exists not’). An exhortation to read La Peste on various
levels, it argues for the legitimacy of representing one sort of imprisonment
by another – and for concluding, ultimately, with Rieux’s elderly patient in
the novel’s closing pages, ‘Mais qu’est-ce que c ̧a veut dire, la peste? C’est la
` vie, et voil a tout’ ( TRN , 1472 ) (‘But what does that mean – “plague”? Just
life, no more than that’ ( P , 295 )).
The ‘imprisonment’ with which the Defoe epigraph opens La Peste is thus
a  central  experience  in  the  novel,  as  is  its  attendant  condition,  solitude.
Indeed, ‘Tous’, wrote Camus in 1942 of the characters in what was to become
 ́  ́ ` La Peste , ‘sont renvoy es a leur solitude. Si bien que la s eparation devient
 ́  ́ `  ́ ` g en erale . . . Faire ainsi du th eme de la s eparation le grand th eme du roman’
( C ii , 80 ) (‘All are forced into solitude, so that separation becomes the general
condition . . . Make the theme of separation the main theme of the novel’
( N ii , 60 , translation modified)). We quickly notice the isolation of each of
the main characters within a certain irremediable solitude. The departure of
Dr Rieux’s wife in the novel’s opening pages only seems to emphasise the
distance that inhabits the couple; putting her on the train to the mountain
retreat they hope will bring a cure to her illness, Rieux promises they will
make a fresh start upon her return ( TRN , 1225 ; P , 8 ). The secretive Cottard
perversely revels in the plague’s extension of his own solitude and isolation
to  all  citizens  of  Oran,  while  the  outsider  Tarrou  finds  in  the  plague  an
image for his own solitary moral convictions. City-clerk Grand is haunted
by his failure to retain the wife he loved, and journalist Rambert yearns for
his far-away mistress. Along with such feelings of solitude and separation
come, necessarily, those of exile, of a loss of home and rootedness: feelings
Camus himself must have known keenly in the summer of 1942 when, having
returned to Oran from France in 1941 to live with his wife Francine, he again
fell ill with the tuberculosis that had dogged him since his teenage years,
obliging him to leave Algeria for a retreat near unoccupied St Etienne, France,
in the hope of restoring his health. However, the Allied landings in North
Africa just a few months later and the subsequent occupation of all of France
by the German army essentially closed contact with France’s North African
colonies. Communication between Camus and Francine became tenuous and
sporadic. ‘Il y a des mois que je suis sans nouvelles de toi’ (‘I’ve been without
news of you for months’) wrote Camus to her soon after the Liberation
2 of France. For the Algerian-born Camus himself, then, solitude in France
became inextricably experienced as exile, and we notice that one of the early
 ́ titles he considered for his novel was Les Exil es ( The Exiles ); indeed, the title
 ́ he gave the excerpt published in Domaine franc ̧ais in 1943 was ‘Les Exil es
dans la peste’ (‘The Plague and its Exiles’) ( TRN , 1959 – 67 ).
166
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Layers of meaning in La Peste
Camus’s own experience of physical and emotional exile during the war is
evoked in the novel through the ordeal of journalist Rambert. He becomes
an exemplary victim of Oran’s closed gates, for, separated from his mistress
and home in Paris, his imprisonment is also an exile – and as such, typifies
the emotional exile experienced by all citizens of Oran separated from loved
ones. Such exile brings the sting of memories of a former life that may or
may not have any link to a possible future ( TRN , 1276 ; P , 67 ). Bereft of
fond connection to a remembered past or a future invested with hope, Oran’s
citizens are stranded in an endless present: ‘il n’y avait plus pour nous que des
instants’ ( TRN , 1367 ) (‘nothing was left us but a series of present moments’
( P , 175 )).
The divestiture of past and future, however, is only the beginning of the
plague’s  progressive  destruction,  as  even  within  the  wastes  of  an  eternal
present, communication among citizens falters. Struggling to express his own
solitary and singular anguish in carefully wrought language that nonethe-
less, however, fails to reach his fellows ( TRN , 1280 ; P , 72 ), each prisoner
of the plague discovers new extremes of solitude. For under the coercion of
common speech, obliged to communicate ‘sur le mode conventionnel, celui
de la simple relation et du fait divers, de la chronique quotidienne’ ( TRN ,
1280 ) (‘using the current coin of language, the commonplaces of plain nar-
rative, of anecdote and of daily event’ ( P , 72 , translation modified)), Oran’s
citizens are forced to convey their suffering through banality and convention
as the price of communication. The language with which, like Rambert, one
seeks urgently to communicate the singularity of one’s own experience – the
differences of one’s own case – is flattened to a common coin, to a neutral,
conventional ‘chronique’.
Intriguingly, however, the narrator – Dr Rieux, as we only discover in the
final pages – here uses the precise term he gives his own account in his effort
to provide an impartial rendering of collective experience. And through this
overlapping use of ‘chronique’, we are implicitly invited to consider the cost
borne by the narrator’s account: the price in silencing and suppressing indi-
vidual expression so as to favour Rieux’s deliberately collective and historical
testimony. Rieux’s chronicle itself, in privileging the collective over the per-
sonal, represents a deliberate choice in favour of solidarity, the experience
of the group over the experience of the individual. Yet, again, his additional
use of ‘chronique’ to imply the flattening, the emptying, of authentic human
contact under the impact of the plague, implicitly invites us to appreciate all
that his own ‘chronique’ excludes.
Alongside  the  generalised  flattening  of  communication  imposed  by  the
 ́ plague – the reduction of human contact to lame clich e – we might notice
other examples of strained or failed communication in the novel. There is, for
167
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

margaret e. gray
instance, the endlessly rewritten opening line of Grand’s unwritten novel. His
obsessive and stalled effort to launch his trotting horsewoman into her May
morning is undoubtedly connected to his original failure to find the words
that would have kept his wife, Jeanne, with him ( TRN , 1286 ; P , 78 ). When
letters are banned as potential bearers of infection, Rambert invites Rieux
to make use of his own system of clandestine correspondence. Yet Rieux
discovers difficulty in writing to his wife, as though he had somehow lost the
language he needed ( TRN , 1431 ; P , 250 ). Increasingly, the plague coerces
the imprisoned citizens of Oran into silence, as without recourse to letters,
 ́ they are forced to collapse all sentiment into the choppy clich es of telegrams:
` ‘Vais bien. Pense a toi. Tendresse’ ( TRN , 1274 ) (‘Am well. Thinking of you.
Love’ ( P , 65 , translation modified)).
We notice that such telegraphic density and restraint finds an analogue in
Rieux’s chronicle, with its own restraint, its evenness, its understatedness. In
his opening lines, Rieux suggests that the events he is about to recount are a
bit out of the ordinary. Such measured tones, for so extreme a catastrophe,
lend further nuance to Rieux’s deliberately collective chronicle, suggesting
additional reasons for his choice to omit all personal experience. As we saw
above, Rieux implicitly invited us to recognise the omission of this experience
– and indeed, tacitly, the impoverishment of his account as a result. But we
begin to have a sense that this omission is perhaps more complicated than
we had realised; we wonder whether Rieux has not imposed such objective
conditions upon his chronicle in an effort to avoid the danger of ‘infection’
by excess and sentiment. We are not surprised to notice his somewhat stiff
mention, in describing a jubilant Oran at the end of the plague, of embracing
couples  ‘qui  ne  craignaient  pas  de  se  donner  en  spectacle’  ( TRN , 1464 )
(‘who were unafraid of making a spectacle of themselves’ ( P , 287 , translation
modified)).
And yet, this same no-nonsense approach becomes a weapon against the
plague, as we see in Rieux’s efforts to persuade the authorities to take more
 ́ decisive measures. When Rieux succeeds in forcing the Pr efecture to call a
meeting at the plague’s onset, all present at last agree on the need to act
 ́ ‘comme si la maladie etait une peste’ ( TRN , 1259 ) (‘as though the epidemic
were plague’ ( P , 49 )). In irritated irony, Rieux flings their own squeamish,
hypothetical language back at the assembled doctors and Prefect, doubling
negatives to end with a terse and terrifying possibility: ‘Disons seulement
 ́ que nous ne devons pas agir comme si la moiti e de la ville ne risquait pas
ˆ  ́ d’ etre tu ee, car alors elle le serait’ ( TRN , 1259 ) (‘My point is that we should
not act as if there were no likelihood that half the population wouldn’t be
wiped out; for then it would be’ ( P , 49 )). And Rieux’s demands for direct-
ness of language and action are ultimately adopted in the curt governmental
168
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Layers of meaning in La Peste
 ́  ́ telegram closing Part i of Rieux’s chronicle, ‘D eclarez l’ etat de peste. Fermez
la ville’ ( TRN , 1269 ) (‘Proclaim a state of plague Stop close the town’ ( P , 61 )).
Such directness, however, while initially a means of combating the plague,
becomes yet another sobering symptom of its crushing effect on all commu-
nication. Human expression is reduced to the groans and cries of victims,
which become, for Oran’s oppressed and hardened citizens, a sort of natural
or normal language ( TRN , 1310 ; P , 107 ). Ultimately, human exchange is
 ́ ` splintered into silence as Oran is reduced to ‘une n ecropole o u la peste, la
pierre et la nuit auraient fait taire enfin toute voix’ ( TRN , 1359 ) (‘a necropo-
lis in which plague, stone and darkness had effectively silenced every voice’
3 ( P , 166 )).
As an ultimate image of this coercion into silence, suffocation becomes
a  central  symptom  of  the  plague’s  victims.  The  context  of  Camus’s  own
respiratory illness allows us to appreciate more keenly La Peste ’s images of
asphyxiation, as Camus saw in his own visceral, corporeal experience of suf-
focation an analogy to life under the German occupation. While in the United
States in 1946 , he writes, amidst impressions of his travels, ‘ Peste : c’est un
monde sans femmes et donc irrespirable’ (‘ Plague : a world without women
4 and thus unbreathable’). Images of asphyxiation proliferate in such a world,
as symptoms of the plague ( TRN , 1234 ; P , 17 ); as the hushed and desperate
pleas of the living ( TRN , 1395 ; P , 206 ); as the muffled footfalls in a silenced
city ( TRN , 1369 ; P , 178 ); as the stifling sky and air ( TRN , 1397 ; P , 208 )
that seal the prison of Oran. Consequently, of course, the ability to breathe
marks resistance to the plague; it is one of the first symptoms of recovery
from the fever, and marks rare moments of respite, as in Rieux’s fraternal,
wordless  swim  with  Tarrou  –  where,  strangely  happy,  Rieux  breathes  at
length, listening to Tarrou’s own breathing ( TRN , 1429 ; P , 246 ). Ultimately,
ˆ dwindling fatalities indicate that ‘enfin il allait etre permis de respirer’ ( TRN ,
1441 ) (‘finally one was going to be allowed to breathe’ ( P , 259 , translation
modified)), in a densely figural as well as literal use of the image.
Yet  suffocation  is  only  one  symptom  endured  by  the  plague’s  victims;
beyond such silencing, the plague carries out a dismembering of the body,
both the body physical and the body politic. Indeed, the plague’s histrionic
 ́ ` ‘ ecart element’, or drawing-and-quartering, of the suffering body becomes
itself emblematic of a dislocated social order. Victims of the disease evoke,
through their disjointed limbs, ‘une attitude de pantin’ ( TRN , 1230 ) (‘a clock-
work doll’ ( P , 14 )); as the disease progresses, however, the various symptoms
 ́ `  ́ map an ‘ ecart element int erieur’ ( TRN , 1249 ) (‘internal dismantling’ ( P , 37 ,
translation modified)). Extending the image of dismemberment, Paneloux –
who, in an initial sermon, had argued that the plague was divine retribution
for loss of faith – pronounces a second sermon, this one under the impact of
169
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

margaret e. gray
the death of Othon’s son. In it, he emphasises the suffering of children and
the need to face such ‘dismemberment’ of meaning as faith’s ultimate chal-
lenge, a moment of truth in which one is called to ‘tout croire ou tout nier’
( TRN , 1402 ) (‘believe everything or deny everything’ ( P , 214 )). Exhorting
a dwindled congregation to remain within the scandal and contradiction of
 ́ ` such dismantled meaning, Paneloux urges fidelity to ‘cet ecart element dont
la croix est le symbole’ ( TRN , 1402 ) (‘that great symbol of all suffering,
the tortured body on the cross’ ( P , 214 )). Indeed, Paneloux’s own contorted
body, discovered half-thrown from his deathbed after a mysterious illness
that may or may not have been the plague, would itself seem to remain
faithful, in its very posture, to the tortured body on the cross. Ambiguously,
however, we are not told whether or not he is found still to be clutching
his crucifix, as he had throughout the fever ( TRN , 1410 ; P , 223 ). Despite
his exhortations, Paneloux thus embodies a faith that, under the impact of
 ́  ́ the suffering of innocents, becomes itself shaken, ‘ ecartel e’; and we are not
surprised to learn that in an earlier version of the episode, Paneloux lost his
5 faith altogether.
 ́ ` Extending the image of ‘ ecart element’ to the body politic, we notice the
plague’s dislocation of social health, signalled by the narrator’s opening indi-
 ́ ` cation that the events he is about to recount ‘n ’... etaient pas a leur place’
( TRN , 1219 ) (‘were out of place’ ( P , 1 )). The proper place and position of
civic order is emphasised in the narrator’s observation that until the clos-
` ing of the city, each citizen had pursued his occupations ‘ a sa place ordi-
naire’ ( TRN , 1273 ) (‘in his ordinary place’ ( P , 63 , translation modified)).
 ́ Under the plague, however, ‘tout se d etraquait’ ( TRN , 1324 ) (‘everything
was breaking down’ ( P , 125 , translation modified)). Such social dislocation
is particularly visible in the deterioration of burial decorum imposed by the
escalating numbers of plague victims. So as to evade a decency it can no
longer accommodate, the city decides to bury victims at night. In a climactic
image of the social and corporeal dismemberment wrought by the plague,
ambulances rush back and forth in burlesque haste, piled ever higher with
ˆ ˆ contorted bodies to be dumped into mass graves. ‘On enterra p ele-m ele, les
 ́ uns sur les autres, hommes et femmes, sans souci de la d ecence’ ( TRN , 1362 )
(‘this last remnant of decorum went by the board, and men and women were
flung into the death-pits indiscriminately’ ( P , 169 )) runs Rieux’s description
of the scene’s macabre, dislocated puppetry.
So gruesome and histrionic a spectacle of the drawn and quartered body,
both corporeal and social, recalls Camus’s dramatic designation for his sec-
 ́ ond cycle as that of ‘trag edie’. For we have become increasingly aware of
the strain between Rieux’s resolutely measured, documentary account and
the tragic spectacle or drama produced by the plague. Such strain is perhaps
170
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Layers of meaning in La Peste
particularly visible in the description of Rieux’s ‘calm’ reaction to his wife’s
death, announced by telegram: indeed, a reaction so composed that Rieux
himself attempts to justify it, framing his explanation, however, with the
` ambiguous ‘sans doute’ (‘no doubt’): ‘Voil a pourquoi, sans doute, le docteur
Rieux, au matin, rec ̧ut avec calme la nouvelle de la mort de sa femme’ ( TRN ,
1459 ) (‘That, no doubt, explains Dr Rieux’s composure on receiving next
morning the news of his wife’s death’ ( P , 280 )). In the middle of his narra-
tion, Rieux reminds us of his effort to avoid ‘les effets de l’art, sauf en ce qui
 ́  ́ ` `  ́ concerne les besoins el ementaires d’une relation a peu pr es coh erente’ ( TRN ,
1365 ) (‘artistic effect, except those elementary adjustments needed to present
his narrative in a more or less coherent form’ ( P , 173 )). Yet, given the signifi-
cant dramatic value of the events he recounts, we are only too acutely aware
of the rising tension between such drama and the narration’s neutrality and
restraint. Indeed, despite his claims, Rieux’s measured account betrays, in
various ways, efforts to convey the drama of all he witnessed.
Rieux’s chronicle of the onset, rise, triumph, decline and disappearance
of the plague is neatly divided, for instance, into five parts. Himself a play-
wright, author of the plays Caligula , Le Malentendu and Les Justes , as well
as  of  theatrical  adaptations  from  the  Spanish,  French,  English  and  Rus-
sian, Camus was only too deliberately structuring his novel according to
the five acts of classical tragedy. Moreover, such tragic undertones acquire
explicit dramatic force and impact when Cottard and Tarrou attend a perfor-
 ́ mance of Gluck’s tragic opera, Orph ee et Eurydice . Elegant citizens of Oran
exchange greetings as they take their seats, intent not to miss their cues in
unwitting performances in the auditorium itself; for, playing urbane roles of
suave self-delusion in a drama more desperate, more compelling than that
onstage, spectators delude themselves that ‘l’habit chassait la peste’ ( TRN ,
1381 ) (‘evening dress was a sure charm against the plague’ ( P , 189 , trans-
lation modified)). Yet this spectators’ drama and its illusion of normalcy
is exploded, brought down as suddenly and decisively as the singer playing
 ́ Orph ee himself; for, overcome by the plague during the third act, he collapses
grotesquely, taking the stage sets with him, before the horrified spectators.
This  eruption  of  an  explicit,  classical  tragedy  –  that  of  Orpheus  and
Eurydice – within the plague’s own tragic events provides a particularly visi-
ble illustration of dramatic forces at work within Rieux’s narration. We might
read such drama in terms of Camus’s own vision for La Peste as a text of
revolt, for, between the lines of Rieux’s tautly controlled cadences, we sense
his effort to convey the essential triumph of the human spirit. It is through this
triumph, despite suffering and loss, that the spirit of revolt among Oran’s
citizens becomes clear – and we begin to understand the purpose, despite
his explicit claims to the contrary, of the drama with which Rieux endows
171
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

margaret e. gray
certain episodes of his narration. There is, for example, the long, detailed
description of Tarrou’s illness and death: a passage we read in agonising
suspense, torn between what we know of the plague’s deadliness, and its
rare, capricious clemency. In this passage, Rieux’s characteristic restraint, as
he describes his powerlessness, yields to metaphor in an image of Tarrou’s
 ́  ́ body disappearing from his grasp: ‘Cette forme humaine qui lui avait et e
 ́  ́ ˆ  ́ si proche, perc ee maintenant de coups d’ epieu, br ul ee par un mal surhu-
` main, tordue par tous les vents haineux du ciel, s’immergeait a ses yeux dans
les eaux de la peste et il ne pouvait rien contre ce naufrage’ ( TRN , 1457 )
(‘This human form, his friend’s, lacerated by the spear-thrusts of the plague,
consumed by searing superhuman fires, buffeted by all the ravaging winds
of heaven, was floundering under his eyes in the dark flood of the pesti-
lence, and he could do nothing to avert the wreck’ ( P , 277 )). The image of
Tarrou’s body sinking in the ‘waters’ of the plague before Rieux’s eyes is all
the more ironic and resonant when we recall the ‘waters’ of their swim, with
its wordless communion, friendship and solidarity. Indeed, the sea has always
offered a backdrop to their friendship; Rieux’s desire to confide in Tarrou
occurs as he looks through the window at the vague and distant sea ( TRN ,
1323 ; P , 123 ), while Tarrou similarly chooses, as the setting for confiding
in Rieux, a rooftop terrace with a view of the indistinct ‘palpitation’ where
sea and sky meet ( TRN , 1419 ; P , 234 ). It is the context of this friendship
implicitly embraced by the sea that lends further pathos to the ‘shipwreck’ of
Tarrou’s body. ‘Il ne pouvait rien contre ce naufrage’, Rieux tells us, speak-
ing of course, as we increasingly suspect, of himself. ‘Il devait rester sur le
rivage, les mains vides et le cœur tordu, sans armes et sans recours, une fois
 ́ de plus, contre ce d esastre’ ( TRN , 1457 ) (‘He could only stand, unavailing,
on the shore, empty-handed and sick at heart, unarmed and helpless yet
again under the onset of calamity’ ( P , 277 )). For all the mastery and control,
the restraint and discipline of Rieux’s narrative, for all the healing he is able
to accomplish, he nevertheless remains vulnerable, human and thus one of
us: confronting circumstances that overwhelm and engulf him, but to which
he refuses to succumb.
Rieux’s narration also tends elsewhere towards the dramatic, as in the
account  of  Rambert’s  ultimate  decision,  the  very  evening  of  his  planned
escape, to stay and fight the plague. When Rambert goes to see Rieux, we
presume  it  is  to  inform  the  doctor  that  his  escape  will  be  carried  out  at
midnight; but we discover only in the episode’s closing line that Rambert
has in fact already cancelled the plan so as to join the ranks of the sanitary
teams.  We  have  in  Rambert’s  stunning  reversal  a  resounding  demonstra-
tion of solidarity, rendered all the more apparent precisely through the dra-
matic shape with which Rieux endows the episode. In answer to the question
172
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Layers of meaning in La Peste
Tarrou asks Rambert at midnight, the hour planned for his escape – as to
whether Rambert has informed his would-be liberators of his decision to stay
 ́ in Oran – Rambert turns his head. ‘J’avais envoy e un mot, dit-il avec effort,
avant d’aller vous voir’ ( TRN , 1390 ) (‘“I’d sent them a note” – he spoke
with an effort – “before coming to see you” ’ ( P , 200 )). Rambert’s admission
is the episode’s closing line, which lends it yet further weight and drama. It
is through subtly dramatic story-telling of this sort that Rieux emphasises
the victory of human solidarity. For as Rambert explains, ‘il peut y avoir de
` ˆ la honte a etre heureux tout seul’ ( TRN , 1389 ) (‘it may be shameful to be
happy by oneself’ ( P , 199 )). Rambert’s dramatic choice in favour of solidarity
over his own happiness emblematises Oran’s response to the plague. For at
Tarrou’s initiative, citizens organise themselves into teams, fighting the dis-
ease as best they can, and counting among their ranks members as different
as Paneloux and Judge Othon; the exhausted Grand spends evenings devot-
ing his clerical skills to the cause. In yet another example of the solidarity
with which the city responds to the plague, and to which his chronicle tes-
tifies, Rieux points to the stunning fact that throughout the epidemic, there
was never a shortage of nurses and grave-diggers, despite their greater risk
of infection ( TRN , 1362 ; P , 170 ).
We might now distinguish two countervailing movements in La Peste .On
the one hand, there is the effective collapse of the human carried out by the
plague in its asphyxiation and dismemberment of the physical and social
body, its pull ‘du fond de la terre’ ( TRN , 1234 ) (‘from the depths of the
earth’ ( P , 19 )) of the human into oblivion. On the other hand, there is the
narration’s resistance to such oblivion through the implicit dramatisation,
the spectacle or staging, of this tragedy in five acts. These two movements,
the  movement  towards  effacement  and  the  movement  towards  spectacle,
converge in the death scene of Judge Othon’s son. In a searing reprise of
the dramatic scene at the Opera House in Oran, where Tarrou and Cottard
 ́ were spectators to the unplanned drama of Orph ee’s collapse, Rieux and
Tarrou now become unwilling spectators to the drawn-out drama of the
child’s  death:  ‘l’agonie  d’un  innocent’  ( TRN , 1394 )  (‘the  death-throes  of
 ́ ` an innocent child’ ( P , 205 )). The child’s ‘ ecart element’ – or drawing and
quartering, as we have seen in Rieux’s recurring term for the plague’s effect
upon the body – is recounted in stark detail as he is shaken by the plague’s
typically dismembering, convulsive movements: the agitation and stiffening
of his body by turns; the curling up and flinging open of limbs; the claw-
like hands; the long inhuman plaint. Ultimately, the child’s skeletal body
 ́ assumes the pose of a ‘crucifi e grotesque’ ( TRN , 1394 ) (‘a grotesque parody
of crucifixion’ ( P , 205 )). This dramatisation of the plague’s crushing and
dismembering, its drawing-and-quartering of this most innocent of beings
173
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

margaret e. gray
in a sacrificial crucifixion, prompts Rieux’s only outburst in the narrative,
`  ́ flung at Paneloux: ‘Ah! Celui-l a, au moins, etait innocent, vous le savez bien!’
( TRN , 1396 ) (‘Ah! That child, anyhow, was innocent – and you know it as
well as I do!’ ( P , 207 )). Rieux’s revolt against the plague’s meaningless evil
summarises and expresses our own reaction.
And such protest involves crying out, like Rieux, against oppression. The
human voice persists, emerging from the plague’s carnage and oppression,
resisting the plague’s effort to silence it. There is Rieux’s own voice itself, with
ˆ its testament to solidarity: ‘pour ne pas etre de ceux qui se taisent’ ( TRN ,
1473 ) (‘so that he should not be one of those who hold their peace’ ( P , 296 )),
explains Rieux of his decision to recount Oran’s ordeal. Grand’s immobilised
narrative ultimately renews and regenerates itself in his letter to Jeanne, a
letter begun further down on the manuscript’s final page: a gesture towards
responsibility and apology, an opening on to a possible reconciliation, after
`  ̈ years of distance and silence: ‘Ma bien ch ere Jeanne, c’est aujourd’hui No el’
( TRN , 1434 ) (‘My dearest Jeanne, today is Christmas Day’ ( P , 253 )). Sterile
and stalled narration thus transforms itself, becoming apostrophe, address,
direct action – its tortured starts and stops, its hesitation and immobility
yielding at last to the promise of movement. Yet, convinced he is dying of the
plague, Grand demands that the manuscript be burned; equally convinced
that Grand is lost, Rieux complies, throwing the manuscript into the fire. But
Grand improbably recovers, and the dashed promise of change, bearing its
possibility of a new beginning with Jeanne, is restored: ‘Ah! Docteur . . . j’ai
eu tort. Mais je recommencerai. Je me souviens de tout, vous verrez’ ( TRN ,
1435 ) (‘Yes, doctor ...Iwas over-hasty. But I’ll make another start. You’ll
see, I can remember every word’ ( P , 254 )).
Similarly, Tarrou’s voice would seem to be lost to the plague, suffocated,
cruelly, as one of its last victims; yet Rieux, like Grand, ‘remember[s] every
word’ ( P , 254 ), and quotes Tarrou at length within his chronicle. The dif-
ferent  discourse  brought  to  Rieux’s  account  through  Tarrou’s  confession
offers  a  perspective  unavailable  to  Rieux’s  resolutely  historical  depiction
of a collective event. For Tarrou’s voice offers a moral and metaphorical
view of the plague that counterbalances not only Paneloux’s initial lacer-
ating claim for the plague as divine retribution, but Rieux’s own account
as a strictly historical chronicle of ‘curious events’ ( P , 1 ). Originally, Rieux’s
insertion of Tarrou’s notebooks within his own account appeared potentially
to offer a rival chronicle, though Rieux appears careful to consign Tarrou’s
notes to ‘secondary’ importance, suggesting that they offer ‘une foule de
 ́ d etails secondaires qui ont cependant leur importance’ ( TRN , 1236 ) (‘a host
of secondary details which yet have their importance’ ( P , 22 , translation
modified)).  Such  care  to  relegate  Tarrou’s  notebooks  to  secondary  status
174
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Layers of meaning in La Peste
is significantly absent, however, from Rieux’s subsequent account of Tar-
rou’s confession. Tarrou’s monologue, moreover – initiated by Tarrou with
 ́ his question to Rieux, ‘Voulez-vous que cette heure soit celle de l’amiti e?’
( TRN , 1419 ) (‘Would you like this to be a moment of friendship?’ ( P , 235 ,
translation modified)) – would not seem immediately pertinent to Rieux’s
resolutely collective chronicle. Quoted at such length that it appears entirely
to overtake Rieux’s own account, usurping it for a rival purpose, Tarrou’s
confession instead opens up for the reader a dimension Rieux had explicitly
refused in his adoption of an objective, chronicler’s voice.
In directing the reader to the plague’s symbolic importance through Tar-
rou’s confession, Rieux subtly integrates within his chronicle the allegory to
which he himself refuses all allusion. For, recounting the shock of his dis-
covery that his fairly ordinary father, a magistrate, regularly requested the
death penalty in the courtroom, Tarrou describes his resolution to refuse all
that brings death, for whatever reason ( TRN , 1425 ; P , 242 ). Suggesting that
we are all complicit in the death of innocents, Tarrou asserts that we must
nonetheless fight any force that brings death; and this includes maintaining
vigilance, as well, against the potential each of us carries within ourselves
for infection by such a plague, whatever form such evil might take. Tarrou
describes the moral loneliness of his struggle, explaining that he knows he
` `  ́ ` has no place in today’s world: ‘ a partir du moment o u j’ai renonc e a tuer,
 ́ `  ́ je me suis condamn e a un exil d efinitif’ ( TRN , 1426 ) (‘once I’d definitely
refused to kill, I doomed myself to an exile that can never end’ ( P , 243 )). By
quoting Tarrou at length, Rieux implicitly invites us to read Oran’s ordeal
symbolically, as Tarrou himself does; in this way, Rieux’s resolutely factual
chronicle allows us access to the multiple layers of meaning that may be read
into the plague.
Given these traces of strain within Rieux’s chronicle – the tension between
the singularity and pathos of the individual’s (including Tarrou’s) experience
of the plague and Rieux’s effort to provide an objective, historical chronicle,
his conviction that he should speak for all ( TRN , 1469 ; P , 291 ) – it is strik-
ing that he chooses to conclude with an account of one citizen for whom he
could not speak, the maddened Cottard firing on the crowd. Rieux’s own
explanation for his choice to close his chronicle in this way is characteris-
tically neutral, even enigmatic: ‘Il est juste que cette chronique se termine
` sur lui qui avait un cœur ignorant, c’est- a-dire solitaire’ ( TRN , 1469 ) (‘It is
fitting that this chronicle should end with some reference to that man, who
had an ignorant, that is to say lonely, heart’ ( P , 291 )). Rieux’s choice soberly
emphasises the persistence of an undomesticated solitude despite his own
experience of all that is noble, beautiful and resilient in human solidarity.
And the presence of such perversion, scandalous to Rieux’s demonstration,
175
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

margaret e. gray
prepares his sober conclusion, following the description of a jubilant Oran:
solidarity’s victory can never be definitive, for the plague might always return
( TRN , 1473 – 4 ; P , 297 ). La Peste thus warns us that the solitary and scan-
dalous heart is always ready to awaken, like the plague, to test and threaten
the collective. Solidarity’s victory is at best fragile, as Rieux, listening from
within Oran’s closed gates to the ‘terrible powerlessness’ of far-away radio
voices of solidarity ( TRN , 1332 ; P , 134 ), had already realised: powerless
voices perhaps suggestive, on a deeper level, of the essential fragility of even
the most robust human solidarity.
Despite Rieux’s sober conclusion; despite critical objections to the absence
6 of indigenous, Algerian voices and experiences in the novel; despite Camus’s
 ́ own despairing conviction, in 1946 , ‘je trouve ce livre manqu e’ (‘I feel this
7 book is a failure’); it was immensely successful upon its publication in 1947 ,
8 selling 22 , 000 copies in just two weeks. Its success has never waned. To
date, over five million copies have been sold, in some thirty languages. As
Camus  himself  asserted  to  Roland  Barthes  in 1955 ,  the  movement  from
9 L’Etranger to La Peste is that from solitude to solidarity. In a France strug-
gling to emerge from the trauma, humiliation and deprivation of World War
II, Rieux’s account of the triumph of human solidarity over oppression, the
resistance of such solidarity to any evil that would destroy it, brought wel-
come solace and encouragement. Camus was to go on to develop the theme
 ́  ́ of revolt in his essay L’Homme r evolt e , published in 1951 .In La Peste , how-
ever, as early as 1947 , we already need to imagine Sisyphus no longer merely
happy (as Camus argues in Le Mythe de Sisyphe ), but in revolt against all
that would crush, suffocate and dismantle the human.
NOTES
1 .  The epigraph to La Peste is taken from the preface to Volume iii of Daniel Defoe’s
Robinson Crusoe .
2 .  Albert  Camus,  Letter  to  Francine  Camus, 31 August 1944 .  Quoted  in  Olivier
Todd, Albert Camus, une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ), p. 501 .
3 .  The effort to resist such oppression, to speak out against that which would impose
silence, was Camus’s own, as journalist and ultimately editor of the Resistance
newspaper Combat during the German occupation of France.
4 .  Albert Camus, Journaux de voyage , ed. Roger Quilliot (Paris, Gallimard, 1978 ),
p. 42 .  English  translation  (modified)  is  by  Hugh  Levick,  from  Albert  Camus,
American Journals (New York, Paragon House, 1987 ), p. 45 .
 ́ 5 .  Raymond Quilliot, ‘“La Peste”: Pr esentation’ ( TRN , 1942 ). Pointing to the ‘Cas
douteux’ (‘Questionable Case’) diagnosis on Paneloux’s death certificate, Edward
Hughes extends this ambiguity to Paneloux’s shaken faith; the uncertain pathology
of Paneloux’s death thus represents ‘a final irony in the case of the once uncom-
promising preacher who had traded so happily in theological certainties’, Albert
176
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Layers of meaning in La Peste
Camus: Le Premier Homme/La Peste (Glasgow, University of Glasgow French
and German Publications, 1995 ), p. 69 .
6 .  Conor Cruise O’Brien, among other critics, has pointed to the absence of indige-
nous voices and experiences in La Peste in his Albert Camus of Europe and Africa
(New York, Viking, 1970 ).
7 .  Albert Camus, Letter to Patricia Blake, 8 July 1946 , quoted in Todd, Albert Camus ,
p. 569 .
8 .  Todd, Albert Camus ,p. 603 .
9 .  Albert Camus, Letter to Roland Barthes, 11 January 1955 ( TRN , 1973 – 5 ).
177
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

13
DAVID R. ELLISON
Withheld identity in La Chute
Following upon four years of near silence after the controversy with Sartre
in Les Temps modernes surrounding the disputed philosophical claims of
 ́  ́ L’Homme r evolt e , the publication in 1956 of La Chute dispelled any prema-
ture notion that Camus might have lost his considerable talents and intellec-
tual relevance as a writer. In a tightly structured imaginative fable centred
in an examination of human duplicity remarkable for its mixture of lucidity
and ferocious wit, Camus made his return to centre stage both assertive and
enigmatic. Of all Camus’s texts, and in contradistinction to the outspoken
straightforward presentation of Le Premier Homme which was to follow
it, La Chute is the most resistant to our understanding as readers, for two
essential reasons: ( 1 ) it is highly personal; its rhetorical mode is that of a
monological confession; and ( 2 ) it eludes our grasp by alluding to numerous
other works of literature in the Western tradition, from the Bible through
Dante to Dostoyevsky, to such a degree that we have difficulty separating lev-
els of meaning in an effort to attain the work’s semantic core. Of all Camus’s
texts, La Chute has generated the broadest diversity of critical readings pre-
cisely because of the apparently uncontrollable multiple meanings that inhere
1 within its personal and allusive potential.
Plot, structure, themes
For readers familiar with the evolution of Camus’s work until 1956 , La Chute
contains a number of surprises. The most striking of these is the setting of
the novel – which is no longer the sun-infused landscape of North Africa, but
the fog-enveloped watery horizon of Holland. Drawing in part on his own
remembrances of a short trip to The Hague and Amsterdam in October 1954
and in part on literary and cultural artefacts, Camus chose to place the action
of his ironical narrative in a location that represented for him the antithesis
of the stark geographical and aesthetic sobriety he found dominant in the
Mediterranean world. Inevitably, the reader who comes to La Chute with a
178
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Withheld identity in La Chute
 ́  ́ clear memory of L’Homme r evolt e and especially of its lyrical conclusion on
 ́ the notions of ‘mesure’ (‘measure’, ‘moderation’) and ‘pens ee solaire’ (‘solar’
or enlightened thought) will find in the setting of the novel – a tobacco- and
gin-filled sailors’ bar in the red-light district of Amsterdam – a conscious and
studied reversal of the values Camus had sought to define in his philosophical
treatise of 1951 . In the simplest of definitions, we say that irony is a figure
of speech whereby one says the opposite of what one means: in the case of
La Chute , it would seem that the entirety of the text is ironical, in that it
says the opposite of what Camus had asserted in a philosophically discursive
 ́  ́ mode in L’Homme r evolt e .
At a first level, it is possible to see in La Chute a belated and textually
 ́  ́ complex ‘reading’ of L’Homme r evolt e in which Camus, instead of criticis-
ing modern man for not recognising his limits and for denying his double
nature as beast and moral being, creates in the novel’s duplicitous protagonist
an alter ego who revels in unlimited self-indulgence and in the inauthentic
proclamation of his essential superiority. Whereas in the final pages of his
philosophical treatise Camus had stated that all equivocal language, every
misunderstanding could lead to violence and death, that ‘le langage clair, le
mot simple, peut seul sauver de cette mort’ ( Ess , 687 ) (‘only clear language,
the  simple  word,  can  save  us  from  this  death’),  in  his  novel  he  portrays
an anti-hero whose language is consistently ambiguous, whose ironical cir-
cumlocutions weave a dizzying and obscuring web around the notions of
innocence and justice that lie, tantalising in their near-absence, at the centre
of the text.
Unlike La Peste , in which the voice of Dr. Rieux was that of a chron-
icler speaking in the name of his fellow citizens, La Chute is constructed
as a dialogue in which only one voice is heard, as a dialogue that may be
the imaginary projection of one monomaniacal consciousness. The chatty
protagonist calls himself Jean-Baptiste Clamence and introduces himself to
his silent interlocutor with polite ceremony in an Amsterdam bar exotically
named ‘Mexico-City’. As a whole, the narrative is a chronologically com-
plicated, unfolding development on the career and personality of Clamence.
The more we read of the novel, the more we know about its protagonist,
the more we understand why a materially successful Parisian lawyer who
enjoyed the admiration of his colleagues and the adulation of his clients
gradually became disillusioned with his profession, lost all self-esteem, and
moved to Amsterdam to become ‘judge-penitent’ in a meeting-place for the
exiled and disinherited of the modern world. In order to gain a preliminary
understanding of La Chute , we need to determine who Clamence is and how
he evolved from his Paris identity to his masked persona at the ‘Mexico-City’.
This task is made difficult by the fact that the narrative as a whole functions
179
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david r. ellison
as a constant and consistent withholding of the protagonist’s identity. Just
as in Nietzsche’s late aphoristic writings a veil does not conceal the truth
but merely another series of veils, in the universe of La Chute a mask seems
2 merely to hide more masks.
The narrative is organised into six chapters of moderate length, each of
which  contributes  cumulatively  to  a  jagged,  fragmented  portrait  of  Cla-
mence. In the first chapter, we meet the protagonist in his bar and discover
him talking to an unnamed interlocutor in the second-person formal form.
When Clamence, in the first sentence of the text, says: ‘Puis-je, monsieur,
ˆ vous  proposer  mes  services,  sans  risquer  d’ etre  importun?’  ( TRN , 1477 )
(‘May I, Monsieur, offer my services without running the risk of intruding?’
( F , 5 )), the reader has the impression that he or she is being addressed; indeed,
Camus has constructed his text in such a way that the ‘you’ ( vous ) to whom
Clamence speaks might be any person who picks up a copy of La Chute .
This impression is dispelled somewhat later on when the interlocutor begins
to assume his own traits of identity and character, when he becomes more
particularised as a specific partner in the dialogue, but it is important to the
dynamic of the novel that the reader be placed in the sometimes uncomfort-
able position of directly participating listener.
In the first two chapters of the novel, the picture Clamence paints of his
past life shows a man in possession of intelligence, wit, charm and just the
right  dose  of  cynicism  for  the  managing  of  a  comfortable  existence  in  a
decadent European capital. Yet at one point in his confident story a chink
in the armour appears: he remembers an evening when, after a particularly
satisfying day, precisely when he had begun to exult in a feeling of power
and domination, he suddenly heard an explosion of inexplicable laughter at
his back ( TRN , 1495 ; F , 30 ). It turns out that the repressed origin of this
laughter occurred some two or three years previously, when he was crossing
the Pont des Arts over the Seine river. Having noticed a lone woman leaning
over the bridge’s parapet, and briefly aware of her sensual charm, Clamence
 ́ continued on his way until he heard ‘le bruit, qui, malgr e la distance, me parut
formidable dans le silence nocturne, d’un corps qui s’abat sur l’eau’ ( TRN ,
1511 ) (‘the sound – which, despite the distance, seemed dreadfully loud in
the midnight silence – of a body striking the water’ ( F , 52 )). Moments later,
he heard a repeated cry that grew gradually fainter, but despite these signs of
distress and of impending disaster, he did not turn around, but regained the
isolated comfort of his Paris apartment. Immediately after the telling of this
central, all-determining event, Clamence and his interlocutor conclude their
evening walk and arrive at the protagonist’s Amsterdam residence, which
the latter describes, significantly, as an abri , or ‘refuge’ ( TRN , 1511 ; F , 53 ).
We begin to understand, at the midpoint of La Chute , that the complex
180
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Withheld identity in La Chute
histrionics of the protagonist are, on one level, a strategy of avoidance: his
verbose assertions of a generalised human guilt constitute an attempt to hide
from his own guilt, which is specific, concrete, and real.
In chapters 4 and 5 , after the account of Clamence’s inaction on the bridge,
we learn how the Parisian lawyer transforms himself into ‘judge-penitent’.
This crucial turn or reversal occurs once Clamence decides that absolute
innocence is an impossibility, that all people are guilty, that even Jesus Christ
falls short of perfection and thereby deserves our forgiveness. As we reach
the end of chapter 5 , Clamence’s remarks become increasingly bitter and
devastatingly ironical:
` D es lors, puisque nous sommes tous juges, nous sommes tous coupables les
` ` `  ́ uns devant les autres, tous christs a notre vilaine mani ere, un a un crucifi es, et
toujours sans savoi r...Dans la solitude, la fatigue aidant, que voulez-vous,
` ` ` on se prend volontiers pour un proph ete. Apr es tout, c’est bien l a ce que je suis,
 ́  ́  ́ ` r efugi e dans un d esert de pierres, de brumes et d’eaux pourries, proph ete vide
 ́  ́ `  ́ pour temps m ediocres, Elie sans messie, bourr edefi evre et d’alcool, le dos coll e
`  ́  ́ a cette porte moisie, le doigt lev e vers un ciel bas, couvrant d’impr ecations des
hommes sans loi qui ne peuvent supporter aucun jugement. ( TRN , 1535 )
Wherefore, since we are all judges, we are all guilty before one another, all
Christs in our cheap way, one by one crucified, always without knowin g...
In solitude and when fatigued, one is inclined, after all, to take oneself for
a prophet. When all is said and done, that’s really what I am, having taken
refuge in a desert of stones, fogs, and stagnant waters – an empty prophet for
shabby times, Elijah without a messiah, stuffed with fever and alcohol, my
back up against this mouldy door, my finger raised towards a threatening sky,
showering imprecations on lawless men who cannot endure any judgement.
( F , 86 )
In the sixth and final chapter, Clamence receives his interlocutor at home,
in the ‘refuge’ of his apartment. Here, he continues his reflections on the
generalised guilt that envelops humankind in the century of world wars and
concentration camps, but now describes that guilt in unmistakably religious
terms, borrowing from Christian imagery for the development of his theories.
At the beginning of the chapter, he alludes to an episode in his past that is
farthest removed from the narrative present – a period during World War II
in which he was interned in a North African prison camp. He explains that
his fellow prisoners, in a desire to create a form of societal order within
their group, elected him their ‘pope’. His role was not only that of prisoner-
representative to the authorities, but also that of leader and exemplar who
incorporated the values of his small society. He assumed his duties playfully
at first, but soon began to take himself seriously. One day, he drank the
181
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david r. ellison
water of a dying comrade, justifying this action to himself as follows: ‘les
autres avaient besoin de moi, plus que de celui-ci qui allait mourir de toute
` fac ̧on, et je devais me conserver a eux. C’est ainsi, cher, que naissent les
 ́ empires et les eglises, sous le soleil de la mort’ ( TRN , 1541 ) (‘the others
needed me more than this fellow who was going to die anyway . . . I had a
duty to keep myself alive for them. Thus, mon cher , empires and churches
are born under the sun of death’ ( F , 93 )). With this episode we learn that
Clamence’s own guilt extends farther into the past than the dramatically
presented bridge sequence. At the same time we discover in his own personal
adventure an allegory of the political process whereby one individual, in
proclaiming his own superiority over others, begins the process of dictatorial
domination.
The Christian imagery introduced by the ironical use of the word ‘pope’
in a context of misery and duplicity is expanded upon in a further develop-
ment in chapter 6 that is fraught with religious symbolism. Clamence asks
his listener to open a cupboard that contains a panel from the Van Eyck
altarpiece called The Adoration of the Lamb . This panel had been stolen in
1934 from the cathedral of Saint-Bavon in Ghent (Belgium), had occupied
a conspicuous place on the walls of the ‘Mexico-City’ for a while, then was
removed to its current location in Clamence’s room. The one panel in the
protagonist’s possession is generally referred to as ‘The Just Judges’: it depicts
famous and morally irreproachable judges on horseback who have come to
admire the Mystic Lamb, who stands in the adjoining centre panel and who
figures the innocence of Jesus Christ. Since the panel of the Just Judges is no
longer in proximity to the Mystic Lamb, Clamence exults in his own private
achievement – which consists of having separated justice from innocence. It
is this separation that allows him to exercise his duplicitous ‘profession’ of
judge-penitent.
Assuming the multiple masks of a false and pretentious penitence, Cla-
mence not only conceals his identity in an only apparently revealing confes-
sional discourse, but also implicates his interlocutor in a game of guilt and
deceit. At the very end of the novel, the protagonist discovers that his listener
is also a Parisian lawyer. What Clamence has been saying throughout his nar-
rative can be considered an echo of what his interlocutor could have said,
and might now say if he decides to accept Clamence’s invitation to confess
his own past guilty actions. The narrative structure of La Chute is circular.
Clamence has related a story that can now be repeated by his listener, who,
in telling his story, can invite another person to confess, ad infinitum. Words
engender more words, and guilt is infinite. At the same time, of course, since
the interlocutor has never spoken in the text, he may be a figment of Cla-
mence’s imagination (the ‘other’ lawyer may be the verbose protagonist’s
182
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Withheld identity in La Chute
own mirror image) – in which case the supposed dialogue collapses into a
ceaseless self-engendering monologue. Doubtless we shall never know which
of these stagings – the monological or the dialogical – is the ‘true’ one, since,
 ́ ˆ as Clamence says (truthfully): ‘il est bien difficile de d em eler le vrai du faux
dans ce que je raconte’ ( TRN , 1537 ) (‘it’s very hard to disentangle the true
from the false in what I’m saying’ ( F , 88 )).
Interpretative Issues
Until now, I have emphasised certain key elements of the novel’s overt narra-
tive organisation and highlighted some of its salient themes. But La Chute is
an enigmatic text that cannot be reduced to simple schemas and that invites
interpretative labour. In what follows, without any pretence to exhaustive-
ness, I shall raise some interpretative issues in three distinct areas: the novel’s
elaborately constructed setting; the unusual (for Camus) preponderance of
religious motifs; and the narrative complexity of La Chute as it compares to
Camus’s previous fictions.
The setting and its connotations
In choosing Amsterdam as the location for La Chute , Camus capitalised on
historical and literary connotations that necessarily surround the city in the
mind of a cultivated European reader. The novelist emphasises two periods
of Amsterdam’s history – its colonial period (the era extending from the sev-
enteenth until the early nineteenth century when Holland administered the
Dutch East Indies) and the years of World War II. In the first case, Camus
reminds us that the commerce linking Holland to the Indies included trade
not just in spices, exotic foodstuffs and aromatic wood, but also in slaves.
When Clamence and his interlocutor take their evening walk through the
city streets, the former points out two ornamental carved heads on a partic-
ularly elegant house: these heads represented ‘Negro slaves’ ( F , 34 ), and the
house belonged to a man who owed his considerable wealth to the selling of
these people. With typical irony, Clamence explains that the only important
difference between the colonial period and our modern age is that our rich
` ancestor had the courage to proclaim directly and emphatically ‘Voil a, j’ai
pignon sur rue, je trafique des esclaves, je vends de la chair noire’ ( TRN ,
1498 ) (‘You see, I’m a man of substance; I’m in the slave trade; I deal in
black flesh’ ( F , 34 )), whereas today the successful entrepreneur has more
liberal views (he will sign manifestos against man’s inhumanity to man), but
institutes the equivalent of slavery in his dehumanising factories.
183
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david r. ellison
Just as one is surrounded by evidence of Amsterdam’s colonial past, by
visual representations of the sins of the City Fathers, in the same way one is
necessarily reminded of the more immediate past – the years of World War
II in which the Jewish population of the city (and of the Netherlands as a
whole) was subject to persecution, deportation and ultimate death in Nazi
prison camps. At the very beginning of his story, Clamence tells us that he
lives in the Jewish quarter of the city ( TRN , 1481 ; F , 10 ), and on several
occasions he uses the terms ‘liquidation’ and ‘clean-up’ ( lessivage ) in alluding
to the tenets of Nazi ideology, whereby the ‘impure’ non-Aryan elements
of European society were to be flushed out of the continent in a massive
‘cleansing’ operation. Naturally, the numerous canals of Amsterdam (a city
often called ‘the Venice of the North’) played a role in Camus’s emphasis on
liquid imagery as such, including the unpleasant metaphors of liquidation
and lessivage .
Water dominates as the single most important symbol in La Chute , not
only through its own connotative potential, but also in its opposition to
other elements and symbols. Thus, when Clamence asserts that the concen-
tric circles of Amsterdam’s canals resemble the circles of Hell, he alludes to
Dante’s Inferno , but replaces the imagery of fire used by the Italian poet
with his own water imagery ( TRN , 1483 ; F , 13 ). Later on in the narrative,
in describing the ‘negative landscape’ of the Zuyderzee with its blending of
grey sky and flat grey sea, the protagonist speaks of ‘un enfer mou’ (‘a flabby
hell’) in which ‘l’espace est incolore, la vie morte’ (‘space is colourless and life
dead’) ( TRN , 1512 ; F , 54 ). Unlike classical Christian emblems of hell, which
rest on the clear illuminating power of flame, Camus’s personal rewriting
of our fallen state accentuates the blurring of boundaries, the mental and
spiritual confusion of the modern human being, who, abandoned by God
and by all transcendence, does not know, in a fundamental sense, where he
or she is. Unlike the Christians, for whom an almighty deity has established
the frontiers of good and evil, and unlike the ancient Greeks, who navigated
 ́ among islands whose ‘ echine sans arbres trac ̧ait la limite du ciel, leur rivage
rocheux tranchait nettement sur la mer’ ( TRN , 1525 ) (‘treeless backbone
marked the limit of the sky and their rocky shore contrasted sharply with
the sea’ ( F , 72 )), the inhabitants of the modern world make their voyage in
liquid imprecision, unaware of all frontiers, unable to find their way against
a nebulous horizon.
Religion
La Chute is unique among Camus’s novels in that it makes consistent use
of a religious vocabulary. In the first place, the name of the protagonist is
184
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Withheld identity in La Chute
Jean-Baptiste Clamence – a double allusion to St John the Baptist, the New
Testament figure who prepares the way for Jesus Christ. Not only is the first
name transparently that of the saint, but the last name, Clamence, plays on
the Latin present participle clamans , meaning ‘crying’, which is to be found
in the legendary expression that describes John’s arduous wanderings and
preachings: vox clamantis in deserto – that is, the voice of one crying in the
wilderness. From the very beginning of the novel, Camus ironically equates
the disabused ruminations of his protagonist with the act of prophecy. But
what separates Clamence from the prophets of the Bible is his own empti-
ness of character, his moral vacancy, as well as the fact that his prophecy
announces nothing concrete or real. There is further irony in Camus’s choice
of Clamence/ clamans as a name for his hero. The epithet of ‘Baptist’ was
chosen for John for obvious and literal reasons: his role was to purify, in the
act of baptism by water, those people who awaited the Messiah. Clamence,
however, is not only impure in a general sense (that is, morally unadmirable),
but the moment at which he could have demonstrated the courage of a gen-
uine moral choice occurs when he does not jump into the water to save a
drowning woman from death. The plunge into water that promises purifi-
cation for the Christian is the plunge not taken by Clamence.
The essential role of Jean-Baptiste Clamence is to reverse the values on
which Christian morality is constructed. Whereas the actions of St John and
Jesus exemplified the notion of agape – that is, brotherly love or charity
wherein all humans demonstrate their essential equality and oneness – the
actions and the mad fantasies of Clamence centre in dreams of power and
domination. Thus, when he imagines his own beheading (in an allusion not
just to the end of L’Etranger , but to the end of the life of St John, whose
severed head was presented on a silver platter by Salome to King Herod), it
is not as a sacrifice in the name of Christian charity, but rather as a devious
method for obtaining the subservient admiration of his ‘public’: ‘Au-dessus
 ́  ́ ` ˆ ˆ du peuple assembl e, vous el everiez alors ma t ete encore fra ıche, pour qu’ils
` s’y  reconnaissent  et  qu’ a  nouveau  je  les  domine,  exemplaire.  Tout  serait
 ́  ́ ` ` consomm e, j’aurais achev e, ni vu ni connu, ma carri ere de faux proph ete qui
 ́ crie dans le d esert et refuse d’en sortir’ ( TRN , 1551 ) (‘Above the gathered
crowd, you would hold up my still warm head, so that they could recognise
themselves in it and I could again dominate – an exemplar. All would be
consummated; I should have brought to a close, unseen and unknown, my
career as a false prophet crying in the wilderness and refusing to come forth’
( F , 107 )).
Clamence’s self-debasement emerges in a strategy of confessional discourse
that aims at the humiliation of his interlocutor. Clamence’s genius consists in
his discovery that one can humiliate one’s opponent at least as effectively by
185
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david r. ellison
beginning below his level as by reigning above it. Penitence as practised by
Clamence is merely a step towards the attainment of judgemental superiority.
The importance of Christian imagery in Camus’s novel begins, of course,
with the title of the volume. In naming his work The Fall , Camus alludes to
the episode in Genesis in which Adam and Eve, the original human inhabi-
tants of Eden, are driven out of their earthly paradise. The Biblical episode
describes the human being’s fall from grace, and his/her fall into the hard-
ships and constraints of life in the natural and social worlds. Camus plays
with the notion of the fall: first, when Clamence, in describing his early,
self-satisfied Paris days, admits: ‘libre de tout devoir, soustrait au jugement
`  ́ `  ́  ́ comme a la sanction, je r egnais, librement, dans une lumi ere ed enique’ ( TRN ,
1489 ) (‘free of any duty, shielded equally from judgement as from penalty,
I freely held sway bathed in a light as of Eden’ ( F , 22 )); later, when the
unknown woman falls from the bridge ( TRN , 1511 ; F , 52 – 3 ); and finally,
when, discovering his own duplicity, Clamence begins to fall, literally and
inexplicably, in public places ( TRN , 1515 ; F , 58 ). In Clamence’s case, falling
relates to the important and pervasive theme of laughter in the novel. To
fall in front of one’s fellow humans is to lose face, to cease being superior
and to become the mere object of someone else’s amusement. Camus recog-
nises that cruelty is never very far from laughter, since both laughter and
cruelty derive from the superiority of one person over another. As Clamence
progresses towards his final status as judge-penitent, he understands that he
can regain his mastery over others by laughing at himself. By becoming a
strategic ironist, by forcing his listener(s) to identify with his narrative, he
eventually reverses the situation and regains control of his staged dialogue. In
his essay ‘De l’Essence du rire’, Baudelaire asserted that Christ never laughed,
that the comical as such, being based on a very non-charitable discrepancy
in power between the person who laughs and the object of his merriment,
3 was therefore ‘Satanic’ in mode. It was Satan, disguised as a serpent, who
caused the fall of humankind. In his use of mordant irony, in his efforts to
undermine innocence and separate it from justice, Clamence aligns himself
with his tortuous predecessor.
Narration
If Camus’s three novels retain the attention of the reading public today, it
is not just because of the ideas they express but also because of their subtle
and appropriate narrative forms. Camus heightened the dramatic tension
of L’Etranger by constructing it symmetrically around three deaths (that of
the protagonist’s mother at the beginning, that of the Arab in the middle of
the story and that of Meursault himself at the end). The central placement
186
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Withheld identity in La Chute
of the murder scene at the beach calls attention to the centrality of the act
within the text; form and content coincide and illuminate each other in this
one theatrical moment. For La Peste , a work that depicts not the struggle of
an individual against his fate but the plight of an entire community, Camus
chose the form of a chronicle in which the personality of the narrator is not
allowed to intervene. What Dr Rieux tells of the epidemic and its effects is
not in his own name, but in the name of Oran’s citizenry. The action of the
novel builds slowly and gradually, and has the overall structure of a five-act
classical tragedy.
In composing La Chute , Camus faced a delicate balancing act. On the one
hand, his protagonist being representative of the excesses and unreason of
our time, the novelist needed to give him free rein to express himself with
appropriate hyperbole. The discourse of Clamence could not appear con-
trolled from the outside lest it lose its power of disorientation and dislocation
of the reader’s sensibilities. On the other hand, however, for an ironical tale
to exercise maximum rhetorical power, it must be tightly constructed and
concentrated in its effects. Camus managed to reconcile these two opposite
demands through an astute manipulation of the text’s formal potential. By
structuring La Chute as a conversation in which only the ‘unhinged’ pro-
tagonist speaks, and by allowing the conversation to seem interminable in
its  labyrinthine  meanderings  as  it  stretches  over  several  days  and  several
landscapes, the author draws his reader into Clamence’s web, into the dizzy-
ing perverse logic of his duplicitous arguments. At the same time, however,
underneath the simple chronological progression of the conversation (from
the initial meeting in the ‘Mexico-City’ through the evening walk in the city
to the excursion on the Zuyderzee to the final meeting in Clamence’s room),
Camus  has  created  a  subterranean  temporal  archaeology  that  the  reader
gradually excavates as he or she moves towards the conclusion of the book.
It is the subtle and complex layering of temporal levels that gives La Chute
its density and that allows the narrative to say so much elliptically.
Although Camus does not intend his novel to be ‘realistic’ or narrowly
mimetic (for this reason, very few specific dates are to be found in the text),
nevertheless he makes it possible for the reader to reconstruct five separate
narrative levels, which I shall designate by number, moving from present to
most remote past:
1 .  Current conversation: the dialogue between Clamence and his interlocu-
tor that begins in the ‘Mexico-City’ one evening and concludes just a few
days later in Clamence’s room. We are in post-war Europe, most likely in
the late forties or early fifties.
187
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david r. ellison
2 .  Clamence’s recent past in Amsterdam: in various rapid allusive comments,
the protagonist relates his early days in the Dutch city and his assumption
of the role of judge-penitent. It is during this period that the Van Eyck
painting appears, first on the wall of the ‘Mexico-City’, then in Clamence’s
apartment.
3 .  Clamence’s life as lawyer in Paris: this period includes the early days of
self-satisfaction as well as the uncomfortable episodes on the bridges of
the city. We can assume that a good part of what is described at this level
occurs immediately after 1945 .
4 .  Clamence’s life in prison camp: this episode takes place during World
War II after 1942 (we know this because the narrator alludes briefly to
the Allies’ occupation of North Africa via ‘Operation Torch’). From this
temporal layer subsists only the one crucial remembrance of Clamence as
‘pope’.
5 .  The theft of the Van Eyck painting: this is an actual historical event that
took place in 1934 (the ‘Just Judges’ panel of the altarpiece was indeed
stolen and its unknown location was a matter of speculation for years).
Clamence is, of course, not the original thief, but is depicted by Camus as
participating in the process whereby the painting remains removed from
its rightful place and hidden from public view.
Like L’Etranger , La  Chute is  constructed  around  a  central  point.  Just
as it is necessary to grasp the importance of the murder scene in the first
novel, in the same way our interpretation of La Chute as an aesthetic whole
will depend on the way in which we read the scene on the bridge in which
Clamence does not act. In a fundamental sense, the dramatic centre of La
Chute occurs at the deepest remove of level three, the original bridge scene
that splits the protagonist’s life into a ‘before’ of unquestioning egocentric
pleasure in a kind of Eden and an ‘after’ of duplicity in the self-chosen role of
judge-penitent. Level five remains outside the essential narrative frame and
relates to level two; level four adds depth to our understanding of Clamence’s
human weakness and lends resonance to the pervasive theme of political
domination, but it does not have the central causative status of the episode
on the bridge.
In a curious way, La Chute appears to be a studied rewriting of L’Etranger .
Both texts centre on an individual, on a central moment in which he acts in
a criminal fashion and on the problem of his guilt and moral responsibility.
In L’Etranger , the entirety of the novel hinges on the murder scene and on
the way in which the reader chooses to judge the protagonist’s involuntary,
dream-like killing of the Arab. In La Chute , the central event is not a violent
188
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Withheld identity in La Chute
action, but a passive avoidance of human intervention. In the eyes of the law
(of society) Clamence would appear to be less guilty than Meursault; after
all, the law does not prescribe that we must jump off bridges to save people
we  do  not  know.  Nevertheless,  the  rhetoric  of  the  text  has  us  believing,
from the very beginning, in the guilt of the protagonist. There is no question
that Clamence is not only guilty of a specific crime of passivity, but that
he incorporates and exemplifies the moral nullity of his time. Between the
writing of L’Etranger and the appearance of La Chute lies World War II –
its violence, its wholesale destruction, its prison camps, its carefully planned
and  plotted lessivages .  Gone  is  the  Romantic  pathos  with  which  Camus
portrayed Meursault as pursued by a blind fate and misunderstood by a
hypocritical society. As he demonstrated in La Peste , evil is not conveniently
located in an exterior social or political entity, but lies dormant within us
all. La Chute moves beyond the sober expository clarity of La Peste and
manifests the ubiquitous presence of evil within logic and within language
itself.
With La Chute , in an explosion of formal and rhetorical brilliance, Camus
wrote his most allusive, most demanding, and most complex work. In his last
completed novel, he diagnosed the ills of the age but offered no solutions, no
prescriptions for an improving of the human condition. In La Chute Camus
 ́ gave literary form to the excesses ( d emesure ) he had criticised in L’Homme
 ́  ́ r evolt e . Unlike the serious philosophical treatise, however, the ironical novel
remains within the foggy confusion of northern climes. Ironically, it may
be that by sinking into this darkness Camus achieved a higher clarity of
perception and judgement than in his nostalgic solar myth of a disappearing
Mediterranean unity.
NOTES
1 .  For  a  subtle  discussion  of La  Chute as  ‘disdainful  confession’  and  as  rhetori-
 ́ cally devious monologue, see Maurice Blanchot, ‘ La Chute : La Fuite’, in L’Amiti e
(Paris, Gallimard, 1971 ), pp. 228 – 35 . For a psychoanalytical approach to the nar-
rator as witness, see Shoshana Felman, ‘Camus’ “The Fall”, or The Betrayal of the
Witness’, in Shoshana Felman and Dori Laub, Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in
Literature, Psychoanalysis and History (New York, Routledge, 1992 ), pp. 165 –
203 . On the literary intertexts of the novel (particularly Dante, Baudelaire and
Dostoyevsky), see F. W. Locke, ‘The Metamorphoses of Jean-Baptiste Clamence’,
Symposium 21 ( 1967 ), 306 – 15 , and David Ellison, ‘Camus and the Rhetoric of
Dizziness: La Chute ’, Contemporary Literature 24 . 3 (Autumn 1983 ), 322 – 48 .On
the importance of Van Eyck’s ‘Just Judges’ panel of The Adoration of the Lamb as
iconic intertext for the novel, see Jeffrey Meyers, ‘Camus’ The Fall and Van Eyck’s
The Adoration of the Lamb ’, Mosaic 7 . 3 ( 1974 ), 43 – 51 , and Margaret Gray, ‘Les
189
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

david r. ellison
` “Juges Int egres” de Clamence: Une lecture psychanalytique de La Chute ’, in Lionel
` Dubois (ed.), Albert Camus entre la mis ere et le soleil (Poitiers, Pont-Neuf, 1997 ),
pp. 73 – 80 .
2 .  For an ironical development on the deluded impulse to unveil the truth, see the
fourth  paragraph  of  the  Preface  to  the  second  edition  of  Nietzsche, The  Gay
Science,  With  a  Prelude  in  Rhymes  and  an  Appendix  of  Songs ,  trans.  Walter
Kaufmann (New York, Vintage Books, 1974 ), p. 38 .
 ́  ́ 3 .  Charles Baudelaire, ‘De l’essence du rire et g en eralement du comique dans les
` arts plastiques’, CEuvres compl etes , ed. Claude Pichois, 2 vols. (Paris, Gallimard
`  ́ (Biblioth eque de la Pl eiade, 1976 ), vol. ii , pp. 525 – 43 .
190
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

14
DEBRA KELLY
Le Premier Homme and the
literature of loss
 ́  ́ Ce qu’ils n’aimaient pas en lui, c’ etait l’Alg erien.
( PH , 31 8 )
What they did not like in him was the Algerian.
( FM , 253 )
The focus of this final chapter will be Camus’s unfinished text Le Premier
Homme , published posthumously in 1994 , and the exploration of his rela-
tionship to Algeria in a narrative concerned with personal origins, family,
and the history and the present of a community.
Born into the poor pied-noir community in Algeria in 1913 , Camus in
his literary exploration of identity necessarily engages not only with a per-
sonal history, but also with the collective histories of North Africa and of
European colonialism, and specifically with the political, social and cultural
configuration of ‘French Algeria’. Those collective histories are integral to
an understanding of the plural nature of the Maghreb. In those short stories
in L’Exil et le Royaume ( 1957 ) which explicitly take the country of his birth
as their context, an increasingly troubled relationship with the Algeria of the
period is already evident. The emphasis here will be on Le Premier Homme
as a work of the imagination. Just as Camus’s imagination was haunted in
the late 1950 s by the increasing violence of the Algerian War of Indepen-
dence and the political polarisation it brought, so this literary expression
of impossible return and potentially irretrievable loss continues to haunt
the imagination of readers, critics and writers. This ‘return to Camus’ took
various forms in the 1970 s, 1980 s and especially the 1990 s following the
immense international publishing success of Le Premier Homme in 1994 ,
1 and of Olivier Todd’s biography in 1996 .
Recent readings, influenced by postcolonial theory and its emphasis on
the power relations between formerly colonised regions and the colonising
powers, have put Camus ‘in the dock’ to answer for a list of offences ranging
from overt racism, for example in L’Etranger , to ‘special pleading’ in the
2 defence of ‘French Algeria’ in Le Premier Homme . I want to argue that
the ambiguities of Camus’s writing and of the representation of memory in
191
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

debra kelly
the Algerian context are more complex and intense than trial by political
conviction allows.
Read within a framework extending beyond postcolonial theory to mem-
ory studies, Le Premier Homme is a text of ‘mediation’ in the sense that Avery
Gordon defines ‘haunting’ as a particular form of mediation: ‘As a concept,
mediation describes the process that links an institution and an individual, a
3 social structure and a subject, and history and a biography.’ The narrative
of Le Premier Homme is haunted by the silences of the past (the dead father
and other war dead; the almost silent mother; the deaf uncle; the incuriosity
about the past manifested by the poor; the dead of the cemetery of Solferino)
and of the present that will soon become a past (the Algerian War of Inde-
pendence will efface the collective history of the French Algerians). The act
of writing involves various forms of mediation: between the individual and
the institution that is the French colonial system, including the notion of
‘French Algeria’; between the subject and the social structures of the family
and of the poor settler community into which Camus was born; and between
the history of French colonialism and personal biography.
This  chapter  aims,  in  addition,  therefore,  to  enable  us  ‘to  appreciate
Camus’s very real contribution to an understanding of the traumas of coloni-
4 sation and decolonisation’. Indeed, Camus’s text shares many of the pre-
occupations of North African postcolonial writing in French which includes
several autobiographical texts published from the period of the independence
struggles in the 1950 s onwards. These texts engage not only with the ques-
tion of individual self-expression and identity, but also with collective social,
ideological and historical contexts in the wake of European colonialism. Yet,
as the prominent Arabo-Berber Algerian woman writer Assia Djebar notes,
while she is currently perceived as the embodiment of an ‘Algeria-woman’,
and is solicited within the Western literary and critical establishment as such,
Camus’s claim to an Algerian identity has become suspect at this point in
5 the history of colonialism and postcolonialism.
Historical ambiguities
` Vieux cimeti ere des colons, l’immense oubli. ( PH , 303 )
Old settler cemetery, immense oblivion. ( FM , 244 )
The  accusation  that  Camus’s  narrative  mythologises  not  just  himself  but
also the way in which Algeria was colonised, and the lives of its poor settler
community, would appear to damn the book from the start. Emily Apter
sums it up: ‘For critics steeped in postcolonial perspectives, Camus’s name
triggers not only a deplorable record on the Algerian War that rightly cost
192
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Le Premier Homme and the literature of loss
him  friendships  on  the  left,  but  also  his  systematic  nullification  of  Arab
characters, particularly evident in L’Etranger , La Peste and the short stories
in L’Exil et le Royaume .’ Yet she also notes the recent recuperation and re-
appropriation of Camus as a ‘universal freedom-fighter’ by Algerian exiles
and dissidents as part of a wider reaction against the rise of fundamentalism
6 in Algeria in the 1990 s.
The aim here is not to re-tread ground that has been comprehensively cov-
ered by several critics concerning the historical and political circumstances
of France and Algeria in the second half of the 1950 s, and Camus’s position
7 as a very public intellectual. There were evident contradictions between
Camus’s political stance on the condition of the Arab and Kabyle popula-
` tions of Algeria and his calls for reforms, for example in Mis ere de la Kabylie
 ́ ( 1939 ) and ‘Crise en Alg erie’ ( 1945 ), and his fictions, which omit any refer-
ence to the colonial system and its oppression, and in which the indigenous
characters lack individual identity. Camus is accused of de-historicising the
colonial past and privileging his loyalty to the European settler community
at the expense of the values of justice that he championed elsewhere in his
political writings. Such accusations focus especially on chapter 7 of Le Pre-
mier Homme and Jacques Cormery’s visit to the old settler, Veillard. The
attack on Camus for his idealised image of colonial Algeria has a lineage
that can be traced back to Albert Memmi’s analysis, in The Coloniser and
the Colonised , of coloniser–colonised relations and of the privileged posi-
tion of even the poor pieds-noirs compared to the majority of the indigenous
8 populations.
The facts of the colonial situation in Algeria have been analysed from a
number of perspectives. Sociological research, for instance, has shown that
in 1954 the pieds-noirs constituted 11 per cent of the population of Algeria,
while holding 50 per cent of all available jobs in industry. However, the
lives of the various sectors of the population varied widely, as Assia Djebar’s
own working through of her childhood as the daughter of an educated Arab
primary schoolteacher in the French education system during the 1930 s and
1940 s makes clear. In many readings of Le Premier Homme , the issue of
poverty that destines the working-class settler to anonymity is evaded. Yet
as Camus insists, it is not only the war that threatens his community, for its
state has been and continues to be one of oblivion; the poor mark only ‘les
traces vagues du chemin de la mort’ ( PH , 79 ) (‘faint traces on the path to
death’ ( FM , 62 )). The critic David Carroll has argued that Camus’s notion
of an Algeria in which there would be justice for both European and Arab
Algerians is very different from the French state’s version of ‘French Algeria’
9 (as it is from that of Algerian nationalists). And following Cruise O’Brien’s
argument closely while arriving at a very different conclusion, Nancy Wood
193
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

debra kelly
argues that Le Premier Homme shows Camus trying to come to terms with a
legacy that he knows to be implicated in colonial oppression but that cannot
be reduced to that alone. For Wood, Camus is engaged in the construction of
a historical memory that includes all the ‘ambivalences, but moderates the
extremes’, attempting to ‘invent for himself and his community a historical
memory that could be invoked as part of Algeria’s collective heritage’. Wood’s
counter-argument also takes up the idea that Le Premier Homme is more
complex than Cruise O’Brien’s reading allows, and locates the key site of
this complexity in Camus’s research into Algeria’s colonial history (evident
in the notes for the unfinished novel): ‘however, these memories take on such
a hallucinatory and ambivalent character’, Wood notes, that they undermine
rather than secure any patrimonial claim and the project constitutes finally
10 a defensive historical memory.
‘Hallucinatory’ is a term used by Cruise O’Brien to describe Camus’s ver-
sion of colonial Algeria devoid of a past before the arrival of the Europeans;
it  is  also  a  term  used  by  Freud  to  describe  an  element  of  the  process  of
mourning to which I will return. Carroll concludes that Camus writes his
short stories and his last novel to express a history that he knows already to
be lost, indirectly revealing in his fiction what he could not admit or accept
in his politics: Algerian independence and the departure and exile of French
Algerians from the country. Camus counters, then, Memmi’s analysis of suf-
fering in the colonial system (although Memmi did recognise the poor settler
as victim also), and thereby sets about collapsing the binary opposition of
coloniser and colonised. This is not to deny the differences between cultures
violently  oppressed  by  colonialism  and  a  culture  created  by  the  colonial
system, and whose fate is therefore inextricably bound up with its defeat.
Yet it is clear that for Camus, his community, its way of life and his own
identity  are  being  denied  by  both  sides  in  the  struggle  of  the  colony  for
independence – to return to the epigraph at the beginning of this chapter,
what they did not like in him was the Algerian. The they certainly means the
1950 s Parisian left-wing intelligentsia opposed to continuing colonisation;
it could also encompass various elements in the local nationalist struggle
uncomfortable with Camus’s claims to be Algerian. Furthermore, while it is
true that in the state of the text as we have it, the commemoration of the
pied-noir community can be read at the expense of the Arab who remains
largely anonymous as in colonialist discourse, there are equally plans for
the elaboration of a native Algerian character – a rebel often referred to as
Saddok – in the ‘Notes and Sketches’ appended to the main body of Le
Premier Homme . The various sketches of dialogues between Cormery and
Saddok give a voice to Algerian nationalist discourse, and Camus’s plan for
what he referred to as the last part of the work was to see Jacques explaining
194
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Le Premier Homme and the literature of loss
 ́ to his mother ‘la question arabe, la civilisation cr eole, le destin de l’Occident’
( PH , 307 ) (‘the Arab question, Creole civilisation, the fate of the West’ ( FM ,
246 )). Apter arrives at a similar conclusion to that of Carroll: the text is writ-
11 ten in the knowledge of the defeat of French Algeria. Historical rupture
brought about by defeat leads to loss on both the personal and collective
levels.
Textual ambiguities
Je vais raconter l’histoire d’un monstre. L’histoire que je vais raconter...
( PH , 300 )
I am going to tell the story of an alien. The story that I’m going to tell...
( FM , 241 )
Political, economic and cultural loss, therefore, are all evident, yet in the
act of writing there is the restoration of a memory, defensive or otherwise,
destined to be lost, but which, through its inscription in Le Premier Homme ,
endures. Assia Djebar perceives Le Premier Homme (in direct opposition to
Cruise O’Brien’s analysis of it as a text that indulges in nostalgia, a melo-
drama of the self by a writer who has regressed) to be rather ‘the first novel
12 by a new forty-six year old writer called Camus’. While not experimental
in the way of other texts of the 1950 s (for example those of ‘new novelists’
such as Alain Robbe-Grillet, Robert Pinget and Michel Butor), there is in the
quest to configure the ‘mythical homeland’ the need to create a particular
set of figures, signs and symbols, and in so doing an embryonic poetics of
13 loss and of love is elaborated. The text’s ambiguity and complexity is not
solely political and historical. The project of Le Premier Homme is firstly a
‘writerly’ one, which is not to suggest that such a life-writing project (like
others of its type) is merely an intellectual project that takes little account of,
and makes no impact on, the realities of a postcolonial (but not post-imperial)
world. The difficulty lies in tolerating the tension between the text’s histori-
cal context and its status as a work of the imagination that cannot be judged
solely on political sensibilities. Ambiguity and complexity reside in the text’s
form and its processes, as in its politics. As in the textual dynamics of North
African autobiographical projects of diverse origins from the 1950 stothe
present day, there is a focus on the present of the act of writing, on the act of
creation as well as on recollection and the retrieval of history, asking what
it means to be a colonised or previously colonised subject.
Camus  poses  the  question  of  what  it  means  to  be  a  ‘French  Algerian’
through  the  figure  of  Jacques  Cormery.  The  difference  from  the  ‘French
from France’ is insisted upon, and the relationship with the metropolitan
195
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

debra kelly
ˆ  ́ ‘centre’ is troubled. France is ‘une terre inconnue de l’autre c ot e des mers’
( PH , 31 ) (‘a strange land on the other side of the seas’ ( FM , 21 )) in which his
father died, but has little meaning for Jacques. While the cultural space of
Camus’s text is not a shared one, remaining ‘alien’ to the indigenous cultures
around it, Le Premier Homme is a mediating text within the contradictions
and ambiguities which constitute the postcolonial world. It shares several
of the themes that recur in the work of North African writers: poverty and
exclusion, and their accompanying shame; the realities of everyday life in
colonial and postcolonial systems; interactions in the home and with the
outside world; the experience of school and social-class differences; edu-
cation and alienation from the family and the community; working lives;
injustice; racism; poverty; the relationship of the individual to history, to
power, to the Other; the struggle for the expression of a politics of self-
14 determination for the individual, the community, the nation. Colonialism
distorts the identity of the colonised subject; it has equally made a ‘mon-
ster’ of Cormery. Cormery is a ‘monster’ on a personal level, created by an
education that alienates him from his background; on the collective level,
the French Algerian is a ‘monster’ created by the colonial system. A quest
for the origins of the creation of the monster goes well beyond ‘nostalgia’,
and  comes  to  involve  personal  and  political  risk.  This  is  a  further  char-
acteristic shared with North African autobiographical writing, where risk
takes many forms, and where the image of sacrifice frequently provides a
pervasive metaphor. The creative process becomes a testimony to a way of
living and writing a necessary intervention despite the political and personal
cost. Camus’s remembrance is subjective certainly – it is socially constructed
as is history. Yet a multiplicity of memories must be held side by side, as
must a multiplicity of histories, if we are to make sense of the postcolonial
world.
Loss, love and the inscriptions of history
En  somme,  je  vais  parler  de  ceux  que  j’aimais.  Et  de  cela  seulement.  Joie
profonde. ( PH , 312 )
In short, I wanted to speak of those I loved. And of that only. Intense joy.
( FM , 250 )
Le Premier Homme embodies other knowledge than solely that of history,
a knowledge provoked in Cormery by the experience in ‘le vaste champ des
morts’ ( PH , 29 ) (‘the vast field of the dead’ ( FM , 20 )) in the Saint-Brieuc
cemetery when ‘le temps se disloqu(e)’ ( PH , 31 7 ) (‘time goes out of joint’
( FM , 253 )). This new course of time demands a new expression: a poetics
196
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Le Premier Homme and the literature of loss
that is at once one of love and of loss, ‘grounding history in love’ and creating
15 a text where ‘ultimately knowledge was to defer to love’.
From the very beginning of the text, the main character is presented as
belonging both to Europe and to Africa, born into the world in a narrative
of Biblical dimensions. Read alongside texts by other North African writers,
this recourse to a set of what I have termed ‘preferred myths’ in order to
elaborate an individual selfhood is a recurrent feature of those who have
endured the multiple effects of colonisation and then tried to come to terms
with these in writing. Camus writes of the impact of colonisation, resulting in
loss for all those involved, even if subsequently some retrieval and reconcili-
ation with fractured identities is possible. The loss of generations is symbol-
ised in the double scenes of the cemeteries at Saint-Brieuc and Solferino.
The  power  of  inscriptions  lost  and  found  provides  a  recurring  dynamic
in the narratives of writers such as Khatibi and Djebar, as it does in some of
the writing of Jacques Derrida, an Algerian Jew who likewise imagines the
‘language of an indecipherable history’ and who sees writing and effacement
as inextricably linked: ‘to meditate on writing, which is to say also on efface-
ment...istomeditate constantly on what renders unreadable or what is
16 rendered unreadable’. Sarocchi reads the tomb at Saint-Brieuc as revealing
the vanity of any inscription, and the tombs at Solferino as undermining
the possibility of making anything endure in writing, yet the narrative of
17 Le Premier Homme persists in its elaboration of an inscription in history.
The self of the writer is in the present of writing, not only in the accumula-
tion of autobiographical ‘facts’ or in the rewriting of a history either erased
or appropriated by others. If the postcolonial state is one of becoming, in
which a new relationship is opened up with time and space, Camus’s unfin-
ished novel seems to anticipate the need for the writer to engage with this
process.
Loss takes many forms in the text, each time bound up with love : love for
` the father (and in the end, the quest for the father – the ‘recherche du p ere’ of
the title of Part One of the novel – leads not to retrieval, but to irredeemable
loss); love for the mother, who is lost to the child and to the adult in her silence
 ́  ́ and illiteracy when ‘ce qu’il d esirait le plus au monde, (c’) etait que sa mere
ˆ  ́ l ut tout ce qui etait sa vie et sa chair’ ( PH , 292 ) (‘what he wanted most was
for his mother to read everything that was his life and his being’ ( FM , 238 ));
love for the uncle who represents the ‘tribe’ that Cormery has left behind;
love for the grandmother – even though she is the incarnation of authority –
 ́  ́  ́ who looks at him with ‘une sorte de tendresse d esesp er ee’ ( PH , 153 ) (‘a sort
of hopeless love’ ( FM , 127 )); love for Monsieur Bernard, mediator between
Jacques and the French educational system, between Jacques and his family,
both living and dead, and between Jacques and those lost in the First World
197
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

debra kelly
War, both Arab and French; love for Malan; love for the forgotten dead in
the Solferino cemetery; love for the land of Algeria itself. Is this ‘nostalgia’?
Since a large part of memory studies has focussed on traumatic memory – the
Holocaust, the effects of colonisation on the colonised – any more positive
role for nostalgia has been deemed suspect, despite the fact that in its ety-
mological sense, it evokes not only the return, but also pain, and a pain that
may be forever unresolved. Mieke Bal has delineated a space for nostalgia
between ‘ordinary’ and ‘traumatic’ memory, and ascribes to it an empower-
ing role if it is ‘critically tempered and historically informed’; nostalgia is ‘a
18 structure of relation to the past, not false or inauthentic in essence’. If Le
Premier Homme is written in the full understanding of the consequences of
the Algerian War of Independence, this is not a surrender to nostalgia, but
part of the work of mourning and loss. The aim of the elaboration of a collec-
tive memory – which is arguably Camus’s purpose in Le Premier Homme –
is to create ‘a useable past’ for the creation of a group identity. In contrast
to history, this reflects a ‘committed perspective’, belonging to one group
and not to others: ‘Collective memory tends to be impatient with ambiguity
and to represent itself as representing an unchanging reality, so it provides
19 a particular textual resource for creating a particular kind of community.’
Yet since the French Algerians have no future, rather than expressing ‘an
unchanging reality’, Le Premier Homme is a book of mourning. In Freudian
terms, nostalgia is a substitute for mourning and prevents any coming to
terms with loss. The ‘work of mourning’ is the struggle of the ego to detach
itself finally from the loved object so as to become free again, a process
to which Le Premier Homme points. Mourning is a kind of remembering
and, unlike nostalgia, will end in letting go. Contemporary writers, how-
ever, have not yet let go of Camus, as will be explored in the concluding
section.
Le Premier Homme , mourning and the haunting
of modern memory
` Il n’y avait plus sous cette dalle que cendres et poussi eres. Mais, pour lui, son
`  ́ p ere etait de nouveau vivant... ( PH , 32 )
Under that slab were left only ashes and dust. But, for him, his father was again
alive... ( FM , 22 )
To return to the notion of haunting invoked at the beginning of this chapter,
Avery Gordon writes: ‘The ghost is not simply a dead or missing person,
but a social figure, and investigating it can lead to that dense site where
20 history  and  subjectivity  make  social  life.’ Cormery  is  haunted  by  his
198
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Le Premier Homme and the literature of loss
father and by the forgotten in the graves of Solferino; Camus is haunted
by events in Algeria, and all the more intensely in the writing of Le Pre-
mier Homme from 1958 onwards, which coincided with his public silence
on  the  country  of  his  birth;  writers,  critics  and  readers  continue  to  be
haunted by Camus. The recurrence of the metaphor of spectres and ghosts
is  striking  in  the  critical  discourse  on  writings  not  only  by  Camus  but
also by others with reference to the Algerian War in general. For Sarocchi,
Le Premier Homme is a ‘spectrographie’ (‘spectrography’) of French Algeria;
it  provides  ‘a  spectral  analysis’,  not  a  political  one,  of  Cormery’s  des-
tiny and of that of his community; and this spectre is always that of the
21 father.
It is on the creative aspects of such haunting that I wish to end. Camus
and his fictions haunt contemporary North African writing, especially by
22 women, recurrently in the case of Assia Djebar. Djebar makes the point
that consciousness of loss is paradoxically almost restorative and that the
consciousness itself therefore must be preserved: ‘Il y a deux sortes de perte:
il y la perte qui vous hante et la perte que vous oubliez, l’oubli de la perte . . .
Le terrible c’est l’oubli de la perte’ (‘There are two sorts of loss. There is the
loss that haunts you and the loss you forget, the forgetting of loss . . . The
23 terrible thing is the forgetting of loss’). Camus shares with these women
writers  a  meditation  on  personal  and  collective  loss,  to  the  point  where
it is possible to speak of a poetics of loss in contemporary North African
writing. Are women attempting to reconcile the opposition between coloniser
and colonised, and to identify with a man who would have been excluded
from full participation in the Algeria constructed by nationalist discourse
after independence, just as they have been obliged as women to take up
ambiguous  positions  ever  since?  In  addition  to  Assia  Djebar,  loss  is  also
 ́ ` a dynamic of the writing of the Algerian Jewish pied-noir H el ene Cixous,
 ́ her ‘Alg eriance’ as she calls it. In Nina Bouraoui’s autobiographical Garc  ̧on
 ́ manqu e ( Tomboy )( 2000 ), the writer describes herself as ‘made of the land
of Algeria’. In a vocabulary that clearly echoes L’Etranger , the ‘violent sun’
of Algeria reveals that she is not a ‘real’ Algerian, and yet she cannot go back
 ̈ to France. In a short story by Ma ıssa Bey, a young Algerian male narrator
remembers reading L’Etranger in school. The narrative is at once critical
of the implicit colonialist discourse that removes the Arab’s subjectivity –
Meursault fires at the Arab ‘with a capital A as if it was his name’ – and of
the violence of contemporary Algerian society: ‘Only the blokes here don’t
24 blame the sun.’
The haunting is more sustained in Assia Djebar’s La Disparition de la
langue franc ̧aise ( The Disappearance of the French Language ), in which the
199
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

debra kelly
protagonist Berkane, almost fifty years old and an exile from Algeria for
twenty years, returns to his country and overtly acknowledges the memory
25 of Camus. Berkane too is haunted by his father’s shadow, a father who
fought in the Second World War for France and dies soon after independence.
After disappearing in a car crash in Kabylia on his way to a camp where he
was imprisoned by the French in 1962 , Berkane leaves behind an unfinished
autobiographical project entitled L’Adolescent ( The Adolescent ), written in
 ́ French, his ‘langue de m emoire’ (‘memory language’). Berkane’s death is also
‘unfinished’, in the way that Assia Djebar has described that of Camus; his
return has become a disappearance, and his ghost returns to haunt his French
lover, Marise. The unfinished text is the one that the reader has just read,
written against the violent background of the ‘disappearance of the French
language’ as the professional classes exile themselves from 1990 s Algeria
and the rise of fundamentalism. Another community is now threatened with
effacement and the consequences of violence in Algeria continue to haunt.
At a time when issues of national identity are increasingly discussed in
terms of cultural and collective memory rather than in terms of the identity
of the nation state, and when struggles for minority rights are also organised
around questions of cultural memory, a reading of Le Premier Homme leaves
us with another apparition of the ‘first man’. The ‘turn to memory’ is at once
a response to, and a symptom of, rupture, lack and absence. The discourse
of cultural memory can ‘mediate and modify difficult and tabooed moments
of the past’. The problem is that the appeal to memory over history may
26 ‘displace analysis by empathy, politics by sentiment’. On any site of conflict
there is equally a struggle for memory, and it is certain that memory makes
claims that will not be acceptable to everyone. The point is not to blame
or exonerate Camus ‘as a coloniser’; it is rather, as Sarocchi expresses it,
27 to see how successfully or otherwise he interprets a ‘political ambiguity’.
The colonisation of Algeria by France and Camus’s relationship to it is rather
more than a ‘political ambiguity’, although Sarocchi’s point regarding blame
or exoneration is important. A work of literary imagination that engages
with memory work, Le Premier Homme is an interpretation of history and
personal experience that haunts and continues to tell us much about the
anxieties of contemporary postcolonial cultures.
NOTES
1 .  N. Wood, ‘Colonial Nostalgia and Le Premier Homme ’, Vectors of Memory.
Legacies of Trauma in Postwar Europe (Oxford, Berg, 1999 ), pp. 143 – 4 ;O.
Todd, Albert Camus, une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ).
200
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Le Premier Homme and the literature of loss
2 .  A. Haddour, Colonial Myths. History and Narrative (Manchester, Manchester
University Press, 2000 ); P. Dunwoodie and E. J. Hughes (eds.), Constructing
Memories: Camus, Algeria and ‘Le Premier Homme’ (Stirling, Stirling French
Studies, 1998 ); N. Harrison, Postcolonial Criticism. History, Theory and the
Work of Fiction (Cambridge, Polity, 2003 ).
3 .  A. F. Gordon, Ghostly Matters. Haunting and the Sociological Imagination (Min-
neapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1997 ), p. 19 .
4 .  E. J. Hughes, Le Premier Homme/La Peste (Glasgow, University of Glasgow
French and German Publications, 1995 ), p. 87 .
` 5 .  A. Djebar, Ces voix qui m’assi egent (Paris, Albin Michel, 1999 ), p. 224 . See,
for example, autobiographical texts by Mouloud Feraoun, Albert Memmi and
 ́ Abdelk ebir Khatibi.
6 .  E. Apter, ‘Out of Character: Camus’s French Algerian Subjects’, Modern Lan-
guage Notes 112 . 4 ( 1997 ), 502 , 500 .
7 .  C. Cruise O’Brien, Albert Camus of Europe and Africa (New York, The Viking
Press, 1970 ); ‘The Fall’, The New Republic , 19 October 1995 ; E. Said, ‘Camus
and  the  French  Imperial  Experience’,  in Culture  and  Imperialism (London,
Vintage, 1994 ( 1993 )), pp. 204 – 24 .
 ́  ́  ́  ́ 8 . Portrait du colonis e pr ec ed ede P  ortrait du colonisateur (Paris, Gallimard, 1985
( 1957 )) has been arguably the North African Jewish writer Albert Memmi’s most
famous text.
9 .  D. Carroll, ‘Camus’s Algeria: Birthrights, Colonial Injustice and the Fiction of a
French Algerian People’, Modern Languages Notes 112 . 4 ( 1997 ), 522 .
10 .  Wood, ‘Colonial Nostalgia’, pp. 153 , 155 , 160 .
11 .  Apter, ‘Out of Character’, 51 4 , 516 .
12 .  Djebar, Ces voix ,p. 232 .
13 .  J. Sarocchi, Le Dernier Camus ou ‘Le Premier Homme’ (Paris, Nizet, 1995 ),
p. 163 .
14 .  D. Kelly, Autobiography and Independence. Selfhood and Creativity in North
African Postcolonial Writing in French (Liverpool, Liverpool University Press,
2005 ).
15 .  T. Garfitt, ‘Le Premier Homm(ag)e: Grounding History in Love’ and D. Walker,
‘Knowing the Place for the First Time?’, in Dunwoodie and Hughes (eds.), Con-
structing Memories , pp. 1 , 20 .
16 .  J.  Derrida, Points  .  .  .  Interviews.  1974–1994 (Stanford,  Stanford  University
Press, 1995 ), p. 11 9 ; Haddour, Colonial Myths ,p. 170 .
17 .  Sarocchi, Le Dernier Camus ,p. 120 . Sarocchi notes the Biblical dimensions of
the narrative, p. 28 .
18 .  M. Bal, J. Crew and L. Spitzer, Acts of Memory. Cultural Recall in the Present
(Hanover NH and London, University Press of New England, 1999 ), p. xi.
19 .  J. V. Wertsch, Voices of Collective Remembering (Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2002 ), pp. 31 , 66 .
20 . Gordon, Ghostly Matters ,p. 8 .
21 .  Sarocchi, Le Dernier Camus , pp. 96 , 149 .
22 .  Djebar, Ces voix , pp. 224 – 32 , where she meditates on Camus’s ‘unfinished’ text
 ́ and on his ‘unfinished’ death; Le Blanc de L’Alg erie (Paris, Albin Michel, 2003 ),
pp. 103 – 4 . In the case of Djebar, it is clear that her reading of Le Premier Homme
201
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

debra kelly
has facilitated what could be termed a reconciliation with Camus. Earlier in Ces
` voix qui m’assi egent , she writes that she took a considerable time to recognise
her relationship to him (p. 221 ).
23 .  A. Djebar, ‘Le Territoire des langues’, in L. Gauvin (ed.), L’Ecrivain francophone
`  ́ a la crois ee des langues: entretiens (Paris, Karthala, 1997 ), p. 30 .
 ́ 24 .  N. Bouraoui, Garc ̧on manqu e (Paris, Stock, 2000 ), p. 36 ; M. Bey, ‘Un jour de
 ́ juin’, Nouvelles d’Alg erie (Paris, Grasset, 1998 ), pp. 46 – 7 .
25 .  A. Djebar, La Disparition de la langue franc ̧aise (Paris, Albin Michel, 2003 ),
p. 92 .
26 .  These arguments summarise the ideas of several critics in the field of memory
studies: A. Huyssens, Twilight Memories: Marking Time in a Culture of Amnesia
(London, Routledge, 1995 ), p. 5 ; Bal et al., Acts of Memory , p. vii; K. Hodgkin
and  S.  Radstone  (eds.), Contested  Pasts.  The  Politics  of  Memory (London,
Routledge, 2003 ), pp. 11 – 12 .
27 .  Sarocchi, Le Dernier Camus ,p. 44 .
202
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

EDWARD J. HUGHES
Postface
Who reads Camus? Were we to focus on the admittedly narrow world of
academic publications and interest, we might well conclude that Camus has
come  to  be  an  author  more  written  about  outside  France  than  inside  it.
It was in France in the early 1970 s that he was notoriously dismissed as
1 an author whose philosophy is only suitable for sixth-form study. Long
before that, as Olivier Todd reminds us, Sartre was decidedly patronising
about  the  philosophical  shortcomings  of Le  Mythe  de  Sisyphe ,  although
somewhat more approving in his response to L’Etranger when these texts
2 appeared in 1942 . Yet Camus’s ability to attract mass audiences both within
 ́ the  hexagon  and  beyond  is  undisputed.  Jeanyves  Gu erin  reported  in  the
1990 s that statistically speaking, Camus remained the author most widely
3 read by school pupils and university students in France. In a recent survey
for French television, Camus was placed fifty-ninth in a poll to establish
‘les plus grands Franc ̧ais de tous les temps’ (‘the greatest French people of
4 all time’), above Sartre, who occupied ninety-fifth place. In the English-
speaking world, his work regularly features on undergraduate reading lists
for courses on twentieth-century French literature, politics and philosophy.
How we approach a text like Le Mythe de Sisyphe is arguably impor-
tant for any approach to Camus’s work more generally. We can, as Sartre
did, dismiss the essay as philosophically unconvincing, just as we can criticise
 ́  ́ L’Homme r evolt e as a rough and ready history of European ideas, as a patch-
work of that continent’s cultural, philosophical and political history. David
Carroll makes the important point that the author of Le Mythe is less inter-
ested in any wisdom about the ultimate meaning of life that might arrive via
great philosophy than in the visceral feeling, experienced by ordinary people,
 ́  ́ that life may abruptly lose meaning: ‘Le sentiment de l’absurdit eaud etour
` de n’importe quelle rue peut frapper a la face de n’importe quel homme’ ( Ess ,
105 ), warns Camus (‘At any street corner, the feeling of absurdity can strike
any man in the face’ ( MS , 10 – 11 )). Moreover, for Carroll, Camus’s take on
the Sisyphus myth and his refusal of any big narrative marks an early phase
203
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
in a career-long battle against ideological certainties, whether philosophi-
cal, political or religious. In a related way, Colin Davis demonstrates (as we
saw in chapter 8 ) how the vain quest for secure ultimate values in Camus’s
reflection on the Absurd anticipates the debate about ethical value central to
what we conveniently label postmodernity.
In Camus’s work generally, we regularly find the same conscious lowering
of philosophical horizons identified in Le Mythe . He views sceptically the
promise of longer-term salvation held out by both Christianity and Marx-
ism, preferring to situate many of his heroes in a here and now that will not
mutate into some transcendent, redemptive order. This insistence on a banal
present, on limits, is central to Camus. The Everyman he constructs from this
ordinariness forms a key dimension of his appeal to generations of readers.
In the seductive portrait of Meursault that he paints in his preface to the
American edition of The Outsider published in 1958 , he evokes his protago-
nist’s run-of-the-mill lifestyle, his typicality as he wanders, ‘en marge, dans les
 ́ faubourgs de la vie priv ee, solitaire, sensuelle’ ( TRN , 1928 ) (‘in the margins,
in the faubourgs of private, solitary, sensuous life’). For the general reader,
the appeal is one of recognition. Meursault’s unexceptional biography seems
to map readily on to a familiar style of urban living in the modern world char-
acterised less by community and kinship than by isolation and alienation;
on to a cultural landscape denied the consolation of religious or political
certainties; on to a world of mundaneness (it is not coincidental that Camus
should choose the unfashionable, working-class faubourg , the inner suburb
with its connotations of social ordinariness, as the locus of Meursault’s con-
frontation with the everyday; or indeed that a bar in Amsterdam’s red-light
district should be where Clamence holds court in La Chute , a meeting-place,
as David Ellison remarks, for ‘the exiled and disinherited of the modern
world’ (see above, p. 179 ). Yet in L’Etranger we find an arresting transition
from this obscurity to a position of social prominence. For however marginal
a figure he cuts, Meursault leads a private life that delivers its own drama
by catapulting him into a public sphere. Indeed, the declamatory tone in the
closing lines of the novel when he expresses the wish that his execution be
an occasion for antagonistic public spectacle confirms the paradox whereby
the figure of social marginality and singularity becomes not only an object of
public hate but also a point of cultural identification for millions of readers.
Camus regularly works this cusp between social anonymity and the spot-
light, between private and public lives. His use of the confessional style of
narrative is particularly effective in drawing out the private and drawing
in the reader. The dramatic opening line of L’Etranger disarms us with its
forthright intimacy. In La Peste , as Margaret Gray explains, Tarrou’s confes-
sion forms a counterpoint to Rieux’s conscious adoption of the more neutral
204
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Postface
chronicler’s tone when called upon to bear witness to more collective suffer-
ing. And as David Ellison identifies in his analysis of La Chute , the dynamic
of that novel requires the reader to occupy the uncomfortable position of
being directly embroiled in Clamence’s phoney world. Clamence’s duplic-
itous verbosity implicates us and destabilises our value systems. His inau-
thenticity contrasts powerfully with Meursault’s untutored candour, with
Tarrou’s anguished self-examination, with Janine’s uncontrollable floods of
` tears at the end of ‘La Femme adult ere’.
Social anonymity and the crushing burden of life’s ordinariness find specif-
ically generational expression in L’Exil et le Royaume , where Camus conveys
an acute, palpable feeling of mid-life unfulfilment. To the inarticulate dissat-
isfaction of the manual worker Yvars in ‘Les Muets’, we can add Janine’s
struggle to extricate herself from a sense of deep private desperation in ‘La
` Femme adult ere’. Janine may experience a fleeting, ecstatic release from her
situation  in  her  communion  with  the  desert;  more  pessimistically,  Yvars,
on strike and faced with his own diminishing physical strength, contends
with a knowing resignation unmitigated by any prospect of collective syn-
dicalist triumph. Both protagonists have long since been estranged from the
sensuous exuberance of youth that is given such free rein in Camus’s early
collection of lyrical essays, Noces . Yet as Danielle Marx-Scouras observes in
chapter 10 , Janine’s private desperation can be mapped on to a more gen-
eralised, French Algerian sense of disconnection, the dawning awareness,
felt keenly by Camus’s woman protagonist, of unredeemed exclusion from
the Algeria of Algerians. A redemptive contrast to this tale of exile lived in
the colony is provided when, in the last story in the collection, ‘La Pierre
qui pousse’, set in a significantly exotic location away from North Africa,
D’Arrast’s peripheral position in relation to a tribe living in the South Amer-
ican jungle is transformed as he is ushered into the hub of community life
( TRN , 1686 ; EK , 152 ).
Returning to the strand of social ordinariness (and by implication to the
bond between author and reader that this helps solder), we see the very
conscious cultivation of the everyday in Camus’s work. His turning away
from the high-flown and the cerebral is strategic. In a brief late text entitled
‘De l’insignifiance’ (‘On Insignificance’) published in 1959 ( TRN , 1903 – 6 ),
Camus writes ironically of his desire to compile an anthology of insignif-
icance.  While  noting  the  mocking  tone  in  Camus’s  piece,  Roger  Quilliot
explains that the basis for his essay was in fact a much more serious draft
on the same subject to be found in the Carnets in early 1945 ( TRN , 1903 ).
Quilliot reminds us that Camus used the motif of insignificance extensively
in both L’Etranger and La Peste , where the routine and the quotidian form
the bedrock of experience for the likes of Meursault and Grand. As Camus
205
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
 ́  ́ argues in L’Homme r evolt e , characters in a novel inhabit a world that is nei-
ther more beautiful nor more edifying than our own ( Ess , 666 ; R , 229 ). In his
defence of the nineteenth-century French Algerians in Le Premier Homme ,
by  contrast,  Camus  stresses  the  arduous  material  conditions  confronting
the newly arrived petits colons for different strategic ends (see chapter 7 of
Part i of the novel). For by representing the material, physical reality of early
colonial life as a form of hell on earth, Camus helps construct a form of
settler martyrology.
Camus’s fictional work connects powerfully with his own world. It forms
a bridge between France and its most important colonial possession, Algeria,
a connection which he sets out matter-of-factly (some might say incongru-
ously) in his Nobel address when he speaks of ‘la plupart d’entre nous, dans
mon  pays  et  en  Europe’  ( Ess , 1073 )  (‘most  of  us,  in  my  country  and  in
Europe’). He can write about France as an outsider, as when he complains
in Le Premier Homme of the country’s soot-filled northern cities, where the
proliferation of plastic and nylon goods and drab, discoloured advertising
posters discourage the alienated Mediterranean visitor ( PH , 26 ; FM , 17 ). Yet
as a war-time journalist often based in France, he writes as an insider, both
capturing and helping to shape the national mood. Indeed, for generations of
Western readers, Camus’s Frenchness was as mainstream as Western colonial
dominance was unproblematical. The history of the reception of L’Etranger
bears this out. For as Peter Dunwoodie explains, Meursault remained for
decades a universalised Everyman, with his status as ‘colonial man’ either
blindly overlooked or conveniently occluded.
Dunwoodie’s  inferred  paradigm  of  generational  readings  of  the  novel
prompts us to think further about ‘colonial man’ and about modes of read-
ing in a postcolonial frame of reference and beyond. To that end, and by
way of a somewhat serpentine conclusion, I want to speculate about a tiny
pocket of L’Etranger where we are able to see retrospectively the intercon-
nectedness of Algerians and French Algerians. The moment occurs during
the prison scene early in Part ii of the novel when Marie visits Meursault.
She is surrounded, and outnumbered, by Moorish women visiting their men-
folk. Camus depicts the local Arab-speaking families as literally providing a
background murmur as they squat while European inmates and their visitors
 ́ ` shout to be heard: ‘Malgr e le tumulte, ils parvenaient a s’entendre en parlant
` tr es bas. Leur murmure sourd, parti de plus bas, formait comme une basse
ˆ continue  aux  conversations  qui  s’entrecroisaient  au-dessus  de  leurs  t etes’
( TRN , 1178 ) (‘In spite of the din, they were managing to make themselves
heard by talking in very low voices. Their muffled murmuring, coming from
lower down, formed a kind of continuo for the conversations going back-
wards and forwards above their heads’ ( O , 72 – 3 )). It is tempting to read the
206
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Postface
idea of the basso continuo as an emblem of Camus’s ties to Algeria generally;
as we have seen, the situation in his homeland was to be one of the great
leitmotifs of his writing career. From the early campaigning journalism in
` 1939 when he highlighted the plight of the Kabyles in Mis ere de la Kabylie
to what was to prove, in Camus’s short life, the end-of-career campaigning
in Le Premier Homme , this time on behalf of the French Algerian settlers,
we see a tenacious, indeed obdurate engagement.
Four of the short stories in the L’Exil et le Royaume collection construct
contrasting fictional situations which dramatise the European’s engagement
` with North Africa. ‘Les Muets’ and ‘La Femme adult ere’ we have already
considered. Two others depict traumatic choices and the intimidating conse-
ˆ quences of position-taking. In ‘L’H ote’, the culturally liberal French Algerian
schoolteacher Daru, forced to hold as prisoner overnight a native Algerian
suspected of murder, can show his charge nothing but fraternal hospitality.
Yet being cast in the role of jailer means that he is afterwards threatened
 ́ with revenge from the prisoner’s Arab brothers. In ‘Le Ren egat’, the young
European missionary sets out to conquer African resistance to Christianity,
to see, as he would have it, good prevail over evil. Yet he ends up a literally
mutilated, alienated subject, torn between Africa and Europe. Derangement
is the consequence of his Manichean confrontation of these two cultural
spaces. With his tongue cut out, he becomes the incarnation of inarticulacy
and of crude cultural confusion and bigotry.
The fluctuations in Camus’s own position in regard to French Algeria have
been pored over and his position-taking dissected. A postcolonial reading of
the prison-scene cameo from L’Etranger might well view with understand-
able suspicion the basso continuo attributed to the native women (taking
it as a marker of cultural hierarchy in which North Africans are routinely
and  dismissively  assigned  a  ‘ murmure  sourd’ ,  a  mere  backdrop  to  Euro-
pean conversation). Certainly the narrative thread of L’Etranger suggests
a form of social apartheid, dramatised in the stand-off between Meursault
and his unnamed Arab adversary. That said, in the scene in the prison vis-
iting room, North Africans are described as succeeding in communicating,
whereas Europeans strain to do so. In positing this contrast, Meursault as
narrator is arguably giving voice to an underlying European insecurity that
persists in spite of obvious colonial supremacy. Yet new contexts prompt
and legitimise new readings. Sixty years on, a number of Algerian women
writers  have  adopted  Camus  as  a  fraternal  figure,  as  we  have  seen  in
chapter 14 . From the vantage point of hindsight, we might then revisit the
page of L’Etranger that precedes the prison scene: here, at the beginning of
his period of incarceration, Meursault explains to fellow inmates (most of
whom are Arabs, to use Camus’s mode of designation) the reason for his
207
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

edward j. hughes
imprisonment. His untutored, frank account is greeted with silence but this
then gives way to an exchange in which the prisoners explain to him how to
arrange the matting to form a bed. The cell, and the shared misery it repre-
sents for its inhabitants, thus becomes a culturally plural space which North
African and European prisoners occupy. However tenuously, the group scene
enacts a provisional form of uneasy interethnic cohabitation, albeit on the
periphery  of  society.  It  delivers  a  sharing  of  space,  albeit  parenthetically,
in the regimented, punitive surroundings of the prison regime. Significantly,
this tense configuration of issues and characters – homicide, fraternity, North
ˆ African, European – forms the template also used by Camus in ‘L’H ote’. It
suggests the author’s abiding preoccupation with what is presented as the
problematics of interethnic cohabitation. In today’s postcolonial order, in
which Western urban spaces often serve as the meeting ground for the once
colonised and the once colonising, Camus’s fictional portraits of ‘colonial
men’ such as Meursault and Daru serve as a reminder of historical divisions
and mindsets.
One  critic  has  referred  to L’Etranger as  a  ‘cool,  elegant  and  startling
book...the creation of an author living in a precarious present and uncer-
5 tain of his future’. The precariousness in question encompassed Camus’s
ill-health and the dire situation of the Second World War, not forgetting the
 ́ volatility of the situation in Algeria (the bloody colonial massacres at S etif
in May 1945 served as a reminder of that). Camus was keenly aware of a
fundamental conditionality facing the writer (as well, of course, as facing his
generation more generally). As he remarked in his Nobel address in Stock-
 ́ ` holm in December 1957 , the writer is ‘obscur ou provisoirement c el ebre,
 ́ jet e dans les fers de la tyrannie ou libre pour un temps de s’exprimer’ ( Ess ,
1072 ) (‘obscure or provisionally famous, thrown into the shackles of tyranny
or free for a time to express himself’). The unpredictable future facing the
author of L’Etranger was to bring Camus both failure and fame: national
and international celebrity as a novelist; the bitter public row with Sartre and
Les Temps modernes , and beyond that the decolonisation debate, with, as
Charles Forsdick draws out in chapter 9 , the radically diverging affective and
intellectual positions this engendered; a complicated private life involving
numerous extra-marital relationships; self-imposed solitude as his position
became increasingly isolated in the 1950 s; the Nobel Prize, which, although
he received it at the exceptionally early age of forty-four for what the Nobel
committee saw as an ‘authentic moral engagement’ with the fundamental
questions of his day ( Ess , 1893 ), came ironically at a great low in Camus’s
life; the beginning of the end for French Algeria; and his own premature
 ́ death. Writing in his preface to the Chroniques alg eriennes in 1958 , Camus
conceded that the long confrontation between an individual and a particular
208
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Postface
historical situation (he was referring to his engagement with Algeria) was not
without errors, contradictions and hesitations ( Ess , 900 ). Indeed, he sees his
Algerian chronicles as the history of a failure ( Ess , 899 ). Yet this sense of
the author’s fallibility, his acceptance that he has made errors of judgement
and, above all, his call to tolerance provide us with not only good reasons
to revisit his work but also potentially with good lessons to draw from it. In
a memorial tribute in January 1960 , John Cruickshank reminded his audi-
ence that, in Camus’s words, ‘every authentic work of art is a gift offered
6 to the future’. In the case of Camus, this proleptic giving entails a body of
work to be read, understood, puzzled and argued over, both in relation to
the circumstances in which he produced it and, no less importantly, within
 ́ the conditions of our contemporary situation and beyond. ‘D esintoxiquer
les esprits et apaiser les fanatismes’ ( Ess , 899 ) (‘To remove the toxins from
 ́ people’s minds, to assuage fanaticisms’) was, as Jeanyves Gu erin reminds us,
7 Camus’s sincerely uttered call to the intellectual. The appeal of the prescrip-
tion endures, as does the challenge of Camus’s complicated legacy.
NOTES
1 .  J.-J. Brochier, Albert Camus philosophe pour classes terminales (Paris, Balland,
1970 ).
2 .  Olivier Todd, Albert Camus, une vie (Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ), p. 309 .
 ́ 3 .  Jeanyves Gu erin, Camus: Portrait de l’artiste en citoyen (Paris, Bourin, 1993 ),
p. 10 .
4 .  See http//programmes.france 2 .fr/leplusgrandfrancais/ 8709130 -fr.php).
5 .  G. V. Banks, Camus: L’Etranger (Glasgow, University of Glasgow French and
German Publications, 1992 ), p. 1 .
6 .  J. Cruickshank, Albert Camus and the Literature of Revolt (New York, Oxford
University Press/Galaxy Books, 1960 ), p. xx.
 ́ 7 .Gu erin, Camus ,p. 281 .
209
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

GUIDE TO FURTHER READING
PRIMARY WORKS BY CAMUS
 ́ `  ́ Albert Camus editorialiste a ‘L’Express’ (mai 1955-f evrier 1956) (Cahiers Albert
Camus 6 ), ed. Paul Smets, Paris, Gallimard, 1987 .
 ́ `  ́  ́ Caligula: texte etabli d’apr es la dactylographie de f evrier 1941: suivi de ‘La po etique
du  premier  Caligula’ (Cahiers  Albert  Camus 4 ),  ed.  A.  James  Arnold,  Paris,
Gallimard, 1984 .
`  ́ Camus a  ‘Combat ’  (Cahiers  Albert  Camus 8 ),  ed.  Jacqueline  L evi-Valensi,  Paris,
Gallimard, 2002 .
Carnets i , ii , iii , Paris, Gallimard, 1962 – 89 .
`  ́ Essais , ed. Roger Quilliot, Paris, Biblioth eque de la Pl eiade, 1965 .
 ́ Fragments d’un combat, 1938–1940 (Cahiers Albert Camus 3 ), eds. Jacqueline L evi-
 ́ Valensi and Andr e Abbou, Paris, Gallimard, 1978 .
Journaux de voyage , ed. Roger Quilliot, Paris, Gallimard, 1978 .
‘Lettre au directeur des Temps modernes ’, Les Temps modernes 82 ( 1952 ), 31 7 – 33 .
La Mort heureuse (Cahiers Albert Camus 1 ), Paris, Gallimard, 1971 .
Le Premier Camus , suivi de Ecrits de jeunesse d’Albert Camus , ed. Paul Viallaneix
(Cahiers Albert Camus 2 ), Paris, Gallimard, 1973 .
Le Premier Homme (Cahiers Albert Camus 7 ), Paris, Gallimard, 1994 .
 ́ ˆ  ́ `  ́ Th e atre, R ecits, Nouvelles , ed. Roger Quilliot, Paris, Biblioth eque de la Pl eiade, 1962 .
Available in English translation
Albert Camus: Lyrical and Critical , trans. Philip Thody, London, Hamish Hamilton,
1967 .
American Journals , trans. Hugh Levick, New York, Paragon House, 1987 ; London,
Hamish Hamilton, 1989 .
Between Hell and Reason , trans. Alexandre de Gramont, London, University Press
of New England, 1991 .
Caligula and Other Plays: Caligula, Cross Purpose, The Just, The Possessed , trans.
Stuart Gilbert, London, Penguin, 1984 .
Exile and the Kingdom , trans. Justin O’Brien, London, Penguin, 2002 ( 1962 ).
Fall , trans. Justin O’Brien, London, Penguin, 2000 ( 1963 ). The
The First Man , trans. David Hapgood, London, Penguin, 1996 .
A Happy Death , trans. Richard Howard, London, Penguin, 2002 ( 1973 ).
210
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Lyrical and Critical Essays , trans. Ellen Conroy Kennedy, New York, Vintage Books,
1967 .
The Myth of Sisyphus , trans. Justin O’Brien, London, Penguin, 2000 ( 1975 ).
Notebooks i : 1935–1942 , trans. Philip Thody, New York, Knopf, 1963 .
Notebooks ii : 1942–1951 , trans. Justin O’Brien, New York, Knopf, 1966 ; New York,
Marlowe and Company, 1995 .
The Outsider , trans. Joseph Laredo, London, Penguin, 2000 ( 1983 ). Also translated
as The Stranger , trans. Matthew Ward, New York, Knopf, 1988 .
The Plague , trans. Stuart Gilbert, London, Penguin, 1963 .
The Rebel , trans. Anthony Bower, London, Penguin, 1971 ; reprinted with a new
introduction by Olivier Todd, London, Penguin, 2000 .
Resistance, Rebellion, and Death (partial translation of Actuelles i , ii and iii ), trans.
Justin O’Brien, London, Hamish Hamilton, 1961 .
Selected Essays and Notebooks , trans. Philip Thody, London, Penguin, 1979 .
Selected Political Writings , trans. and ed. Jonathan H. King, London, Methuen, 1981 .
Youthful Writings , trans. Ellen Conroy Kennedy, New York, Knopf, 1976 .
Biography
Lottman, Herbert R., Albert Camus: a Biography , London, Weidenfeld and Nicol-
son, 1979 ; New York, Braziller, 1980 ; reprinted London, Axis, 1997 . Also avail-
 ́ able in French translation, Albert Camus , trans. Marianne V eron, Paris, Seuil,
1978 .
Todd, Olivier, Albert Camus, une vie , Paris, Gallimard, 1996 ; translated (in abbre-
viated form) as Albert Camus, A Life , trans. Benjamin Ivry, London, Chatto &
Windus, 1997 ; New York, Carroll & Graf, 2000 .
Correspondence
Correspondance  Albert  Camus/Jean  Grenier ,  ed.  Marguerite  Dobrenn,  Paris,
Gallimard, 1981 .
CRITICAL WORKS
Achour, Christiane, L’Etranger si familier , Algiers, EnAP, 1984 .
Apter, Emily, ‘Out of Character: Camus’s French Algerian Subjects’, Modern Lan-
guage Notes 112 . 4 ( 1997 ), 499 – 516 .
‘Out of Character: Camus’s French Algerian Subjects’, in Continental Drift: From
National Characters to Virtual Subjects , Chicago and London, University of
Chicago Press, 1999 , pp. 61 – 75 .
Archambault,  Paul, Camus’s  Hellenic  Sources ,  Chapel  Hill,  University  of  North
Carolina Press, 1972 .
 ́ `  ́ Arnold, A. J., Caligula: texte etabli d’apr es la dactylographie de f evrier 1941: suivi de
 ́ ‘La po etique du premier Caligula ’ (Cahiers Albert Camus 4 ),  Paris, Gallimard,
1984 .
 ́ Aron, Raymond, M emoires , Paris, Julliard, 1985 .
Aronson, Ronald, Camus and Sartre: The Story of a Friendship and the Quarrel that
Ended It , Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press, 2004 .
211
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
(Aronson, Ronald), ‘Sartre, Camus, and the Caliban articles’, Sartre Studies Interna-
tional 7 . 2 ( 2001 ), 1 – 11 .
‘The Third Man in the Story: Ronald Aronson discusses the Sartre-Camus conflict
with Francis Jeanson’, Sartre Studies International 8 . 2 ( 2002 ), 20 – 67 .
 ́ Audisio, Gabriel, Hommes au soleil , Maupr e, Le Mouton blanc, 1923 .
 ́ H eliotrope , Paris, Gallimard, 1928 .
 ́  ́ Jeunesse de la M editerran ee , Paris, Gallimard, 1935 .
Le Sel de la mer , Paris, Gallimard, 1936 .
Ulysse ou l’intelligence , Paris, Gallimard, 1945 .
Backan,  Ahmed, Camus  et  Sartre:  deux  intellectuels  en  politique ,  Lille,  ANRT,
2004 .
Bal, M., J. Crew and L. Spitzer, Acts of Memory. Cultural Recall in the Present ,
Hanover, NH and London, University Press of New England, 1999 .
Banks,  G.  V., Camus:  ‘L’Etranger ’,  Glasgow,  University  of  Glasgow  French  and
German Publications, 1992 ; first published: London, Arnold, 1976 .
Barrat, Denise (ed.), Espoir et parole , Paris, Seghers, 1963 .
Bartfeld, Fernande, L’Effet tragique. Essai sur le tragique dans l’œuvre de Camus ,
Geneva, Champion-Slatkine, 1988 .
 ́ ˆ  ́  ́  ́ ‘Le Th e atre de Camus, lieu d’une ecriture contrari ee’, in Jacqueline L evi-Valensi
`  ́ ˆ (ed.), Albert Camus et le th Actes du Colloque tenu a Amiens du 31 mai e atre:
au 2 juin 1988 , Paris, IMEC, 1992 , pp. 177 – 85 .
 ́  ́ ‘Anti-M editerran ee et lyrisme de l’exil’, Perspectives 5 ( 1998 ), 213 – 25 .
` Barthes, Roland, ‘La Peste’ ( 1955 ), in CEuvres compl etes , ed. Eric Marty, Paris, Seuil,
2002 , 5 vols., vol. i , pp. 540 – 5 .
 ́  ́  ́ Le Degr ez ero de l’ ecriture , Paris, Seuil, 1953 .
Bartlett, Elizabeth Ann, Rebellious Feminism: Camus’s Ethic of Rebellion and Fem-
inist Thought , New York, Palgrave/Macmillan, 2004 .
ˆ Beer (Capstick), Jill, ‘ Le Regard : Face to Face in Albert Camus’s “L’H ote” ’, French
Studies 56 . 2 ( 2002 ), 179 – 92 .
 ́  ́  ́  ́  ̈  ́ B eji, H el e, ‘Radicalisme culturel et la ıcit e’, Le D ebat 58 (January–February 1990 ),
45 – 9 .
Bertrand, Louis, Le Sang des races , Paris, Ollendorf, 1899 .
 ́ Les Villes d’or: Alg erie et Tunisie romaines , Paris, Fayard, 1921 .
 ́  ̈ Bey, Ma ıssa, Nouvelles d’Alg erie , Paris, Grasset, 1998 .
 ́  ́ ‘Femmes au bord de la vie’, Albert Camus et les ecritures alg eriennes. Quelles
traces? , Aix-en-Provence, Edisud, 2004 , pp. 127 – 33 .
Biondi, J.-P., Les Anticolonialistes (1881–1962) , Paris, Laffont, 1992 .
Birchall, Ian, ‘Camus contre Sartre: quarante ans plus tard’, in David H. Walker (ed.),
ˆ  ́ Albert Camus: les extr emes et l’ equilibre , Amsterdam, Rodopi, 1994 , pp. 129 –
50 .
Blanchot,  Maurice,  ‘Le  Mythe  de  Sisyphe’,  in Faux  Pas ,  Paris,  Gallimard, 1943 ,
pp. 65 – 71 .
‘Tu peux tuer cet homme’, La Nouvelle Revue franc ̧aise 3 ( 1954 ), 1059 – 69 .
L’Entretien infini , Paris, Gallimard, 1969 .
 ́ ‘ La Chute : La Fuite’, in L’Amiti e , Paris, Gallimard, 1971 , pp. 228 – 35 .
Bloom, Harold (ed.), Albert Camus , Philadelphia, Chelsea House, 1989 .
Albert Camus’s ‘The Stranger ’, Philadelphia, Chelsea House, 2001 .
 ́ Bouraoui, Nina, Garc Paris, Stock, 2000 .  ̧on manqu e ,
212
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Braun, Lev, Witness of Decline. Albert Camus: Moralist of the Absurd , Rutherford,
NJ, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1974 .
 ́ Br ee, Germaine, Camus , New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers University Press, 1959 .
Camus and Sartre: Crisis and Commitment , London, Calder and Boyars, 1974 .
 ́ Br ee, Germaine (ed.), Camus: A Collection of Critical Essays , Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
Prentice-Hall, 1962 .
Brochier,  J.-J., Albert  Camus  philosophe  pour  classes  terminales ,  Paris,  Balland,
1970 .
 ́ ` Brodziak, Sylvie, et al. (eds.), Albert Camus et les ecritures du xx esi ecle , Arras, Artois
 ́ Presses Universit e, 2003 .
Bronner, Stephen Eric, Camus: Portrait of a Moralist , London, University of Min-
nesota Press, 1999 .
 ́ Broyelle, Claudie and Jacques, Les Illusions retrouv ees: Sartre a toujours raison con-
tre Camus , Paris, Grasset, 1982 .
Capstick, Jill, ‘Mastery or Slavery: The Ethics of Revolt in Camus’s “Les Muets” ’,
Modern and Contemporary France 11 . 4 ( 2003 ), 453 – 62 .
Carroll, David, ‘Camus’s Algeria: birthrights, colonial injustice and the fiction of a
French Algerian people’, Modern Language Notes 112 . 4 ( 1997 ), 51 7 – 49 .
Albert Camus, The Algerian: Colonialism, Terrorism, Justice , New York: Columbia
University Press, forthcoming.
 ́  ̈ Champigny, Robert, Sur un h eros pa ıen , Paris, Gallimard, 1959 . Also available as A
Pagan Hero , trans. Rowe Portis, Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press,
1969 .
 ́  ́ Charbit, Denis, ‘Camus et l’ epreuve alg erienne’, Perspectives 5 ( 1998 ), 157 – 81 .
Chaulet-Achour, Christiane (C. Achour), Albert Camus, Alger: ‘L’Etranger’ et autres
 ́  ́ r ecits , Paris, S eguier, 1999 .
 ́ Albert Camus et l’Alg erie , Algiers, Barzakh, 2004 .
Chouaki, Aziz, Les Oranges , Paris, Mille et une nuits, 1998 .
ˆ Clot, J.-P., Fant omes  au soleil , Paris, Gallimard, 1949 .
 ́  ́ Cohen-Solal, Annie, ‘Camus, Sartre et la guerre d’Alg erie’, in Jeanyves Gu erin (ed.),
Camus et la politique , Paris, L’Harmattan, 1985 , pp. 177 – 84 .
 ́ ˆ Coombs, Ilona, Camus, homme de th e atre , Paris, Nizet, 1968 .
 ́ Costes, Alain, Albert Camus et la parole manquante: etude psychanalytique , Paris,
Payot, 1973 .
Cruickshank, John, Albert Camus and the Literature of Revolt , New York, Oxford
University Press/Galaxy Books, 1959 / 1960 .
 ́  ́  ́ Daniel, Jean, Camus , Paris, Hachette, coll. G enies et r ealit es, 1969 .
‘Le Suicide d’une nation’, Le Nouvel Observateur ( 14 – 20 April 1994 ), 28 – 9 .
Soleils d’hiver. Carnets 1998–2000 , Paris, Grasset, 2000 .
Davis, Colin, ‘Interpreting La Peste ’, Romanic Review 85 . 1 ( 1994 ), 125 – 42 .
Ethical Issues in Twentieth-Century French Fiction: Killing the Other , Basingstoke,
Macmillan, 2000 .
‘The Cost of Being Ethical: Fiction, Violence, and Altericide’, Common Knowledge
9 . 2 ( 2003 ), 241 – 53 .
Davison, Ray, Camus: The Challenge of Dostoevsky , Exeter, Exeter University Press,
1997 .
‘Mythologising the Mediterranean: The Case of Albert Camus’, Journal of Mediter-
ranean Studies 10 . 1 – 2 ( 2000 ), 77 – 92 .
213
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
de Beauvoir, Simone, La Force des choses , Paris, Gallimard, 1963 .
 ́  ́ Debout, Simone, ‘Sartre et Camus, t emoins de la libert e’, Modern Language Notes
112 ( 1997 ), 600 – 7 .
Deguy, Jacques, ‘Sartre lecteur de L’Etranger ’, Albert Camus (La Revue des Lettres
Modernes), 16 ( 1995 ), 63 – 83 .
 ́  ́ Deleuze, Gilles, ‘L’Ile d eserte’ ( 1953 ), in David Lapoujade (ed.), L’Ile d eserte et autres
textes , Paris, Minuit, 2002 .
 ́ Derrida, Jacques, Force de loi , Paris, Galil ee, 1994 .
Points . . . Interviews. 1974–1994 , Stanford, Stanford University Press, 1995 .
Dine,  Philip,  ‘Fighting  and  Writing  the  War  Without  a  Name:  Polemics  and  the
French-Algerian Conflict’, AURIFEX , 2 ( 2002 ) (http://www.goldsmiths.ac.uk/
aurifex/issue 2 /dine.html).
Djebar, Assia, ‘Afterword’, in Women of Algiers in Their Apartment , Charlottesville,
University Press of Virginia, 1992 , pp. 159 – 211 .
 ́ Le Blanc de l’Alg erie , Paris, Albin Michel, 1995 .
`  ́ ‘Le Territoire des langues’, in L. Gauvin (ed.), L’Ecrivain francophone a la crois ee
des langues: entretiens , Paris, Karthala, 1997 , pp. 17 – 34 .
` Ces voix qui m’assi egent ,  Paris, Albin Michel, 1999 .
La Disparition de la langue franc ̧aise , Paris, Albin Michel, 2003 .
`  ̈ Djema ı, Abdelkader, Camus aOran , Paris, Michalon, 1995 .
Dostoyevsky, F., Notes from the Underground , trans. Jane Kentish, Oxford, Oxford
University Press (World’s Classics), 1991 .
Drake, David, ‘Sartre, Camus and the Algerian War’, Sartre Studies International 5 . 1
( 1999 ), 16 – 32 .
Dunn, Susan, ‘From Burke to Camus: Reconceiving the Revolution’, Salmagundi 84
( 1989 ), 214 – 29 .
Dunwoodie,  Peter, Camus:  ‘L’Envers  et  l’Endroit’  and  ‘L’Exil  et  le  Royaume ’,
London, Grant & Cutler, 1985 .
 ̈ Une histoire ambivalente: Le dialogue Camus-Dosto ıevski , Paris, Nizet, 1996 .
Writing French Algeria , Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1998 .
Francophone  Writing  in  Transition:  Algeria  1900–1945 ,  Berne,  Peter  Lang,
2005 .
Dunwoodie, Peter and Edward J. Hughes (eds.), Constructing Memories: Camus,
Algeria and ‘Le Premier Homme’ , Stirling, Stirling French Publications, 1998 .
 ́  ́  ́ El Houssi, M., ‘Camus ou le d esir de M editerran ee’, Africa, America, Asia, Australia
15 ( 1993 ), 29 – 39 .
Ellison, David R., ‘Camus and the Rhetoric of Dizziness: La Chute ’, Contemporary
Literature 24 . 3 (Autumn 1983 ), 322 – 48 .
Under standing Albert Camus , Columbia, University of South Carolina Press, 1990 .
Felman, Shoshana, ‘Camus’ “The Fall”, or The Betrayal of the Witness’, in Shoshana
Felman and Dori Laub, Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in Literature, Psycho-
analysis and History , New York, Routledge, 1992 , pp. 165 – 203 .
Fitch, Brian T., The Narcissistic Text: A Reading of Camus’s Fiction , Toronto, Uni-
versity of Toronto Press, 1982 .
 ́  ́ Fouchet, M.-P., Un jour, je m’en souviens . . . M emoire parl ee , Paris, Mercure de
France, 1968 .
Freeman, E., The Theatre of Albert Camus: A Critical Study , London, Methuen,
1971 .
214
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Garfitt, (J. S.) Toby, ‘Grenier, Malraux, Camus’, Europe 897 – 8 (January–February
2004 ), 208 – 23 .
Garfitt, J. S. T., ‘Grenier and Camus: From Les Iles to La Chute ’, Forum for Modern
Language Studies 17 . 3 ( 1981 ), 217 – 29 .
‘Le Premier homm(ag)e: Grounding History in Love’, in Dunwoodie and Hughes
(eds.), Constructing Memories , pp. 1 – 8 .
 ́  ́  ́ ˆ Gay-Crosier, Raymond, Les Envers d’un echec: etude sur le th e atre d’Albert Camus ,
Paris, Minard, 1967 .
Giles, J. (ed.), French Existentialism: Consciousness, Ethics and Relations with Oth-
ers , Amsterdam, Rodopi, 1999 .
Gordon,  A.  F., Ghostly  Matters.  Haunting  and  the  Sociological  Imagination ,
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1997 .
` Gray, Margaret E., ‘Les “Juges Int egres” de Clamence: Une lecture psychanalytique
` de La Chute ’, in Lionel Dubois (ed.), Albert Camus entre la mis ere et le soleil ,
Poitiers, Pont-Neuf, 1997 , pp. 73 – 80 .
Grenier, Jean, Les Iles , Paris, Gallimard, 1959 ( 1933 ).
Albert Camus. Souvenirs , Paris, Gallimard, 1968 .
Sous l’occupation , Paris, Claire Paulhan, 1997 .
Grenier, Roger, Albert Camus. Soleil et ombre: une biographie intellectuelle , Paris,
Gallimard, 1987 .
 ́ Gu erin, Jeanyves, Camus: Portrait de l’artiste en citoyen , Paris, Bourin, 1993 .
 ́ Gu erin, Jeanyves (ed.), Camus et la politique , Paris, L’Harmattan, 1985 .
 ́ Camus  et  le  premier  ‘Combat’ ,  La  Garenne-Colombes,  Editions  europ eennes
Erasme, 1990 .
Haddour, Azzedine, Colonial Myths: History and Narrative , Manchester, Manch-
ester University Press, 2000 .
‘The Camus–Sartre Debate and the Colonial Question in Algeria’, in Charles Fors-
dick and David Murphy (eds.), Francophone Postcolonial Studies: A Critical
Introduction , London, Arnold, 2003 , pp. 66 – 76 .
Hargreaves, Alec, ‘Caught in the Middle: the Liberal Dilemma in the Algerian War’,
Nottingham French Studies 25 . 2 ( 1986 ), 73 – 82 .
‘Camus and the Colonial Question in Algeria’, Muslim World 77 ( 1987 ), 164 – 74 .
Harrison, Nicholas, Postcolonial Criticism. History, Theory and the Work of Fiction ,
Cambridge, Polity, 2003 .
`  ́  ́ ˆ Hart, Elisabeth, ‘Face a face: l’ ethique l evinasienne dans “L’H ote” ’, in Lionel Dubois
(ed.), Les Trois guerres d’Albert Camus , Poitiers, Les Editions du Pont-Neuf,
1995 , pp. 172 – 7 .
 ́ ` H enein,  Georges,  ‘Lettre a  Henri  Calet, 16 avril 1948 ’, Grandes  Largeurs 2
(autumn/winter 1981 ), 66 .
Hodgkin, K. and S. Radstone, Contested Pasts , London and New York, Routledge,
2003 .
Horowitz, Louise, ‘Of Women and Arabs: Sexual and Racial Polarization in Camus’,
Modern Language Studies 17 . 3 (Summer 1987 ), 54 – 61 .
Hughes, Edward J., Albert Camus: Le Premier Homme/La Peste , Glasgow, University
of Glasgow French and German Publications, 1995 .
‘Camus and the Resistance to History’, in E. J. Hughes, Writing Marginality in
Modern French Literature: from Loti to Genet , Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2001 , pp. 102 – 34 .
215
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Huyssens,  Andreas, Twilight  Memories:  Marking  Time  in  a  Culture  of  Amnesia ,
London, Routledge, 1995 .
Isaac, Jeffrey C., Arendt, Camus and Modern Rebellion , London, Yale University
Press, 1992 .
ˆ  ́  ́ Jeanson, Francis, ‘Albert Camus, ou l’ ame r evolt ee’, Les Temps modernes 79 ( 1952 ),
2070 – 90 .
‘Pour tout vous dire’, Les Temps modernes 82 ( 1952 ), 354 – 83 .
Jones, Rosemarie, Camus: ‘L’Etranger’ and ‘La Chute’ , London, Grant & Cutler,
1994 .
Judt, Tony, ‘The Lost World of Albert Camus’, New York Review of Books 41 . 16
( 6 October 1994 ), 3 – 5 .
The Burden of Responsibility , Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press,
1998 .
Kelly, Debra, Autobiography and Independence. Selfhood and Creativity in North
African Postcolonial Writing in French , Liverpool, Liverpool University Press,
2005 .
 ̈ Khatibi, Abdelkebir, Maghreb pluriel , Paris, Deno el, 1983 .
King, Adele (ed.), Camus’s ‘L’Etranger’: Fifty Years on , New York, St Martin’s Press,
1992 .
Knapp, Bettina L., Critical Essays on Albert Camus , Boston, MA, G. K. Hall & Co.,
1988 .
Knauss, P. R., The Persistence of Patriarchy: Class, Gender and Ideology in Twentieth-
Century Algeria , New York, Praeger, 1987 .
Koestler, Arthur, Darkness at Noon , London, Cape, 1940 .
The Yogi and the Commissar , London, Cape, 1945 .
` Kouchkine, Eug ‘ Les Justes : le tragique de l’amour et du renoncement’, in Jacque- ene,
 ́ ` line L evi-Valensi and Agn es Spiquel (eds.), Camus et le lyrisme , Paris, Editions
SEDES, 1997 , pp. 161 – 71 .
Krapp, J., ‘Time and Ethics in Albert Camus’s The Plague ’, University of Toronto
Quarterly 68 . 2 ( 1999 ), 655 – 76 .
Kritzman, Lawrence D., ‘Camus’s Curious Humanism or the Intellectual in Exile’,
Modern Language Notes 112 . 4 ( 1997 ), 550 – 75 .
Le  Sueur,  James  D.,  ‘The  Unbearable  Solitude  of  Being:  the  Question  of  Albert
Camus’, in Uncivil War: Intellectuals and Identity Politics during the Decolonisa-
tion of Algeria , Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001 , pp. 87 – 127 .
 ́ ` ˆ  ́ L evi-Valensi,  Jacqueline,  ‘Terre  faite a  mon ame:  pour  une  mythologie  du  r eel’,
Perspectives 5 ( 1998 ), 185 – 97 .
 ́ ˆ `  ́ L evi-Valensi, Jacqueline (ed.), Albert Camus et le th e atre: Actes du Colloque tenu a
Amiens du 31 mai au 2 juin 1988 , Paris, IMEC, 1992 .
` Camus a ‘Combat’ , Paris, Gallimard, 2002 .
 ́  ́ L evi-Valensi,  Jacqueline  and  Denis  Salas  (eds.), Albert  Camus:  R eflexions  sur  le
terrorisme 2 . , Paris, Nicolas Philippe, 200
Locke,  F.  W.,  ‘The  Metamorphoses  of  Jean-Baptiste  Clamence’, Symposium 21
( 1967 ), 306 – 15 .
 ́  ́ Malraux, A., ‘D’une jeunesse europ eenne’, in Andr e Chamson et al., Ecrits , Paris,
Grasset, 1927 .
Maougal, Mohamed Lakhdar (ed.), Albert Camus. Assassinat post-mortem , Algiers,
Editions APIC, 2004 .
216
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Margerrison, Christine, ‘Struggling with the Other: Gender and Race in the Youthful
Writings  of  Camus’,  in  J.  Giles  (ed.), French  Existentialism:  Consciousness,
Ethics and Relations with Others , Amsterdam, Rodopi, 1999 , pp. 191 – 211 .
Masters, Brian, Camus: a Study , London, Heinemann, 1974 .
McBride,  William  L.,  ‘The  Polemic  in  the  Pages  of Les  Temps  modernes ( 1952 )
Concerning  Francis  Jeanson’s  Review  of  Camus’ The  Rebel ’,  in Sartre  and
Existentialism , 8 vols., Hamden, CT, Garland, 1997 , vol. viii , pp. 79 – 93 .
McCarthy, Patrick, Camus. A Critical Study of his Life and Work , London, Hamish
Hamilton, 1982 .
‘The First Arab in L’Etranger ’, Revue CELFAN Review 4 . 3 ( 1985 ), 23 – 6 .
Albert  Camus:  ‘The  Stranger’ (Landmarks  of  World  Literature),  Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1988 ; second edition 2005 .
 ́ Memmi, Albert, ‘Camus ou le colonisateur de bonne volont e’, La Nef , 12 December
1957 , 95 – 6 .
 ́  ́  ́  ́ Portrait du colonis e, pr ec ed ede Portrait du colonisateur , Paris, Gallimard, 1985
( 1957 ).
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, Humanisme et terreur , Paris, Gallimard, 1947 .
Meyers,  Jeffrey,  ‘Camus’ The  Fall and  Van  Eyck’s The Adoration  of  the  Lamb ’,
Mosaic 7 . 3 ( 1974 ), 43 – 51 .
 ́  ́ Montgomery, Geraldine F., Noces pour femme seule. Le f eminin et le sacr e dans
l’œuvre d’Albert Camus , Amsterdam/New York, Rodopi, 2004 .
Murchland,  Bernard,  ‘Camus  and  Sartre:  the  Anatomy  of  a  Quarrel’,  in  Michel-
Antoine  Burnier  (ed.), Choice  of  Action:  The  French  Existentialists  on  the
Political Front Line , trans. Bernard Murchland, New York, Random House,
1968 , pp. 175 – 94 .
 ́ Nacer-Khodja,  Hamid, Albert  Camus.  Jean  S enac  ou  le  fils  rebelle ,  Paris,  EDIF,
2004 .
O’Brien, Conor Cruise, Albert Camus of Europe and Africa , New York, The Viking
Press, 1970 .
Camus , Glasgow, Collins (Fontana), 1970 .
‘The Fall’, The New Republic , 16 October 1995 .
Orme, Mark, ‘ Retour aux sources : Crisis and Reappraisal in Albert Camus’s Final
Pronouncements on Justice’, Modern and Contemporary France 11 . 4 ( 2003 ),
463 – 74 .
Oxenhandler,  Neil, Looking  for  Heroes  in  Postwar  France.  Albert  Camus,  Max
Jacob, Simone Weil , Hanover, NH, Dartmouth College/University Press of New
England, 1996 .
Pollmann, Leo, Sartre and Camus: Literature of Existence , trans. Helen and Gregor
Sebba, New York, Ungar, 1970 .
 ́ Rioux,  Jean-Pierre,  and  Jean-Franc ̧ois  Sirinelli  (eds.), La  Guerre  d’Alg erie  et  les
intellectuels franc ̧ais , Brussels, Complexe, 1991 .
Rizzuto,  Anthony, Camus.  Love  and  Sexuality ,  Gainesville,  University  Press  of
Florida, 1998 .
Roman, Joel,  ‘Histoire  et  utopie  dans Ni  victimes  ni  bourreaux ’,  in  Jeanyves
 ́ Gu erin (ed.), Camus et le premier ‘Combat’ , La Garenne-Colombes, Editions
 ́ europ eennes Erasme, 1990 , pp. 125 – 34 .
 ́  ́  ́ Rousset,  David,  ‘Au  secours  des  d eport es  dans  les  camps  sovi etiques’  ( 1949 ),  in
Lignes n.s. 2 (May 2000 ), 143 – 60 .
217
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Royle, Peter, The Sartre–Camus Controversy: A Literary and Philosophical Critique ,
Ottawa, University of Ottawa Press, 1982 .
Saadi, Yacef, La Bataille d’Alger , vol. i , Algiers, Entreprise Nationale du Livre, 1984 .
Said, Edward, Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Orient , London, Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1978 .
Culture and Imperialism , London, Vintage, 1994 ( 1993 ).
Sarocchi, J., Le Dernier Camus ou ‘Le Premier Homme’ , Paris, Nizet, 1995 .
 ́  ́  ́ ‘La  M editerran ee  est  un  songe,  Monsieur’, Perspectives.  Revue  de  l’Universit e
 ́  ̈  ́ h ebra ıque de J erusalem 5 ( 1998 ), 109 – 29 .
 ́ ` Sartre, Jean-Paul, ‘R eponse a Albert Camus’, Les Temps modernes 82 ( 1952 ), 334 – 53 .
‘Explication de L’Etranger ’, in Situations i , Paris, Gallimard, 1947 , pp. 92 – 112 .
Also available as ‘Camus’ “The Outsider” ’, in Jean-Paul Sartre, Literary and
Philosophical Essays , trans. Annette Michelson, New York, Criterion Books,
1955 , pp. 24 – 41 .
Situations v , Paris, Gallimard, 1964 ; translated as Colonialism and Neocolonial-
ism , trans. Azzedine Haddour, Steve Brewer and Terry McWilliams, London,
Routledge, 2001 .
Showalter, Jr, English, Exiles and Strangers: A Reading of Camus’s ‘Exile and the
Kingdom’ , Columbus, Ohio State University Press, 1984 .
‘The Stranger’: Humanity and the Absurd , Boston, Twayne, 1989 .
 ́  ́ Siblot, Paul, and Jean-Louis Planche, ‘Le 8 mai 1945 : el ements pour une analyse des
 ́  ́ positions de Camus face au nationalisme alg erien’, in Jeanyves Gu erin (ed.),
Camus et la politique , Paris, L’Harmattan, 1986 , pp. 153 – 75 .
Sprintzen, David, Camus: A Critical Examination , Philadelphia, Temple University
Press, 1988 .
Sprintzen, David A., and Adrian van den Hoven (eds.), Sartre and Camus: A Historic
Confrontation , Amherst, Humanity Books, 2004 .
 ́ St ephane, N., ‘La Mer heureuse’, Europe 77 . 846 (October 1999 ), 132 – 44 .
Suther,  Judith  D., Essays  on  Camus’s  ‘Exile  and  the  Kingdom’ ,  Jackson,  MS,
University of Mississippi Romance Monographs, 1980 .
Tarrow, Susan, Exile from the Kingdom: A Political Re-reading of Albert Camus ,
Birmingham, University of Alabama Press, 1985 .
Thody, Philip, Albert Camus, 1913–1960 , London, Hamish Hamilton, 1961 .
ˆ van  der  Poel,  Ieme,  ‘Albert  Camus,  ou  la  critique  postcoloniale  face  au  “r eve
 ́  ́ m editerran een”’, Francophone Postcolonial Studies 2 . 1 ( 2004 ), 70 – 8 .
V anney, Philippe, ‘A propos d’une lecture: Ni victimes ni bourreaux d’Albert Camus
 ́  ́ ou la probl ematique r evolutionnaire dans les relations internationales’, Bulletin
 ́ d’ etudes franc ̧aises , University of Tokyo, 17 ( 1986 ), 36 – 67 .
 ́ ‘Albert Camus devant la guerre’, Bulletin d’ etudes franc ̧aises , University of Tokyo,
19 ( 1988 ), 19 – 55 ; and 21 ( 1990 ), 1 – 30 .
Vulor, Ena C., Colonial and Anti-Colonial Discourses: Albert Camus and Algeria ,
Lanham, MD, University Press of America, 2001 .
ˆ Walker, David (ed.), Albert Camus: Les Extr emes et l’Equilibre: Actes du colloque
de Keele, 25–27 mars 1993 , Amsterdam, Rodopi, 1994 .
‘Knowing  the  place  for  the  first  time?’,  in  Dunwoodie  and  Hughes  (eds.),
Constructing Memories , pp. 9 – 20 .
Walzer, Michael, ‘Albert Camus’s Algerian War’, in The Company of Critics , New
York, Basic Books, 1988 , pp. 136 – 52 .
218
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

guide to further reading
Wertsch, J. V., Voices of Collective Remembering , Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 2002 .
 ́ Weyembergh,  Maurice,  ‘Ni  victimes  ni  bourreaux:  continuit e  ou  rupture?’,  in
 ́ Jeanyves Gu erin (ed.), Camus et le premier ‘Combat’ , La Garenne-Colombes,
 ́ Editions europ eennes Erasme, 1990 , pp. 109 – 24 .
 ́ Albert Camus ou la m emoire des origines , Brussels, De Boeck, 1998 .
Williams, James S., Camus: ‘La Peste’ , London, Grant & Cutler, 2000 .
Wood, N., ‘Colonial Nostalgia and Le Premier Homme ’, in Vectors of Memory:
Legacies of Trauma in Postwar Europe , Oxford, Berg, 1999 , pp. 143 – 66 .
Young, Robert J. C., Postcolonialism. An Historical Introduction , Oxford, Blackwell,
2001 .
‘Sartre:  the  “African”  Philosopher’,  in  Jean-Paul  Sartre, Colonialism  and  Neo-
colonialism ,  trans.  Azzedine  Haddour,  Steve  Brewer  and  Terry  McWilliams,
London, Routledge, 2001 , pp. vii–xxiv.
219
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

the cambridge companion to camus
Albert Camus is one of the iconic figures of twentieth-century French literature,
one of France’s most widely read modern literary authors and one of the youngest
winners of the Nobel Prize for Literature. As the author of L’Etranger and the
architect of the notion of ‘the Absurd’ in the 1940 s, he shot to prominence in
France and beyond. His work nevertheless attracted hostility as well as acclaim
and he was increasingly drawn into bitter political controversies, especially the
issue of France’s place and role in the country of his birth, Algeria. Most recently,
postcolonial studies has identified in his writings a set of preoccupations ripe for
revisitation. Situating Camus in his cultural and historical context, this Compan-
ion explores his best-selling novels, his ambiguous engagement with philosophy,
his theatre, his increasingly high-profile work as a journalist and his reflection
on ethical and political questions that continue to concern readers today.
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

THE CAMBRIDGE
COMPANION TO
CAMUS
EDITED BY
EDWARD J. HUGHES
Queen Mary, University of London
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

cambridge university press
 ̃ Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, S ao Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge cb2 8ru ,UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/ 9780521549783
© C Cambridge University Press 2007
publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception This
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2007
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
isbn 978 - 0 - 521 - 84048 - 4 hardback
isbn  978 - 0 - 521 - 54978 - 3 paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for
external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

CONTENTS
Notes on contributors page vii
Acknowledgements x
Chronology xi
Preliminary notes and abbreviations xvii
Introduction 1
edward j. hughes
part i:  biography and influences
13 1 Camus: a life lived in critical times
ieme van der poel
26 2 Situating Camus: the formative influences
toby garfitt
39 3 Autobiographical soundings in L’Envers et l’Endroit
edward j. hughes
part ii:  themes, preoccupations and genres
53 4 Rethinking the Absurd: Le Mythe de Sisyphe
david carroll
67 5 Camus and the theatre
christine margerrison
79 6 Camus the journalist
jeanyves guerin
v
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

contents
7 Camus and social justice 93
martin crowley
106 8 Violence and ethics in Camus
colin davis
11 8 9 Camus and Sartre: the great quarrel
charles forsdick
131 10 Portraits of women, visions of Algeria
danielle marx-scouras
part iii:  texts and contexts
147 11 From Noces to L’Etranger
peter dunwoodie
165 12 Layers of meaning in La Peste
margaret e. gray
178 13 Withheld identity in La Chute
david r. ellison
191 14 Le Premier Homme and the literature of loss
debra kelly
203 Postface
edward j. hughes
210 Guide to further reading
Index 220
vi
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
david carroll is Professor of French and Director of European Studies at the
University of California, Irvine. His books include The Subject in Question: The
Languages  of  Theory  and  the  Strategies  of  Fiction ( 1982 ); Paraesthetics:  Fou-
cault, Lyotard, Derrida ( 1987 ); and French Literary Fascism: Nationalism, Anti-
Semitism, and the Ideology of Culture ( 1995 ). He is also editor of a collection of
essays entitled The States of ‘Theory’ ( 1989 , 1994 ). He has recently completed a
book entitled Albert Camus, The Algerian: Colonialism, Terrorism, Justice (forth-
coming).
martin crowley is Senior Lecturer in French at the University of Cambridge.
His  publications  include: Duras,  Writing,  and  the  Ethical:  Making  the  Broken
Whole ( 2000 ); Robert Antelme: Humanity, Community, Testimony ( 2003 ); and
 ́  ́ Robert Antelme: L’Humanit e irr eductible ( 2004 ). He is currently writing a book
on conceptions of the human in post- 1945 French thought.
colin davis is  Professor  of  French  at  Royal  Holloway,  University  of  London.
His research falls principally in the area of post-war French fiction and thought,
with a particular interest in the connections between ethics and literature. His
principal publications are Michel Tournier: Philosophy and Fiction ( 1988 ); Elie
Wiesel’s Secretive Texts ( 1994 ); Levinas: An Introduction ( 1996 ); Ethical Issues in
Twentieth-Century French Fiction: Killing the Other ( 2000 ); French Fiction in the
Mitterrand Years: Memory, Narrative, Desire (co-authored with Elizabeth Fallaize,
2000 ); and After Poststructuralism: Reading, Stories and Theory ( 2004 ).
peter dunwoodie is Professor of French Literature and Head of the Department
of English and Comparative Literature, Goldsmiths, University of London. His
most recent book-publications are Writing French Algeria ( 1998 ) and Francophone
Writing in Transition ( 2005 ). He is currently working on the subject of colonialism
and proselytism in the work of Louis Bertrand.
david r. ellison is  Professor  of  French  and  Comparative  Literature  at  the
University  of  Miami.  He  is  the  author  of The  Reading  of  Proust ( 1984 );
vii
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

notes on contributors
Understanding Albert Camus ( 1990 ); Of Words and the World: Referential Anxi-
ety in Contemporary French Fiction ( 1993 ); and Ethics and Aesthetics in European
Modernist Literature: From the Sublime to the Uncanny ( 2001 ).
charles forsdick is Professor of French at the University of Liverpool. He is
the author of Victor Segalen and the Aesthetics of Diversity: Journeys between Cul-
tures ( 2000 ) and Travel in Twentieth-Century French and Francophone Cultures:
the  Persistence  of  Diversity ( 2005 ),  and  co-editor  of Francophone  Postcolonial
Studies: a Critical Introduction ( 2003 ). He is currently co-editing a volume on
Postcolonial Thought in the Francophone World ( 2008 ), and completing a type-
script entitled Representing the Revolutionary: the Afterlives of Toussaint Louver-
 ́ ture . His critical editions of Victor Segalen’s Equip ee and Essai sur l’exotisme are
forthcoming.
toby garfitt is Fellow and Tutor in French at Magdalen College, Oxford. He is
the author of The Work and Thought of Jean Grenier (1898–1971) ( 1983 ), and
of numerous articles on Grenier, Mauriac, Green, La Tour du Pin, Camus and
 ́ Makine, among others. His edited volumes include one entitled Daniel Hal evy,
Henri Petit et les Cahiers Verts ( 2004 ), and another devoted to the contemporary
writer Sylvie Germain ( Sylvie Germain: rose des vents et de l’ailleurs , 2003 ). He
 ́ has recently completed a full-scale biography of Jean Grenier, La Discr etion d’un
ˆ ma ıtre (forthcoming).
margaret e. gray is  Associate  Professor  in  the  Department  of  French  and
Italian  at  Indiana  University,  Bloomington,  Indiana.  She  is  the  author  of Post-
modern Proust ( 1992 ), and of articles on Proust, George Sand, Beckett, Camus,
Simone  de  Beauvoir  and  the  Belgian  writer  Jean-Philippe  Toussaint.  Her  cur-
rent  typescript,  entitled Stolen  Limelight:  Gender,  Display,  and  Displacement
in  Twentieth-Century  French  and  Francophone  Narrative ,  is  under  review  for
publication.
jeanyves guerin is  Professor  of  French  at  the  University  of  Paris  III  (La
Sorbonne Nouvelle). His main areas of research are twentieth-century French the-
 ́  ́ atre (Audiberti, Ghelderode, Ionesco, Claudel) and la litt erature engag ee (Camus,
 ́ ˆ Malraux, Sartre). He is the author of Le Th  d’Audiberti et le baroque ( 1976 ); e atre
Camus,  portrait  de  l’artiste  en  citoyen ( 1993 ); Audiberti.  Cent  ans  de  solitude
 ́ ( 1999 ); and Art nouveau ou homme nouveau. Modernit e et progressisme dans
 ́ ` la litt erature franc ̧aise du xx esi ecle ( 2002 ). He is the editor of several collective
`  ́ ˆ ` volumes, including the Dictionnaire des pi eces th e atrales franc ̧aises du xx esi ecle
( 2005 ).
edward j. hughes is  Professor  of  French  Studies  at  Queen  Mary,  University
of  London.  He  is  the  author  of Marcel  Proust:  a  Study  in  the  Quality  of
Awareness ( 1983 ); Albert  Camus:  ‘La  Peste’/‘Le  Premier  Homme’ ( 1995 );  and
viii
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

notes on contributors
Writing Marginality in Modern French Literature: from Loti to Genet ( 2001 ). He
is co-editor, with Peter Dunwoodie, of Constructing Memories: Camus, Algeria
and ‘Le Premier Homme’ ( 1998 ).
debra kelly is Professor of French and Francophone Literary and Cultural Stud-
ies at the University of Westminster and Director of the Group for War and Cul-
ture Studies. She is an Associate Fellow of the Institute of Germanic and Romance
Studies, University of London. She has published widely in the fields of Text and
Image Studies (especially the early twentieth-century Parisian avant-garde), War
and Culture Studies focusing on France in the twentieth century, and Francophone
Postcolonial Studies. Her major publications are Pierre Albert-Birot. A Poetics in
Movement, A Poetics of Movement ( 1997 ) and Autobiography and Independence.
Selfhood and Creativity in Postcolonial North African Writing in French ( 2005 ).
christine margerrison is a Tutor in French Studies at Lancaster University.
She is the author of a number of articles on Camus and is currently completing
ˆ a book on him, ‘Ces forces obscures de l’ ame’ : Women, Race and Origins in the
Writings of Albert Camus (forthcoming). She is also joint editor of a forthcoming
 ́ ` volume on post-independence Algeria, L’Alg erie: quarante ans apr es .
danielle marx-scouras is  Professor  of  French  at  Ohio  State  University,
Columbus, Ohio. She is co-editor of the review Research in African Literatures
and edited that review’s special number on ‘Dissident Algeria’ ( 1999 ). She is the
author of The Cultural Politics of ‘Tel Quel’: Literature and the Left in the Wake
of Engagement ( 1996 ); La France de Zebda: 1981–2004 ( 2005 ); and of numerous
articles on French, Francophone and Italian literature.
ieme van der poel is  Professor  of  French  Literature  at  the  University  of
Amsterdam. Her books include: Traveling Theory: France and the US ( 1999 , with
 ́  ́ Sophie Bertho), and Congo-Oc ean: un chemin de fer colonial controvers e ( 2006 ).
She was appointed ‘Chevalier dans les Arts et les Lettres’ by the French govern-
ment in 2004 for her work in the field of Francophone literature, and has published
widely on Francophone Maghrebin literature, French Modernist writing and colo-
nialism. She is currently directing a research project, funded by the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), on the new Moroccan literatures in
French, Spanish and Dutch.
ix
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My first thanks go to the contributors to this volume. They have shown a
commitment to the project that has been immensely encouraging through-
out, as has their engagement with Camus’s work and the issues it raises. I
want to thank in particular Charles Forsdick for his excellent advice on a
number of issues. I also thank Mike Routledge for his translation of chapter
6 and the French Department of Royal Holloway, University of London for
its very generous help. Warm thanks go to the staff of Cambridge University
Press, in particular to Linda Bree, Rachel de Wachter, Maartje Scheltens,
Joanna Breeze and Audrey Cotterell, who combined to guide me through
the various planning and delivery stages of the book. Thanks are also due
to Eamonn Hughes for his help with the Index. The acknowledgement of
indebtedness would not be complete without a sincere expression of grati-
tude to the anonymous readers at Cambridge University Press. In suggest-
ing many excellent modifications to my initial volume proposal, they have
greatly influenced and improved the shape of this book. Needless to say, any
limitations in its overall conception remain my own responsibility.
x
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

CHRONOLOGY
7 November  Birth of Albert Camus. His working-class parents, Catherine
 ́ ` ` 1913 H el ene Sint es and Lucien Auguste Camus, are living in the
village  of  Mondovi  near  Constantine,  in  Algeria.  A  French
colony  between 1831 and 1962 ,  Algeria  had  been  declared
French national territory by the French government in the mid
nineteenth century and was administered as three departments
of the French nation.
August 1914 Camus’s family move to Algiers, living in the working-class
district of Belcourt.
11 October Death of Camus’s father as a result of wounds received at the
1914 Battle of the Marne. He is buried in a French war cemetery in
Saint-Brieuc in Brittany.
May 1920 Camus and his brother Lucien acquire the official status of
‘pupilles de la nation’ or war orphans.
 ́ October Camus begins his secondary education at the Grand Lyc ee in
1924 Algiers  and  thus  enters  a  culturally  very  different  world
from   that   of   his   ‘petit   colon’   (working-class   colonial)
background.
1930 – 1 French celebrations to mark the centenary of the colonial occu-
pation of Algeria.
December Camus, diagnosed as having tuberculosis, is forced to interrupt
 ́ 1930 his  studies  at  the  Grand  Lyc ee.  His  life  will  be  blighted  by
intermittent ill-health.
1931 – 4 Key period in Camus’s intellectual development. His teacher
and mentor, the writer Jean Grenier, opens up the world of
philosophical ideas for him.
xi
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

chronology
 ́ 16 June Camus marries Simone Hi e. The marriage will end two years
1934 later.
1935 Camus joins the Algerian Communist Party.
1936 Outbreak  of  the  Spanish  Civil  War.  Camus  will  prove  an
outspoken  supporter  of  the  Spanish  Republican  cause  over
 ́ the  years.  Publication  of R evolte  dans  les  Asturies .  Camus
 ́ ˆ involved in amateur theatre in Algeria with the Th e atre du Tra-
 ́ ˆ vail. He will go on to found the Th e atre de l’Equipe in 1937 .
Summer Camus travels to central Europe and Italy.
1936
1937 Camus delivers the opening address at the launch of the new
Maison de la Culture in Algiers ( 8 February). His first book,
L’Envers et l’Endroit , dedicated to Jean Grenier, is published
in Algiers by Editions Charlot. Camus is expelled from the
Algerian  Communist  Party  for  opposing  the  Party’s  ending
of its campaign for indigenous civil rights. In November, he
begins  work  at  the  Institute  of  Meteorology  in  Algiers  and
will work there until September 1938 .
September The  writer  Pascal  Pia,  editor-in-chief  of  a  new  newspaper,
 ́ 1938 Alger r epublicain , hires Camus as an editorial secretary. The
paper runs from 6 October 1938 to 28 October 1939 .
 ́ 20 October    Camus’s  review  of  Sartre’s La  Naus ee ( Nausea )  appears  in
 ́ 1938 Alger r epublicain .
23 May Publication of collection of lyrical essays, Noces .
1939
5 – 15 June Camus  publishes  a  series  of  ground-breaking  newspaper
` 1939 articles, ‘Mis ere de la Kabylie’. Although his work is not anti-
colonialist, it lays bare the catastrophic economic impact of
colonialism  on  the  Kabylia  region  of  Algeria.  His  critique
comes at a time when metropolitan France shows no interest
in the state of affairs in Algeria.
September Pascal  Pia  and  Camus  found  a  second  newspaper, Le  Soir
 ́ 1939 r epublicain .
 ́ 10 January Following  conflict  with  the  censors, Le  Soir  r epublicain is
1940 suspended by the French authorities.
xii
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

chronology
March 1940 Camus arrives in Paris to work for Paris-Soir as a ‘ secdac ’, or
editorial secretary. Although he does not publish in this paper,
he  finds  out  how  a  big  popular  newspaper  works.  He  will
spend the war years partly in France, partly in Algeria.
December Camus remarries. His second wife is Francine Faure.
1940
1940 – 2 Camus  working  on  texts  that  will  establish  his  reputation
as one of the most important writers of his generation: the
novel L’Etranger (published May 1942 ), the essay Le Mythe
de Sisyphe (December 1942 ). The play Caligula , written sub-
stantially in the late 1930 s, is published in 1944 .
1942 Camus suffers a relapse of tuberculosis.
1943 Sartre’s  very  positive  review  of L’Etranger appears  in  the
Resistance periodical Les Cahiers du Sud . Camus is actively
engaged with the Combat group of the Resistance movement.
He becomes editor-in-chief of the clandestine newspaper Com-
` bat .  Publication  of  the  first  of  the Lettres a  un  ami  alle-
mand . Camus begins working for the Gallimard publishing
house.
1944 The play Le Malentendu receives an indifferent reception.
1944 to Writing  for Combat ,  Camus  plays  an  influential  role  in
1947 public  debate  in  France.  He  is  now  a  prominent  figure  in
Parisian intellectual circles. He writes of the journalist as a
historian of the day-to-day ( Combat , 1 September 1944 ).
May 1945 Thousands of indigenous Algerians are killed by the French
 ́ army in S etif in retaliation for the killing of Europeans. Coin-
cidentally a trip Camus made as a reporter to Algeria ended
immediately prior to the massacres.
8 August Camus  writes  an  outspoken  condemnation  of  the  bombing
1945 of Hiroshima in Combat . He is one of the few journalists in
France to do so.
September First performance of Caligula . The play is a success.
1945
March–June  Camus travels to the United States and Canada.
1946
xiii
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

chronology
November Camus  publishes  eight  articles,  reflecting  on  revolt,  revolu-
1946 tion  and  violence,  under  the  heading Ni  victimes  ni  bour-
reaux .  Camus’s  position  will  contrast  markedly  with  the
views expressed by the philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty
in Humanisme et terreur ( Humanism and Terror ), published
in 1947 .
10 June La Peste , written mainly during the last years of the war, is
1947 published. 22 , 000 copies are sold in just two weeks.
` October First performance of L’Etat de si ege . The play closes after only
1948 seventeen performances.
Summer Camus travels to South America.
1949
December First performance of Les Justes . The play is a success.
1949
1950 A carefully chosen selection of Camus’s editorials appear in a
volume entitled Actuelles i .
 ́  ́ 18 October    Publication of L’Homme r evolt e .
1951
 ́  ́ 1952 Francis Jeanson’s hostile review of L’Homme r evolt e appears
in Les Temps modernes . The ensuing acrimonious exchanges
involving Sartre and Camus acquire the status of a national
dispute. In the wake of the Les Temps modernes quarrel and
given Camus’s anti-communism, he becomes an increasingly
isolated figure in French intellectual milieux of the 1950 s.
December Camus   visits   Laghouat   in   the   Algerian   hinterland.   The
` 1952 landscape will provide the setting for ‘La Femme adult ere’.
1953 Publication of Actuelles ii .
 ́ 1954 Publication of L’Et e . In October, Camus makes a brief trip to
The Hague and Amsterdam.
1 November  Outbreak  of  what  was  to  become  the  Algerian  War  of
1954 Independence.
1955 Camus becomes a columnist at L’Express .
January Camus visits Algeria and calls for a civil truce there. The move
1956 fails and his position becomes further marginalised.
xiv
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

chronology
February He leaves L’Express .
1956
May 1956 Publication of La Chute .
September Camus’s   adaptation   of   Faulkner’s Requiem   for   a   Nun
1956 ( Requiem pour une nonne ) is performed.
November Soviet invasion of Hungary to suppress Hungarian uprising.
1956 Camus will cite this example of totalitarian repression in his
dispute with Marxist-leaning intellectuals in France.
15 March Speaking  at  the  Salle  Wagram  in  Paris,  Camus  expresses
1957 solidarity with Hungarian intellectuals and workers. He dis-
misses Stalinist culture as repressive and propagandising.
1957 Publication of L’Exil et le Royaume .
December Camus receives the Nobel Prize for literature in Stockholm. He
1957 dedicates his acceptance address to his primary-school teacher,
Louis  Germain.  At  a  press  conference,  when  pressed  about
French  Army  violence  in  the  Algerian  War,  he  makes  the
controversial statement that he will defend his mother before
justice.
1958 Camus draws together his journalistic writings on Algeria in
 ́ Actuelles iii : Chroniques Alg eriennes (1939–1958) . He pub-
 ́ lishes ‘Alg erie 1958 ’, justifying his position on the situation
there. He opposes colonial oppression but at the same time
underscores the rights of Algeria’s 1 . 1 million Europeans.
1959 Camus is working on what will remain his unfinished novel,
Le Premier Homme .
4 January Camus and his publisher friend Michel Gallimard die in a car
1960 crash south of Paris in Villeblevin.
July 1962 Algeria becomes independent.
1970 Conor Cruise O’Brien’s reading of Camus as a colonial author
takes Camus studies in a new direction. Subsequent, postcolo-
nial readings of his work will extend this critique.
1990 s Camus’s reputation is in some measure restored in the wake
 ́ of the decline of communism. In France, Bernard-Henri L evy
endorses  his  work.  A  bloody  civil  war  is  waged  in  Algeria
between the military government and Islamic fundamentalists
xv
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

chronology
(the  F.I.S.).  The  gruesome  violence  indirectly  prompts  a
favourable  reappraisal  of  Camus’s  work  by  a  number  of
Algerian Francophone women writers, among them Assia Dje-
bar. Djebar links Camus to the victims of assassinations car-
 ́ ried out by Algerian fundamentalists ( Le Blanc de l’Alg erie
( The White of Algeria ), 1995 ).
1994 Publication of Camus’s unfinished novel, Le Premier Homme .
The work is an international publishing success.
xvi
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

PRELIMINARY NOTES AND ABBREVIATIONS
Two French terms regularly used in the pages of this book derive from the
context of colonial French culture that Camus knew well. The first of these,
petit colon , literally ‘small colonial’, means a member of the colonial Euro-
pean working class. The second term, the pieds-noirs (literally ‘black feet’),
historically designated the stokers on a coal-powered boat who would have
worked barefoot – many of the stokers on French boats in the Mediterranean
in the early twentieth century were in fact indigenous Algerians. But from
the mid 1950 s on, pieds-noirs came to mean the French Algerians and partic-
ularly those who steadfastly considered Algeria as their homeland (for some
observers, the term indeed carried connotations of complicity with colonial
militarism). It was not a designation that Camus himself chose to use. With
Algerian independence in 1962 , les pieds-noirs came to signify the French
Algerians repatriated to France.
Titles and translations
Quotations  from  Camus’s  published  works  are  given  both  in  the  French
original  and  in  English  translation,  with  page  references  to  both  sources
indicated. Where published translations have been modified, this is signalled
in the text. Occasionally, contributors have provided their own translations;
where translations are not attributed, this is always the case.
Readers will find full bibliographical details of Camus’s published work in
the ‘Guide to Further Reading’ at the end of this volume, but they may find it
helpful to have a summary list here of those main works by Camus that are
cited in the volume, together with the English translations. The list is set out
in alphabetical order, the exception being that the titles of individual texts
within a larger text (for example individual section titles within a collection
such as L’Exil et le Royaume ) are located together as a sub-category at that
point  in  the  list).  The  original  date  of  publication  of  the  French  texts  is
indicated in parenthesis.
xvii
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

preliminary notes and abbreviations
Actuelles i ( 1950 ) Current Chronicles i
Actuelles ii ( 1953 ) Current Chronicles ii
Actuelles iii (Chroniques Current Chronicles iii ( Algeria)
 ́ alg eriennes) ( 1958 )
(The three volumes of Actuelles are partly translated in Resistance,
Rebellion, and Death )
 ́ ‘Alg erie 1958 ’( 1958 ) ‘Algeria 1958 ’
ˆ ‘Appel pour une tr eve civile’ ( 1956 ) ‘Appeal for a Civil Truce’
Caligula ( 1944 ) Caligula
` Camus a ‘Combat’ ( 2002 ) Camus at ‘Combat’
 ́ Carnets i : mai 1935-f evrier 1942 Notebooks i
( 1962 )
Carnets ii : janvier 1942-mars 1951 ii Notebooks
( 1964 )
La Chute ( 1956 ) The Fall
 ́ ‘Crise en Alg erie’ ( 1945 ) ‘Crisis in Algeria’
L’Envers et l’Endroit ( 1937 ) Betwixt and Between
‘L’Ironie’ ‘Irony’
‘Entre oui et non’ ‘Between Yes and No’
ˆ ‘La Mort dans l’ ame’ ‘Death in the Soul’
‘Amour de vivre’ ‘Love of Life’
‘L’Envers et l’Endroit’ ‘Betwixt and Between’
` L’Etat de si ege ( 1948 ) State of Siege
 ́ L’Et e ( 1954 ) Summer
including
‘Le Minotaure ou la halte d’Oran’ ‘The Minotaur or the Halt at
Oran’
 ́ ` ‘L’Exil d’H el ene’ ‘Helen’s Exile’
` ‘Retour a Tipasa’ ‘Return to Tipasa’
L’Etranger ( 1942 ) The Outsider (also translated as
The Stranger )
L’Exil et le Royaume ( 1957 ) Exile and the Kingdom
` ‘La Femme adult ere’ ‘The Adulterous Woman’
 ́ ‘Le Ren egat’ ‘The Renegade’
‘Les Muets’ ‘The Silent Men’
ˆ ‘L’H ote’ ‘The Guest’
‘Jonas ou l’Artiste au travail’ ‘The Artist at Work’
‘La Pierre qui pousse’ ‘The Growing Stone’
Fragments d’un combat, 1938–1940 Fragments of a Combat,
( 1978 ) 1938–1940
xviii
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

preliminary notes and abbreviations
 ́  ́ L’Homme r evolt e ( 1951 ) The Rebel
Les Justes ( 1949 ) The Just (also translated as The
Just Assassins )
` Lettres a un ami allemand ( 1945 ) Letters to a German Friend
Le Malentendu ( 1944 ) Cross Purpose
` ‘Mis ere de la Kabylie’ ( 1939 ) ‘Poverty in Kabylia’
La Mort heureuse ( 1971 ) A Happy Death
Le Mythe de Sisyphe ( 1942 ) The Myth of Sisyphus
Ni victimes ni bourreaux ( 1946 ) Neither Victims nor Executioners
Noces ( 1939 ) Nuptials
` ‘Noces a Tipasa’ ‘Nuptials at Tipasa’
`  ́ ‘Le Vent aDj emila’ ‘The Wind at Djemila’
 ́ ` ‘L’Et e a Alger’ ‘Summer in Algiers’
 ́ ‘Le D esert’ ‘The Desert’
La Peste ( 1947 ) The Plague
Le Premier Camus ( 1973 ) Youthful Writings
Le Premier Homme ( 1994 ) The First Man
 ́ ‘R eflexions sur la guillotine’ ( 1957 ) ‘Reflections on the guillotine’
French editions used
 ́ For the original French texts by Camus, the two-volume Pl eiade edition of his
 ́  ́ ˆ ` work has been used: vol. i : Th e R ecits, Nouvelles , Paris, Biblioth eque de atre,
 ́ `  ́ la Pl eiade, 1962 ; vol. ii : Essais , Paris, Biblioth eque de la Pl eiade, 1965 . This
edition contains the bulk of his fictional works and political and philosoph-
 ́ ical essays (the first two volumes of a new, substantially extended Pl eiade
edition of Camus’s complete works appeared in 2006 ).
 ́ For works not contained in the Pl eiade edition, the Companion makes use
of the available Gallimard editions.
Abbreviations
The  following  abbreviations  of  French  and  English  editions  of  Camus’s
works are used throughout the volume, with accompanying page references.
Full bibliographical details of these editions can be found in the ‘Guide to
Further Reading’ at the end of the volume.
BB Betwixt and Between (contained in Albert Camus : Lyrical
and Critical )
xix
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7

preliminary notes and abbreviations
BHR Between Hell and Reason
CAC Cahiers Albert Camus
` CC Camus a ‘Combat’
C i ,C ii ,C iii Carnets, vols. i , ii and iii
COP Caligula and Other Plays: Caligula, Cross Purpose, The
Just, The Possessed
Corr Correspondance Albert Camus/Jean Grenier
EK Exile and the Kingdom
Ess Essais
F The Fall
FC Fragments d’un combat, 1938–1940
FM The First Man
HD A Happy Death
MH La Mort heureuse
N i , N ii Notebooks, vols. i and ii
MS The Myth of Sisyphus
O The Outsider
P The Plague
PH Le Premier Homme
R The Rebel
RRD Resistance, Rebellion, and Death
SEN Selected Essays and Notebooks
 ́ ˆ  ́ TRN Th e atre, R ecits, Nouvelles
YW Youthful Writings
xx
Cambridge  Collections  Online © Cambridge University Press, 200 7