9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 108
5CAMUS AND SARTRE
1 Sartre or nostalgia for the universal idyll
The “revolted soul”
By the time Camus and Sartre were formally introduced in 1943, they were already
familiar  with,  and  had  publicly  expressed  measured  admiration  for,  each  other’s
works.  In  1938  and  1939  Camus  had  quite  favourably  reviewed  Sartre’s  Nausea
and  The Wall ( SEN : 167–72;  E : 1417–22). In 1943 Sartre wrote favourably of  The
Outsider (Sartre 1962a: 108 –21; Sartre 1993: 92–112). They first met in Paris in June
1943, at the opening of Sartre’s play  The Flies , and shortly thereafter Sartre became
involved with  Combat (where Camus was now editor), although he did not write for
it  until  after  the  Liberation.  In  an  interview  in  1944,  Camus  declared  himself  to
“have three friends in the literary world, André Malraux, even if I no longer see him
because of his political positions, René Char, who is like a brother to me, and Jean-
2 In  the  same  year  Sartre  asked  Camus  to  direct  and  act  in  his  play  Paul  Sartre”.
No Exit . In 1945 Camus offered Sartre the opportunity to travel to America to write
a series of reports for  Combat . While there he wrote of his friend in  Vogue magazine:
In Camus’s sombre, pure works one can already detect the main traits of the
French literature of the future. It offers us the promise of a classical literature,
without illusions, but full of confidence in the grandeur of humanity; hard but
without  useless  violence;  passionate,  without  restraint . . . .A  literature  that
tries to portray the metaphysical condition of man while fully participating in
the movements of society.
(Quoted in Cohen-Solal 1987: 233– 4; Sartre 1981: 1917–21)

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 109
CAMUS AND SARTRE 109
However, their apparent mutual respect and admiration was certainly not with-
out considerable qualification. Camus’s reviews of  Nausea and  The Wall criticize
Sartre  for  “thinking  that  life  is  tragic  because  it  is  wretched”.  “Life  can  be  magni-
ficent and overwhelming”, Camus writes, “that is the whole tragedy.” Camus seems
to  have  had  serious  reservations  about  the  implications  of  Sartre’s  depiction  of
solipsistic,  absurd  freedom,  noting  that  “the  realisation  that  life  is  absurd  cannot 
be an end in itself but only a beginning. It is a truth which nearly all great minds have
taken  as  their  starting  point.  It  is  not  the  discovery  which  is  interesting  but  the 
consequences and rules for actions which can be drawn from it” ( SEN : 168 –9, 191;
E : 1418 –19, 1421). Reservations are also apparent in Sartre’s review of  The Outsider ,
which  while  complimenting  Camus’s  talents  as  a  novelist,  expresses  reservations
about  The Myth of Sisyphus (which he suggests reflected a limited understanding of
3 existentialist  philosophy). He  also  places  Camus  in  the  tradition  of  the  French
moralistes , a tradition for which it is unlikely Sartre himself felt much sympathy. In
a letter written to Jean Grenier discussing Sartre’s review, Camus agreed that “most
of  his  criticisms  are  fair”,  but  complained  of  the  “acid  tone”.  A  few  months  later, 
in July 1943, shortly after meeting Sartre for the first time, Camus wrote, again to
Grenier, “In spite of appearances I don’t feel much in common with the work or the
man. But seeing those who are against him, we must be with him” (Camus & Grenier
2003: 66, 75; Camus & Grenier 1981: 88, 99).
In fact, despite their undoubted, if limited, friendship, their political and philo-
sophical differences were fundamental. These differences, which initially concerned
their  respective  ontologies  (illustrated  by  their  differing  accounts  of  the  absurd),
later  focused  on  the  distinctly  different  character  of  their  political  commitments.
We have noted already that, for example, unlike Camus, Sartre did not sign the peti-
tion  requesting  clemency  for  Robert  Brasillach  in  January  1945.  Whereas  Camus
had decided that he could no longer add his voice to those calling for the execution
of collaborators, Sartre and de Beauvoir were of the view that although “vengeance
is useless”, “there were certain men who could have no place in the world we were
trying  to  build”  (de  Beauvoir  1968:  28).  Although  there  was  certainly  a  great  deal
that brought the two writers together, it is clear that neither Sartre nor Camus felt
entirely comfortable with the image generated in the media of them as close intel-
lectual allies (Camus seems to have been especially sensitive to being characterized
as a Sartrean acolyte). Indeed, in at least five interviews and articles between 1944
and 1946, Camus publicly and explicitly distanced himself from existentialism and
4 Sartre. In the same period, on at least two occasions, Sartre also insisted on the pro-
found political and philosophical difference separating himself from Camus, declar-
5 ing that their association in the popular imagination “rests on a serious confusion”.
Besides  the  straightforward  point  that  Camus  was  “not  an  existentialist”,  we  also 
see in these articles the genesis of arguments that were to prove central to their ultim-
ate disagreement in the pages of  Les Temps modernes in 1952. In December 1945,
Sartre explained that Camus’s true masters were not the existentialists, but rather
the seventeenth-century French moralists; in the same month Camus explained that

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 110
110 ALBERT CAMUS
he found the existentialists’ conclusions false, most especially those existentialists,
such  as  Sartre,  whose  philosophy  concludes,  Camus  said,  with  a  “divinisation  of 
history, history considered as the sole absolute value” (Sartre 1981: 1912–17; Camus
E : 1427–9).
We have seen that Camus’s series of articles “Neither Victims nor Executioners”
was indirectly criticized by Sartre in 1946 and 1947. However, the clearest indica-
tion of the significance of their political and philosophical differences had already
come to pass by this time, with Sartre’s founding of  Les Temps modernes in 1945.
Camus’s refusal of the offer of a place on the editorial board has been explained by
the  fact  that  by  this  time  he  was  editor-in-chief  of  Combat (see,  for  example,  de
Beauvoir 1968: 22; Burnier 1968: 20; Aronson 2004: 57). However, it is abundantly
clear that Camus did not share the values that  Les Temps modernes sought to pro-
mote, and in January 1946 he publicly stated his fundamental disagreement with the
ideas expressed in Sartre’s “manifesto” in the inaugural issue of the journal, calling it
6 “unacceptable” [ inacceptable ].
Differing opinions on legitimate political violence were at the heart of Sartre’s dis-
agreement with “Neither Victims nor Executioners”, but what Camus objected to in
Sartre’s  Les Temps modernes manifesto is perhaps less certain, although it was most
probably the idea of “committed literature”, which the manifesto sought to define
and defend. About a year after the manifesto was published, Camus observed in his
notebooks: “I prefer committed men to literatures of commitment  . . .I should like
to see them less committed in their works and a little more so in their daily lives”
( NB2 : 140 – 41;  C2 : 180). He would probably also have disagreed with the primacy
given by Sartre’s manifesto to class consciousness in the amelioration of social con-
ditions. Having already asserted in 1944 that the “class struggle is a fact to which I
subscribe completely”, in this editorial Sartre defines the politics of  Les Temps mod-
ernes in contrast with what he calls “the official doctrine of bourgeois democracies”,
which  he  characterizes  primarily  as  a  blindness  to  the  fundamental  reality  of  the
class structure, in place of which a spurious unifying “human nature” is posited: “it
persists in seeing no more than men, in proclaiming the identity of human nature in
every diverse situation, but it is against the proletariat that it makes that decision”
(Sartre  1974b:  159;  Sartre  1988:  258).  Although  he  does  not  in  any  way  limit  the
significance of social and economic inequality, we have seen that in  The Rebel and
elsewhere Camus attempts to justify a form of solidarity that is not class-based, that
is based on human nature (or at least on a human condition), and that is therefore
in fundamental conflict with the primacy given to class by Sartre.
Given  that  Sartre  had  insisted  upon  both  the  legitimacy  of  revolutionary  vio-
lence and the centrality of class conflict, it is hardly surprising that both he and the
Les Temps modernes group  generally  would  disagree  with  the  arguments  of  The
Rebel , or indeed that they would consider those ideas to be politically reactionary.
Although after the disagreement over Merleau-Ponty’s “Le Yogi et le Prolétaire” in
1946 they effected a certain rapprochement in 1947, there remained a discernible
distance between Camus and Sartre. In 1948, Jean Daniel drew attention to their
diverging views on morality and politics by publishing in consecutive issues of his

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 111
CAMUS AND SARTRE 111
magazine  Caliban Sartre’s  “To  Be  Hungry  Already  Means  that  You  Want  to  Be
7 Free” and Camus’s starkly contrasting “Democracy Is an Exercise in Modesty”. The
extent of these differences can also be seen in their responses to Merleau-Ponty’s
Humanism and Terror (1947) (of which the 1946 essay was part), a book that could
be said to have had an equal and opposite effect on Camus and Sartre. Whereas, as
we have seen in Chapter 2, the essay was for Camus an expression of the worst kind
of  intellectual  “fellow  travelling”,  Sartre  compliments  it  with  giving  “me  the  push 
I needed to release me from my immobility” (Sartre 1965: 253). The extent of the
political and philosophical differences now separating Camus and Sartre was fur-
ther highlighted by the publication of  The Plague in mid-1947, a novel that seemed
to confirm the suspicion of Sartre and de Beauvoir that Camus had “rejected his-
tory”: “to treat the Occupation as the equivalent of a natural calamity was”, accord-
ing to de Beauvoir, “merely another means of escaping from History [ sic ] and the
real  problems”  (de  Beauvoir  1968:  138).  It  is  hardly  surprising  given  the  radically 
different  political  positions  adopted  by  Sartre  and  Camus  by  this  time,  as  well  as
their complete awareness of these political differences, that when the time came,  Les
Temps modernes would review  The Rebel negatively, and indeed Camus could not
8 have been unaware of their likely reaction.
The editorial board of  Les Temps modernes , with Sartre at the head, met every
two weeks, and at each meeting since its publication in October 1951 the need to
review  The Rebel was discussed. According to de Beauvoir, although nobody on the
board  liked  the  book,  neither  did  anyone  want  to  review  it  (the  reason  she  gives 
for  this,  that  Sartre  “wouldn’t  let  any  one  say  anything  bad  about  it  because  of 
9 their friendship”, is somewhat contradicted by subsequent events). Finally, Sartre
decided that Francis Jeanson should write it: “He will be the harshest”, he said, “but
10 at least he will be polite.” Ultimately, however, Jeanson was far from polite. Indeed,
by the time he first met Sartre in 1947, Jeanson had already developed a sophist-
icated and highly critical account of Camus’s thought, so it seems plausible to sug-
gest that Sartre chose him to write the review not because of a putative politeness,
but  because  Jeanson  had  already  developed  a  complex  criticism  of  Camus,  and, 
crucially, because, as became apparent when he addressed Camus directly, Sartre
was in complete agreement with Jeanson’s analysis. In an interview in 1945, Sartre
had insisted that his conception of the absurd and Camus’s were “completely dif-
ferent”, that Camus’s conception of the absurd involved a sense of “scandal and dis-
appointment”, and was born from “the themes of classical pessimism” (Sartre 1981:
1916). In an article published in1947 Jeanson sought to identify the implications of
Camus’s conception of the absurd, and argued that his insistence on “maintaining
the absurd” did not imply consenting to the facts of experience but, instead, meant
abandoning philosophical thought altogether. To him, Camus “subscribed to a form
of defeatism that led to ‘absurdism’ by converting the fact of absurdity into a value”
(Aronson 2004: 138 –9; see Jeanson 1947b, c). For Jeanson, then, the absurd as con-
strued by Camus could only result in political quietism. This perspective on Camus’s
intellectual trajectory was confirmed for Jeanson by his reading of  The Rebel itself –
as is indicated in the title of his 21-page review – “Albert Camus – or the Revolted

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 112
112 ALBERT CAMUS
11 Soul”. The review began with an ironic overview of the critical praise the book had
received: “a turning point in Western thought”, “one of the greatest books in recent
years”, “no comparable oeuvre has appeared in France since the war”. Jeanson said
that were he in Camus’s position, receiving such lavish praise from the political right
wing,  he  would  be  worried,  and  indeed  he  understood  that  Camus  was  worried
( SCHC : 79– 80*; Jeanson 1952a: 2070).
Fundamentally,  Jeanson’s  argument  is  based  on  the  claim  that  Camus  had  re-
jected or denied history, and that he represented “that Manichaeism which situates
evil within history and good outside of it”, which requires “that we choose against
history whenever possible” ( SCHC : 97; Jeanson 1952a: 2086). Having accomplished
this supremely reactionary task, Jeanson surmises, Camus has adopted the position
of the Hegelian “beautiful soul” ( belle âme ), who prefers to remain pure, uncontam-
inated  by  contact  with  reality,  and  who  is  “satisfied  with  the  reiteration  of  an
12 abstract Idea void of all dialectical energy”. He further criticizes Camus for what he
judged to be his superficial reading of Hegel and Marx, and his readiness to reject
13 revolution without being able to offer any feasible alternative. In so doing, Camus
achieves “the ‘objectively’ reactionary task” of condemning the Marxist experiment,
without having anything positive to offer in exchange. He asserts that “if Camus’s
revolt  chooses  to  be  deliberately  static,  it  can  only  concern  Camus  himself ”,  and
suggests  that  although  intellectual  disquisitions  are  fine  hors contexte ,  in  history
they can be used for reactionary purposes (he claims, for example, that in practice
Camus’s rebellion is directed solely against revolutions). Thus, he surmises: “In our
view  incorrigibly  bourgeois,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  face  of  capitalism  is  less 
‘convulsed’ than that of Stalinism. But what face does it offer to the miners, to the
state workers sanctioned for striking, to the Madagascan tortured by the police, to
the Vietnamese ‘cleansed’ by napalm, to the Tunisian  ratissé by the Legion?” In a
world weighed down with such social injustice, the choice facing the intellectual is
either to side with the oppressed, which can only be done effectively by supporting
the  Communist  Party,  or  to  “deny”  history  in  the  name  of  a  transcendent  meta-
physics. It is precisely that latter choice that Jeanson accuses Camus of having made.
Although he admires Camus’s voice – “so human and charged with such genuine
torment”  –  Jeanson  ultimately  condemns  the  essay,  “this  pseudo-philosophy  of  a
pseudo-history of ‘revolutions’ ”.  The Rebel , he concludes, “is above all a failed great
book: hence, precisely, the myth to which it has given birth. We beg Camus not to
yield to fascination, and to rediscover in himself that personal voice – by which his
14 work remains for us, despite everything, irreplaceable.”
Camus  was  greatly  exercised  by  Jeanson’s  implication  that  he  was  at  least 
indirectly condoning the murderous repression by capitalist regimes of oppressed 
peoples  who  would  “undertake  to  struggle  against  those  responsible  for  their
hunger”, and that in doing so, was serving to ease the consciences of the bourgeoisie
while giving political ammunition to the Right. Yet it is important to point out that
although there was certainly a degree of wounded vanity reflected in Camus’s re-
sponse, his primary objection to the review was Jeanson’s failure to address the main
question posed by the book: the question of whether or not Marxist historical deter-

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 113
CAMUS AND SARTRE 113
minism perpetuated tyranny and legitimized police and state terrorism. And indeed
Jeanson had failed to address this question (neither, as Aronson acknowledges, was
it addressed by Sartre in his letter responding to Camus). Camus did not read the
review simply as an expression of the views of Jeanson (whom his response effect-
ively ignored, referring to him only as “your colleague”), but as the view of the entire
Les Temps modernes board and, in particular, the view of Sartre. Accordingly, it was
to  Sartre  (addressed  formally  as  “Monsieur  le  Directeur”)  that  he  sent  his  letter. 
The August 1952 issue published Camus’s response to Jeanson’s review (seventeen
pages),  along  with  further  replies  from  Sartre  (twenty  pages)  and  Jeanson  (thirty
pages). Camus began: “I shall take as a pretext the article which, under an ironical
title, your magazine has devoted to me to submit to your readers some remarks con-
15 cerning the intellectual method and the attitude demonstrated by this article.” His
letter, which argued that Jeanson’s article was more a symptom of the malaise that
he had tried to describe in  The Rebel than a valuable criticism of it, centres on three
related points.
First, Camus insists that Jeanson’s article not only misrepresents the arguments
of  The Rebel , it in fact attributes to Camus a view that he had explicitly criticized 
at length in his book. He accuses Jeanson of reducing the entire book to a defence 
of the view that “all evil is found in history and all good outside of it” ( SCHC : 97;
Jeanson 1952a: 2086). Camus responds:
Here, I really must protest and tell you calmly that such tactics are disgraceful.
 . . .In  fact,  The Rebel seeks  to  demonstrate  –  nearly  a  hundred  quotations
could  prove  it,  if  necessary  –  that  pure  anti-historicism,  at  least  in  today’s
16 world,  is  as  harmful  as  pure  historicism. It  is  written  there,  for  those  who
wish to read, that he who believes only in history marches towards terror and
that he who does not believe in it at all authorises terror  . . .above all, it de-
monstrates that “the denial of history is equivalent to the denial of reality” in
the same way, neither more nor less, that “one separates oneself from reality
by wanting to consider history as a self-sufficient totality”. But what’s the use
17 of texts! Your colleague pays no attention to them.
Camus argues that far from his essay being a renunciation of history in the name 
of  transcendent  values,  “anyone  who  has  seriously  read”  it  knows  that  for  him
“nihilism coincides with disincarnated and formal values”, that  The Rebel criticized
both “the formal and bourgeois revolution of 1789” and “the cynical revolution of
the twentieth century”. In both cases, “nihilism and terror are justified, although by
contrary excesses – either because values are placed above history or because they
are absolutely identified with it”. By “systematically suppressing one of the aspects 
of this double critique”, says Camus, Jeanson “sanctifies his thesis but shamelessly
sacrifices the truth”, the truth that  The Rebel “does not deny history (a denial that
would make no sense) but only criticises the attitude that aims to make history into
an  absolute”.  Rather  than  ridiculing  a  false  version  of  his  thesis,  “a  judicious  and
honest  critic  would  have  dealt  with  my  true  thesis:  namely,  that  whoever  seeks 

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 114
114 ALBERT CAMUS
to  serve  history  for  its  own  sake  ends  in  nihilism”.  However,  Jeanson  “replaces 
historicism with history, which, in effect, is enough to transform the book into its
18 opposite  and  its  author  into  an  unrepentant  idealist”. Jeanson  had  similarly
claimed that  The Plague provides evidence of Camus’s exit “from history” ( SCHC :
82–3; Jeanson 1952a: 2072–3). Camus notes in his reply that the intellectual trajec-
tory from  The Outsider to  The Plague is precisely the opposite of that which Jeanson
claims;  that  is,  The Plague  marks  a  move  from  solitary  revolt  towards  collective
action: “After all, nobody, except in your journal, would have thought to dispute the
fact that if there is an evolution from  The Outsider to  The Plague , it is towards soli-
darity and participation. To claim otherwise is either to lie or to dream” ( SCHC : 112;
19 Camus 1952: 321).
Secondly,  Camus  argues  that  Jeanson’s  wilful  misreading  of  The Rebel allowed
him to ignore the central arguments of the book. He ignores, for example, the ques-
tion of whether or not there is a dimension of Marxist philosophy that Camus calls
“a Marxist prophecy”, and whether or not such a prophecy, if it exists, is not “con-
tradicted  today  by  numerous  facts”.  In  particular,  Jeanson  is  accused  of  ignoring
“everything  in  my  book  that  deals  with  the  misfortunes  and  specifically  political
implications of authoritarian socialism”. According to Camus, Jeanson’s avoidance
of what he considered to be the main arguments of his book reveals “a more pro-
found antinomy” – an antinomy that, as we shall see, Camus had already hinted at
in  The Rebel itself. Camus interprets Jeanson’s refusal to respond directly to the dis-
cussion of Marxist historicism in  The Rebel as not only an implicit admission of faith
in that doctrine, but also an admission that such a faith was incompatible with the
prevailing  existentialism  of  Les Temps modernes .  This  is  an  important  point,  and
one  that  has  been  little  noted  in  the  scholarship.  As  I  have  noted  above,  Camus 
had observed in 1945 an emerging tendency towards what he called the “divinisa-
tion of history” in Sartre’s philosophical and political thinking. He returns to this
point again, arguing that had Jeanson directly confronted the arguments in his book,
he  would  have  been  obliged  to  defend  the  Marxian  idea  that  history  had  both  a 
necessary meaning and an end. Furthermore, Camus observes that Jeanson would
also  have  had  to  demonstrate  why  this  view  was  not  in  contradiction  with  the 
existentialist principles that, in Camus’s view, remain the basis of editorial policy at
Les Temps modernes (Camus  may  have  been  in  the  wrong  in  assuming  Sartrean
existentialism as editorial policy, but certainly the criticism was relevant to Sartre
himself ):
Only the principles of prophetic Marxism (along with those of a philosophy of
eternity) can justify the complete rejection of my thesis. But can one, without
contradiction, clearly affirm them in your journal? Because, after all, if man
does not have an end that can be chosen as a principle of value, how could his-
tory have a meaning that could be perceived right now? And if it has one, why
would man not make it his end? And if he does so, how could he find himself
with  this  terrible  and  incessant  freedom  of  which  you  speak?  These  objec-
tions, which could be developed further, are, to my mind, considerable. No

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 115
CAMUS AND SARTRE 115
doubt, they are no less so in the eyes of your critic, since he totally avoids the
only discussion that would have interested  Les temps modernes : that concern-
ing the end of history                                     .( SCHC : 123; Camus 1952: 329–30)
Camus argues in  The Rebel that the sacrifices demanded by Marxist revolution
“can only be justified in the context of a happy end to history”, and now writes that
Jeanson’s “professed existentialism would be threatened in its very foundations if he
accepted a foreseeable end to history”. In order to reconcile his existentialism with
Marxism, at the very least Jeanson would need “to demonstrate this difficult pro-
position: history has no end but it has a meaning that, however, does not transcend
it. Perhaps this perilous reconciliation is possible, and I would love to read it.” But,
Camus concludes, as long as this contradiction between the fundamental freedom
of the individual and the inexorable progression of history towards its end remains,
the  political  and  philosophical  perspective  of  Les  Temps  modernes will  remain 
contradictory,  something  that  is  both  terribly  cruel  (because  of  the  reality  of 
those regimes founded on the ideology in question) and terribly trivial (because the
20 contradiction is fundamental to  Les Temps modernes ’ political agenda).
Thirdly,  Jeanson’s  article  completely  ignores  Camus’s  lengthy  discussions  of 
revolutionary  violence,  and  the  possibility  of  legitimate  political  violence.  The
importance  of  this  can  hardly  be  overestimated  when  we  consider  that  it  is 
precisely  Camus’s  consideration  of  the  legitimization  of  violence  that  leads  him 
to critique historical materialism. Jeanson ignores his analysis of non-Marxist left-
wing thought; and in particular, he makes no comment on Camus’s discussion of
revolutionary  syndicalism  and  anarchism  (except  to  pour  scorn  upon  it,  writing
“Ah! Revolutionary Syndicalism is so fine, when it has no need to be revolutionary
21 [cf. the Scandinavian countries]” ). Camus responds:
The First International and the Bakuninist movement, still alive in the masses
of the C.N.T. in both France and Spain, are ignored. The revolutionaries of
1905, whose experiences are at the centre of my book, are completely ignored.
Revolutionary syndicalism is mocked, while my arguments in its favour, rest-
ing on its achievements and on the properly reactionary nature of caesarean
socialism,  are  ignored.  Your  colleague  writes  as  if  he  were  ignorant  of  the 
fact that Marxism no more inaugurated the revolutionary tradition than  The
German Ideology inaugurated philosophy. Although, while exalting the tradi-
tion of non-Marxist revolution, [ The Rebel ] does not deny the importance of
Marxism,  your  article,  curiously,  develops  as  if  there  were  no  other  revolu-
tionary tradition than that inherited from Marx.
( SCHC : 118 –19*; Camus 1952: 326)
“Hostile to history”
Unsurprisingly, Sartre was infuriated by the assumption implicit in Camus’s letter
that  the  views  of  Jeanson  were  also  his  own  (as  justifiably  annoyed  as  Sartre  was,

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 116
116 ALBERT CAMUS
nothing  in  his  letter  suggests  that  he  was  not  in  complete  accord  with  Jeanson’s
22 arguments). It  is  unsurprising,  then,  that  the  issue  of  Les Temps modernes that
contained Camus’s letter also contained replies from Sartre and Jeanson. Jeanson’s
was taken up mainly with defending his original criticisms, but Sartre, whose asso-
ciation  with  Camus  in  the  popular  mind  was  becoming  a  political  liability,  had  a
vastly more significant task. His letter, which began “Our friendship was never easy,
but  I  shall  miss  it”,  accused  Camus  of  having  become  “the  victim  of  a  bleak  im-
moderation  which  masks  your  internal  difficulties  and  which  you  call,  I  believe,
Mediterranean  mesure ”, adding, “Sooner or later someone would have told you; let
it be me” (Sartre 1952: 334;  SCHC : 131–2*; trans. Lottman 1979: 504). Like Jeanson,
Sartre appears initially to reproach Camus for having turned his back on his former
heroes:
Where is Meursault, Camus? Where is Sisyphus? Where are those Trotskyists
of  the  heart  today,  who  preached  permanent  revolution?  Without  doubt,
murdered  or  in  exile.  A  violent  and  ceremonial  dictatorship  has  taken  pos-
session  of  you,  supported  by  an  abstract  bureaucracy,  and  pretends  to  rule
23 according to moral law.
He seems to assert here that what had interested him and others about Camus was
the paradox of his absurdist philosophy combined with his political commitment,
and  that  in  The Rebel Camus  has  replaced  this  dynamic  with  a  profoundly  reac-
tionary conservatism. Crucially, Sartre is arguing  at this point  in his letter that the
position Camus outlines in  The Rebel marks a distinct break from his thought in the
24 past, the thought of the Camus they had so much admired:
You had been for us – and you could be again tomorrow – the admirable con-
junction of a person, an action, and a work. This was in 1945. We discovered
Camus, the Resistant, as we discovered Camus, the author of [ The Outsider ].
And when the editor of the clandestine  Combat was joined with Meursault,
who carried honesty to the point of refusing to say that he loved his mother
and his mistress, and who our society condemned to death, when we knew,
above all, that you had ceased neither to be the one nor the other, when this
apparent contradiction made us progress in the knowledge of ourselves and of
the world, then you were not far from being exemplary . . . .You were a real
person , the most complex and the richest, the last and the most gifted heir of
25 Chateaubriand and the scrupulous defender of the social cause.
However, examined in the light of the article as a whole, it becomes abundantly
apparent that this is  not Sartre’s view. In fact, in his letter Sartre deploys a series of
arguments  designed  precisely  to  demolish  the  perception  of  Camus  as  a  political
writer and to show not only that  The Rebel is ahistorical and politically reactionary,
but that precisely in its political irrelevance it is the culmination of Camus’s entire
oeuvre . We have noted already the centrality of history and historicism to both the

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 117
CAMUS AND SARTRE 117
intellectual relationship between Camus and Sartre and the argument of  The Rebel .
We have seen too that in his letter responding to Jeanson’s criticism, Camus asked
Sartre to explain how  Les Temps modernes ’ implicit faith in Marxist historical deter-
minism did not contradict its founding existentialist principle of radical freedom.
This particular point, made more elaborately some years later by Raymond Aron, is
26 ignored by Sartre. Instead, Sartre returns to Jeanson’s earlier argument regarding
Camus’s own relation to history, and he attempts to show conclusively that Camus
27 proves himself “completely hostile to history”. In other words, whereas Camus’s
letter questioned Sartre’s relationship with Marxist historical materialism and the
implications that might have for his existentialism, Sartre responded by questioning
Camus’s relationship to his own historicity.
He alleges that Camus, once a powerful voice on the Left, was fast becoming a
tool  of  the  bourgeoisie,  no  longer  simply  a  member  of  that  class,  like  Sartre  or
Jeanson, but a representative of their interests. His writing, exemplified in his letter
28 to  Les Temps modernes , had become, says Sartre, terroristic. It was not possible to
disagree with Camus: to do so was to be on the side of totalitarianism, was to deny
the existence of concentration camps in the USSR. Like the bourgeois who, in spite
of their horror, rejoiced in the discovery of the camps because it proved the com-
munist experiment to be a failure, Camus too “exploits the Turkestani and the Kurd
29 to more effectively demolish a critic who did not happen to praise [him]”. Sartre
further insists that one must earn the right to critique the communists: “To merit
the  right  to  influence  men  who  are  struggling,  one  must  first  participate  in  their
struggle, and this first means accepting many things if you hope to change a few of
them . . . .But when a man can only see in present struggles the idiotic duel of two
equally abject monsters, I hold that this man has already abandoned us. He has gone
into a corner all by himself to sulk” ( SCHC : 147*; Sartre 1952: 345). That is to say,
with the critique of Soviet communism in  The Rebel , and most especially with his
determination to replace class conflict with human nature as the unifying principle
behind  political  action,  and  his  insistence  that  the  obscurely  defined  concept  of
“rebellion” was as the heart of legitimate revolution, Camus had proclaimed a “false
solidarity” between the classes and made himself completely irrelevant politically:
“You  decided  against  history;  and  rather  than  interpret  its  course,  you  preferred 
to see it only as one more absurdity  . . .Your personality, which was real and vital 
as long as it was nourished by events, became a mirage. In 1944, it was the future. 
30 In  1952,  it  is  the  past.” We  have  already  observed,  in  discussing  his  response  to
Jeanson,  Camus’s  insistence  that  in  The Rebel “the  denial  of  history  is  equivalent 
to the denial of reality”, and that Jeanson’s article “replaces historicism with history,
which, in effect, is enough to transform the book into its opposite and its author into
an unrepentant idealist” ( SCHC : 114 –16*; Sartre 1952: 322– 4). Irrespective of the
legitimacy of this distinction, Sartre ignores it completely, something that may be
explained by his evident desire not to be drawn into the subject that remained at 
the heart of the debate, that of political violence and its theoretical legitimacy. As
Ronald Santoni points out, “the criticism that Camus levelled against Jeanson could
just as aptly be applied to Sartre: specifically, that he had been reluctant to discuss

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 118
118 ALBERT CAMUS
some of the crucial issues of  The Rebel – for example, ‘a limit [regarding violence]
revealed by the  . . .movement of rebellion itself ’ ” (Santoni 2003: 129) .
However,  Sartre’s  letter  is  not  only  concerned  with  exposing  the  “hostility  to 
history” he finds embodied in  The Rebel and, in fact, he uses the immediate task of
critiquing  the  essay,  and  Camus’s  defence  of  it,  to  launch  a  scathing  attack  on
Camus’s  entire  oeuvre .  Although  Sartre  begins  his  review  by  asking  the  question
“How could an author so central to French life after the war become so irrelevant so
quickly?”, the conclusion he comes to questions the worth of Camus’s entire  oeuvre .
The  remarkable  conclusion  at  which  Sartre  arrives  is  not  simply  that  The Rebel
marks an abdication from the great act of affirmation of human value present in the
early “absurd” works, but that the irrelevance of Camus was inevitable because of his
persistence  in  seeing  the  causes  of  human  misery  in  strictly  metaphysical  terms.
Accordingly, what began as a critique of a book and its author’s precious defence
against its detractors becomes a profound and scathing critique of a writer’s entire
oeuvre .  What  Sartre  sets  out  to  prove  is  that,  given  Camus’s  absurd  premise,  his
work  inevitably  evolved  towards  a  kind  of  critical  entropy  that  culminated  in  the
profoundly ahistorical and reactionary work that was  The Rebel . In this context, it
will become apparent that, despite his appeal to Camus’s reason – “You had been 
for us – you could again be tomorrow – the admirable conjunction of a person, an
action,  and  a  work”  –  Sartre  was,  at  least  by  1952,  entirely  convinced  of  Camus’s
31 political irrelevance. For Sartre  The Rebel was, precisely in its insignificance, the
culmination of its author’s life work, and like Jeanson, he perceived the source of
Camus’s  political  insignificance  precisely  in  his  conception  of  the  absurd.  Hence,
although Sartre claims to have been immediately attracted by Camus’s remarkable
courage  in  seeking  only  temporal  truths  (“you  only  wanted  to  be  concerned  with
truths ‘which must rot’”), it transpired that this actually masked a far more signi-
ficant  fact,  that  Camus  identified  injustice  as  eternal,  as  transcendent  of  history.
Sartre, therefore, characterizes Camus’s conception of the absurd in the following
terms:
You  rejected  the  fraud  of  the  Soul  and  of  the  Idea.  But  since,  in  your  own
terms,  injustice  is  eternal –  that  is  since  the  absence  of  God  is  a  constant
throughout  the  changes  of  history  –  the  immediate  and  continually  re-
affirmed relation of man who insists on having a meaning (that is to say, who
demands that one be given him) to this God who maintains an eternal silence,
is  itself  transcendent  to  History  [ sic ].  The  tension  by  which  man  realises 
himself  . . .is  thus  a  veritable  conversion  that  wrenches  him  from  his  daily
“agitation” and from “historicity” in order to make him finally coincide with
his  condition.  One  can  go  no  further:  there  is  no  place  for  progress  in  this
instantaneous tragedy                                      .( SCHC : 148 –9*; Sartre 1952: 346)
There  are  at  least  two  problems  with  Sartre’s  argument  here.  First,  we  should
note  that  man’s  insistence  on  meaning  in  no  way  implies,  as  Sartre  has  it,  that
“[man] demands that he be given one”. Instead it suggests that man has the capacity

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 119
CAMUS AND SARTRE 119
to  create  meaning.  This  is  suggested  by  the  very  lines  from  Letters to a German
Friend quoted by Sartre in the same paragraph: “man must exalt justice in order to
fight  against  eternal  injustice,  create  happiness  in  order  to  fight  against  eternal
injustice” ( RRD : 28;  E : 240; quoted in  SCHC : 148; Sartre 1952: 346). The verbs here
denote action or creation on the part of the individual. Further, we should note that
this act of creating meaning is necessarily done  in history . Secondly, Sartre claims to
identify  in  Camus’s  idea  of  metaphysical  injustice  the  assertion  that  all  forms  of
injustice have metaphysical origins. There is no doubt that Camus continues to see,
in the context of the absurd, the human condition characterized by an absence of
justice (as opposed to the presence of injustice), and there is no doubt that he also
sees rebellion as emerging out of this context. We have seen in Chapter 1 that this
may appear vulnerable to the “pointless lament” argument advanced by A. J. Ayer.
However,  Camus  also  clearly  understands  rebellion  in  a  political  context,  as  The
Rebel makes  clear.  Whatever  eternal  “metaphysical  injustice”  Camus  may  have
identified, it does not itself diminish the political critique he was also engaged upon.
Crucially,  at  no  point  does  Camus  assume  that  the  immediate  cause  of  political
injustice  is  anything  other  than  political.  Although  he  identifies  a  correlation  be-
tween metaphysical revolt, which is exemplified by both Sisyphus in  The Myth of
Sisyphus and  Prometheus  in  The Rebel ,  and  political  revolt,  which  is  exemplified 
by the Socialist Revolutionaries, and although both acts of rebellion are based on a
sense  of  limit,  it  is  in  no  way  clear,  as  Sartre  assumes,  that  these  equivalences 
themselves make one form of rebellion (i.e. political) dependent upon the other (i.e.
metaphysical). In any event, Sartre now claims that, despite appearances, Camus’s
philosophy is profoundly conservative, and firmly situated
within  our  great  classical  tradition  which,  since  Descartes,  and  with  the
exception of Pascal, has been completely hostile to history  . . .you didn’t re-
ject History through having suffered from it and because you discovered its
face with horror. You rejected it, previous to all experience, because our cul-
ture rejects it, and because you located human values in the struggle of man
“against heaven”                                              .( SCHC : 149–50*; Sartre 1952: 347)
Sartre’s interpretation of Camus’s intellectual trajectory makes Camus’s involve-
ment  with  Combat difficult  to  understand,  or  at  least  leads  one  to  suspect  that 
his motivation for being involved was different from that of most other  résistants .
Absorbed by the perpetual bitter fight of man against the injustice of his fate, what
could  interest  Camus  in  the  struggle  against  the  Nazis?  Sartre  does  acknowledge 
the extent of Camus’s involvement in the Resistance but argues that Camus fought
against the Nazis only because he was able to imagine them as having taken sides
with that universal injustice, as, “accomplices of the blind forces of the universe, they
sought  to  destroy  man”  ( SCHC :  151;  Sartre  1952:  348).  Hence,  for  Sartre,  Camus
identified the struggle against the Nazis in strictly ahistorical terms, and only then
did the fight become worthwhile. Not only is this premised on a faulty conception of
the absurd; it ignores Camus’s explicit commitment to history in both the early and

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 120
120 ALBERT CAMUS
late works: in  The Myth of Sisyphus , for example, he declared, “Conscious that I can-
not stand aloof from my time, I have decided to be an integral part of it . . . .Between
history and the eternal I have chosen history because I like certainties”, and in  The
Rebel  he insists that the rebel “cannot turn away from the world and from history
without  denying  the  very  principle  of  his  rebellion”  ( MS :  80 – 81;  E :  165;  R :  287; 
E :  690).  Similarly,  he  noted  at  the  outbreak  of  war  in  1939  that  “the  dilettante’s
dream of being free to hover above his time is the most ridiculous form of liberty”
( NB1 : 143;  C1 : 172). Nevertheless, Sartre purports to find evidence in  Letters to a
German Friend  to support his view of Camus’s “hostility” to history, so we should
look carefully at the details of his argument: “You accused the Germans of taking
you  away  from  your  struggle  against  heaven,  of  forcing  you  to  take  part  in  the 
temporal combats of men. ‘For so many years now, you have tried  to make me enter
into  History ’,  and  further  on,  ‘you  did  what  you  had  to  do,  we  entered  History ’”
( SCHC : 150*; Sartre 1952: 348).
These quotations, thinks Sartre, constitute clear evidence of Camus’s “hostility to
history”, and they constitute the only direct evidence Sartre provides as evidence of
32 Camus’s “refusal” of history. In fact in his letter (a letter in which he berates Camus
for a “mania for not going to the source”) Sartre quotes from  Nuptials (1939),  Letters
to  a  German  Friend (1945)  and  the  “Neither  Victims  nor  Executioners”  articles
(1946), but not once from either Camus’s letter to  Les Temps modernes or, crucially,
33 from  The Rebel itself. Moreover, closer inspection leads us to question the accur-
acy of Sartre’s interpretation of his second quotation from Camus (“you did what
you  had  to  do,  we entered History ”),  because  of  the  use  of  the  first  person  plural.
Whatever Camus was describing, by attributing it to people other than himself (as
indicated by the “we”), he is clearly not referring to the solipsistic exile that Sartre
claims Camus enjoyed. Further, it is clear that Camus was talking about a specific
act  precipitated  by  a  specific  cause,  rather  than  presence  or  absence  of  a  general
“commitment”  to  history.  What  becomes  evident  from  a  careful  reading  of  this
specific passage is that Camus is talking about his own involvement with the Resist-
ance, with the violent struggle against Nazi domination, rather than a generalized
affirmation  of  the  importance  of  political  action.  Camus  believed  in  justice,  but
refused the affirmation of justice at the expense of happiness. Yet his experience of
Nazi occupation caused him to conclude that there were instances when immediate
happiness could be sacrified in the cause of justice:
We thought that happiness was the greatest of conquests, a victory over the
fate imposed upon us. Even in defeat this longing did not leave us. But you did
what you had to do, and we entered History. And for five years it was no longer
possible to enjoy the call of the birds in the cool of the evening . . . .For five
years the earth has not seen a single morning without death agonies, a single
evening  without  prisons,  a  single  noon  without  slaughters.  Yes,  we  had  to 
follow you.  But our difficult achievement consisted in following you into war
34 without forgetting happiness .

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 121
CAMUS AND SARTRE 121
Moreover, and crucially, the first quotation provided (twice) by Sartre (“For so many
years now, you have tried  to make me enter History ”) is in fact a fabrication. Camus
actually wrote the following (I include the previous two sentences, as the context
shows Camus to have meant something almost exactly the opposite of what Sartre
alleges): “For a long time we both thought that this world had no ultimate meaning
and that consequently we were cheated. I still think so in a way. But I came to dif-
ferent conclusions to the ones you used to talk about, which for so many years now,
35 you have been trying to introduce into history.” Although it is peculiar, to say the
least, that Sartre’s letter makes no direct reference to the text that was supposed to
have been at the heart of the dispute,  The Rebel , it seems difficult to exaggerate the
significance of this misquotation.
Sartre continues with the claim that after Camus had “served [his] five years with
History, [he] thought [he] could return (and all men with [him]) to the despair from
which man must derive his happiness”. Camus was prepared to struggle against the
Nazis  because  he  identified  in  them  an  accord  with  the  metaphysical  forces  that
thwart the human pursuit of happiness. Unless he was capable of making this asso-
ciation between metaphysical cause and political effect, Sartre seems to allege, social
injustices were ignored: “You revolted against death, but in the iron belts that sur-
rounded cities, other men revolted against social conditions which raised the toll of
mortality. When a child died, you blamed the absurdity of the world and this deaf
and  blind  God  which  you  had  created  in  order  to  spit  in  his  face.  But  the  child’s
36 father, if he were an unemployed worker or an unskilled labourer, blamed men.”
Having  ignored  Camus’s  question  regarding  the  implications  of  Marxist  his-
toricism, and having established to his own satisfaction Camus’s abdication from
historical responsibility, Sartre can accuse Camus of never having dreamt, in Marx’s
phrase, of “making history”: “The proof ”, he says, alluding perhaps to the modest
proposal of “Neither Victims nor Executioners”, is that “after the war, you envisaged
37 only the return of the  status quo ”. As I hope the previous chapters have indicated,
this is, to say the least, a peculiar assessment of Camus’s political trajectory. Indeed,
there is contrary evidence in the very texts cited by Sartre. In  Letters to a German
Friend Camus declares: “I belong to a nation which for the past four years has begun
to relive the course of her entire history and which is calmly and surely preparing
out  of  the  ruins  to  remake  another  history”,  and  in  “Neither  Victims  nor  Execu-
tioners”  he  explicitly  rejects  the  idea  of  maintaining  the  status  quo,  calling  it  “a 
completely utopian position insofar as it assumes that history is immobile” and “the
impossible dream of bringing history to an abrupt halt” ( RRD : 10;  CC : 266;  E : 225,
341–2). Therefore the allegation that Camus welcomed the return to the status quo
after the war seems utterly disingenuous. Even a cursory look at Camus’s  Combat
writings shows this to be the case (indeed even a look at the newspaper’s masthead,
bearing the slogan “From Resistance to Revolution”, would be adequate).
It is groundless, then, for Sartre to claim that “even when, for us, you still incar-
nated the man of the immediate past, perhaps even the man of the near future, you
had already become, for ten million Frenchmen, one of the privileged. They didn’t

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 122
122 ALBERT CAMUS
recognise  their  only  too  real  anger  in  your  ideal  revolt.  This  death,  this  life,  this
earth, this rebellion, this God, this no and yes, this love, were, they said to you, the
games of a prince. Others went as far as to call them circus acts.” Despite the fact
that “for a few years, you were what could be called the symbol and the proof of class
solidarity”, Sartre now accuses Camus of locating the cause of human misery out-
side history, or human control ( SCHC : 153, 152; Sartre 1952: 350, 349). To Sartre’s
mind  Camus  had  effectively  ignored  the  class  struggle.  He  accuses  the  author  of
“indulging and displaying his moral sensibilities while leaving the world to its own
resources” ( Judt 1998: 95). Far from being working class, Camus was, like Jeanson
and Sartre himself, bourgeois. But Camus, unlike either Sartre or Jeanson, now repre-
sented the interests of the bourgeoisie. Sartre continues:
Today, it is different. It is no longer a matter of  defending the  status quo , but 
of changing it. This is what you will not accept, unless accompanied by the
most formal guarantees. And I suppose that if I believed that history is a pool
of filth and blood, I would act just like you and look twice before diving in. But
suppose that I am in it already, suppose that, from my point of view, even your
sulking is proof of your historicity                      .( SCHC : 156*; Sartre 1952: 352)
“Freedom without brakes”
So far, the main purpose of Sartre’s letter has been to highlight what he considers 
to be Camus’s hostility to history, hostility more or less latent in his earlier writings
and given full expression in  The Rebel . However, there is a separate point: Camus’s 
letter is clearly addressed to Sartre directly, and this leads him to comment on what
he considers to be Camus’s misinterpretation of his writings, saying “I have at least
this in common with Hegel: you have not read either of us.” Specifically, according
to Sartre, Camus has radically misunderstood his conception of absolute freedom,
as  articulated  in  Being and Nothingness (1943),  misinterpreting  it  as  an  assertion 
of  absolute  political  freedom,  rather  than  absolute  ontological  freedom.  He  sup-
ports this view by purporting to quote Camus attributing to him (Sartre) the idea of
“freedom without brakes”, an accusation that originates, says Sartre, not in his own
writings, but in those of the Jesuit critic Roger Troisfontaines. Sartre goes on to say
that when it is understood as an ontological concept, “you cannot put a brake on
freedom”, and that with his talk of “freedom without brakes” Camus has confused
“politics  and  philosophy”  ( SCHC :  145– 6;  Sartre  1952:  343– 4).  The  implication 
of this alleged confusion is significant, for it permits Camus to attribute to Sartre 
a  view  of  freedom  that  licenses  the  nightmare  of  contemporary  totalitarianism.
Ronald Santoni endorses this reading of Camus, pointing to his claim in  The Rebel
that absolute freedom “is the freedom to kill”. According to Santoni, Camus mis-
understood  Sartre’s  concept  of  freedom,  and  confused  “ontological  freedom  and
practical/political freedom” (Santoni 2003: 129–30). However, this argument does
not stand up to a great deal of scrutiny. First, we note that, as Sprintzen points out,

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 123
CAMUS AND SARTRE 123
the phrase “freedom without brakes” [ liberté sans frein ] appears neither in Camus’s
letter  nor  in  The Rebel itself.  Furthermore,  the  view  Camus  actually  attributes  to
Sartre in his letter, “this terrible and incessant freedom of which you speak”, is to be
38 found in  Being and Nothingness : “this terrible necessity of being free”. Secondly, it
is clear from a careful study of the material in question that Camus did not confuse
ontological  freedom  with  political  freedom;  instead  (as  I  have  argued  above)  he
questioned whether a philosophy of teleological socialism could be reconciled with
absolute  ontological  freedom.  He  claims  that  such  a  “perilous  reconciliation”  is 
necessary to the coherence of the philosophical and political agenda of  Les Temps
modernes , and he considers Jeanson’s failure to address this question directly as an
39 endorsement of his suspicion that such a reconciliation is impossible. Curiously,
although Ronald Santoni fails to recognize the argument as it appears in Camus’s
letter,  he  later  makes  the  same  argument  himself,  suggesting  that  interpreted
through the optic of  Being and Nothingness certain of Sartre’s later writings would
seem  to  be  in  bad  faith  because  they  impose  “an  unsurpassable  limit  on  the  un-
limited freedom of every individual in the group  . . .freedom has now placed chains
on itself ”. Later, referring to the discussion of “necessary” violence in Sartre’s “Rome
Lecture”  (which  I  discuss  below),  Santoni  asks,  “what  is  the  sense  of  the  word 
‘necessary’ in this context? It is surely not a ‘necessary’ that precludes freedom to 
do otherwise in this situation. That would violate Sartre’s ontology”, and concludes
with  an  observation  that  echoes  Camus’s  complaint:  “it  is  the  inexactness  of  his
words  as  well  as  the  duplicity  in  his  position  that  moves  the  reader  to  seek  more
moral definition  or  closure  with  regard  to  his  revolutionary  ‘contradiction’  (his
word)” (Santoni 2003: 48, 160).
The strength of Camus’s argument seems to be further endorsed by Sartre’s more
conspicuous failure to address it directly in his open letter, and it could be said that
it is precisely this question, that of the compatibility of his existentialism with his
Marxism,  that  Sartre  eventually  addresses  in  his  Critique  of  Dialectical  Reason
(1960). Strikingly, when Sartre goes on to discuss political freedom directly in his
response to Camus, he asserts that “The limit of a right (i.e. a freedom) is another
right (that is to say, still another freedom) and not some human nature” ( SCHC : 146;
Sartre 1952: 344). Santoni is probably correct to interpret this reference to “human
nature” as a “swipe” at Camus, although on the surface there seems to be nothing 
in  Sartre’s  assertion  with  which  Camus  would  disagree,  except  to  note  that  the
recognition of another’s freedom might itself presuppose a common human nature
(Santoni 2003: 130). It is perhaps worth noting that in his 1946 essay “Materialism
and Revolution”, Sartre expressed a view strikingly similar to Camus in this regard
(“The declaration that ‘We too are men’ is at the bottom of any revolution” (Sartre
1955a: 217)), but it is clear that by 1952 for Sartre the dilemma created by the fact of
incompatible freedoms is not resolved by resort to talk of human nature, but only
through  conflict:  freedom  today,  he  says  in  his  letter  to  Camus,  “is  nothing  but 
the free choice to fight in order to become free ” ( SCHC : 146; Sartre 1952: 345, original
italics). The implicit denial of this reality, the reality of oppression, in  The Rebel , says
Sartre,  is  proof  of  Camus’s  irrelevance.  Here  we  find  ourselves  back  on  familiar 

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 124
124 ALBERT CAMUS
territory: Camus is seen as “hostile to history”, has “gone into a corner all by himself
to sulk”, belongs in “the Galapagos islands” and so on ( SCHC : 149, 147, 144; Sartre
1952: 347, 345, 343). But Camus’s question, regarding the putative incompatibility
of Sartre’s existentialism with his Marxism, remained unanswered.
Until now Sartre has interpreted Camus’s critique of historicism as a rejection of
his own historicity, his own historical “situatedness”, the implication of which was
his  locating  the  source  of  all  social  or  political  injustice  outside  history,  beyond
human  agency.  However,  in  the  letter’s  penultimate  paragraph  he  appears  to  ac-
knowledge that what Camus was really questioning was the assertion that history
had a necessary end or objective. Sartre responds to this argument by claiming that
“Marx never said that History would have an end. How could he? One might as well
say that one day man would be without goals. He spoke only of an end to prehistory,
that is, of a goal that would be reached within History itself and then surpassed like
all  goals”  ( SCHC :  157;  Sartre  1952:  353).  Of  course,  from  the  point  of  view  of  a 
critique of historicism, whether it was the end of prehistory or history that Marx 
had predicted was irrelevant, for the principle of historical determinism would still
apply,  and  it  was  against  precisely  this  principle  that  The Rebel was  substantially
addressed. Indeed, Camus explicitly addresses this Marxist distinction between his-
tory and prehistory in the essay – “Capitalism is the last of these stages of produc-
tion [the Marxist ‘objective stages of historical development’] because it produces
the conditions in which every antagonism will be resolved and where there will be
no more economy. On that day our history will become prehistory” – and finds it
spurious, noting that “we come no nearer to solving the problem by declaring that 
it is not a question of the end of history, but of a leap into the midst of a different 
history. We can only imagine this other history in terms of our own history; for man
they are both one and the same thing. Moreover, this other history poses the same
dilemma. Either it is not the solution of all contradictions and we suffer, die, and kill
for almost nothing, or it is the solution of contradictions and therefore, to all intents
and purposes, terminates our history” ( R : 197, 223;  E : 602, 627).
Concluding  his  letter,  Sartre  rephrases  the  essence  of  his  response  thus:  “Does
History have a meaning, you ask? Has it an end? For me this question has no mean-
ing. Because History, apart from the men who make it, is only an abstract and static
concept, of which it can neither be said that it has an end, nor that it doesn’t have
one. And the problem is not to  know its end, but to give one to it” ( SCHC : 157; Sartre
1952: 352). This is interesting for two reasons. First, one could suggest on the basis
of it that whereas Camus sought to give history a meaning (“I continue to believe
that this world has no ultimate meaning. But I know something in it has meaning,
and that is man, because he is the only creature to insist on having one” ( RRD : 28;  E :
241)), Sartre seems to have sought to give history an objective or end (“the problem
is not to  know its end, but to  give it one” ( SCHC : 157; Sartre 1952: 352)). It is precisely
this that Camus finds objectionable in Marx – whether one seeks to create history’s
end  by  giving  history  an  end  one  desires,  or  one  claims  to  have  determined  the
nature of that end in advance of its coming into being, Camus asserts that when we
live towards ends, the bodies pile up (of course, giving human existence “meaning”

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 125
CAMUS AND SARTRE 125
is not at all the same as “giving history an end”). In the course of another, not entirely
unrelated, polemical exchange in 1955, Camus asserted:
When  I  criticize  twentieth  century  Communism  for  judging  everything  in
terms of the future, it is because that future is represented as definitive, and
that that happy end of history then authorizes all excesses. The future in his-
tory, when one calculates it, is simply the gathering of different possibilities,
and in order to decide upon an attitude toward history it is necessary to con-
sider each of these options. The future of history, then, can justify no dogma-
tism, but demands that a risk be taken. It is utterly unreal to consider history
as so determined in advance as to not bother trying to give it, through risk and
commitment, a meaning by which we can live                                        .( E : 1755)
Raymond Aron similarly notes that Sartre’s point here “lacks something of the rules
of honest discussion. There is no doubt that we give an objective to History by our
actions.  But  how  are  we  to  choose  that  objective,  without  recourse  to  universal 
40 values or a unified understanding?”
The second reason why the conclusion to Sartre’s letter is interesting is because it
is based upon an entirely spurious premise. Camus nowhere asks whether “history
[or,  for  that  matter,  ‘History’]  has  a  meaning”.  What  he  does  ask,  in  his  reply  to
Jeanson,  is  whether  history  has  “a  necessary meaning  and  an  end”.  Camus  clearly
believes that although no such necessary meaning can be known to exist, a limited
41 meaning can be  created by man. There is perhaps not a great deal that is philo-
sophically complex about Camus’s argument here, but there is something distinctly
unsubtle about Sartre’s wilful misreading of it. Although Sartre criticizes Camus for
being “no longer anything but an abstraction of a rebel”, it is precisely such abstrac-
tion  (including  Sartre’s)  that  Camus  is  writing  against  in  The Rebel ( SCHC :  158;
Sartre 1952: 353). In fact, Camus’s is precisely a revolt  not based upon abstraction.
Since  there  are  few  moments  in  Sartre’s  letter  when  he  is  not,  in  one  way  or
another, underlining for his readers the extent of his political and philosophical dif-
ferences with Camus, it is ironic that when he turns to explain his ideas in contrast
to Camus’s alleged “rejection of history”, he actually articulates a view that in certain
respects is remarkably similar to that of Camus:
Whether or not there are values transcendent to history will not be discussed.
It  will  simply  be  noted  that,  if  there  are  any,  they  are  manifested  through
human actions which are, by definition, historical. And this contradiction is
essential to man. He makes himself historical in order to pursue the eternal,
and  discovers  universal  values  in  the  concrete  action  that  he  undertakes  in
view of a specific result. If you say that this world is unjust, you have already
lost  the  game.  You  are  already  outside,  busily  comparing  a  world  without 
justice to a Justice without content. But you will discover Justice in each effort
that  you  make  to  organise  your  efforts;  in  each  effort  to  reapportion  the 
burdens among your comrades; in each effort to subject yourself to discipline

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 126
126 ALBERT CAMUS
or to apply it . . . .It is not a question of knowing whether History has a mean-
ing  and  whether  we  should  deign  to  participate  in  it,  but  to  try,  from  the
moment we are up to our noses in it, to  give to it the meaning that seems best
to us, by not refusing our support, however weak it may be, to any concrete
action that may require it                             .( SCHC : 157– 8; Sartre 1952: 352–3)
Although there does seem to be a great deal here with which Camus would concur,
there  are  at  least  two  crucial  points  with  which  I  think  he  would  disagree:  first,
Camus’s modesty would prevent him from claiming to “pursue the eternal” in any
context; secondly, as we have seen, Camus was not of the view that the world was
unjust,  but  instead  claimed  in  The Rebel that  life  must  be  lived  with  an  effort  to 
create justice where it is found to be absent. On the other hand, in general terms, it
seems that Sartre’s claim that we ought to try to give history a meaning seems close
to Camus’s own thinking.
Camus and Sartre on violence
Notwithstanding this disconcerting affinity, it remains clear, as I have tried to show
throughout this chapter, that there were marked differences in the political evolu-
tion of Camus and Sartre. Chief among these differences, as the exchange of letters
in  Les Temps modernes shows, was their conflicting attitudes to political violence and
its theoretical legitimization. I have discussed Camus’s ideas on violence in detail
elsewhere, and although it is beyond the scope of this book to give a detailed account
of the trajectory of Sartre’s thought on violence, it is perhaps worth attempting a
summary  here,  if  only  in  order  to  illustrate  the  depth  of  the  philosophical  differ-
ences that existed between him and Camus. Ronald Santoni (2003) has provided an
exhaustive  study  of  Sartre’s  ideas  on  violence,  analysing  them  from  their  initial
ontological context in  Being and Nothingness (1943) to their latest, and most sur-
prising,  formulation  in  the  controversial  Hope Now interviews,  which  took  place
shortly  before  Sartre’s  death  in  1980.  Although  he  suggests  a  number  of  curious 
similarities between Camus’s writings on violence and Sartre’s (notably in Sartre’s
posthumously  published  Notebooks for an Ethics ,  written  in  1947– 8),  for  present
purposes  it  is  reasonable  to  focus  on  those  works  where  his  ideas  on  violence
achieve  their  fullest  expression:  in  the  two  volumes  of  the  Critique of Dialectical
Reason (1960, 1985; trans. 1991; hereafter  CDRI  and  CDRII ) and the unpublished
“Rome Lecture” (1964), which Sartre scholars have interpreted as an “ethical sequel”
42 to  CDR .
In  Being and Nothingness Sartre identified conflict as “the essence of the relations
between consciousnesses”. It defines the nature of the relation between the self and
the other: “it is necessary above all that I be the one who is not the Other, and it is in
this very negation  . . .that I make myself be and that the Other arises as the Other”
(Sartre  1956:  429,  283).  However,  the  Critique  of  Dialectical  Reason marks  the
philosophical culmination of Sartre’s post-war focus on the socio-historical context

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 127
CAMUS AND SARTRE 127
of human existence, so rather than a phenomenological account of the origins of
conflict, Sartre here emphasizes “how the economic, political, and social structures
that  humans  create  ‘make’  human  beings”  (Anderson  1993:  88).  In  this  context,
Sartre  now  interprets  violence  “in  terms  of  purposive  human  activity  aroused  by
conditions  of  material  scarcity”,  noting,  furthermore,  that  “scarcity  makes  the 
passive  totality  of  individuals  within  a  collectivity  into  an  impossibility  of  co-
43 existence”. This impossibility serves as the background to  CDR ’s description of the
dialectical movement of social organization from individual praxis (the individual
working on nature to satisfy his or her needs) to the common or group praxis (the
group  working  on  nature  to  satisfy  their  common  needs),  what  Sartre  calls  the
“group-in-fusion”. Through this dialectic what Sartre calls “seriality” is “dissolved
and human freedom is resurrected” (Santoni 2003: 42). Raymond Aron has observed
that although the constitution of the “group-in-fusion” may represent what he calls
a  “perfect  moment”,  “perfect  moments  do  not  last”  (Aron  1975:  59,  quoted  in
Santoni 2003: 43). Sartre himself acknowledges that “alienation exists as a constant
danger within the practical group . . . .The most lively and united group is always in
danger  of  relapsing  into  the  series  from  which  it  came”.  To  combat  this  danger,
Sartre proposes as a “practical device” what he calls the oath or pledge, which he
believes will “bind the group in unity and permanence”. It is through this pledge that
“the potential for violence and its justification – presumably within the framework
44 of a new humanity – emerges in full force”. Indeed Sartre declares the oath to be “a
statute of violence”, a statute that “finds its origin in fear and its strength and élan
through  violence  and  the  threat  of  Terror .  The  pledge  purports  to  guarantee  the
freedom of everyone against necessity  . . .even at the cost of one’s life . ‘To swear is
to say, as a common individual, I demand that you kill me if I secede [or betray the
group]. And this demand has no other goal but to establish Terror in me against the
45 fear of the enemy’.” Terror becomes what Sartre calls the “fundamental statute” of
the “pledged group”, “the reciprocal ‘right’ of everyone in the group over the life and
death  of  every  other  member”  ( CDRI :  430,  433;  Santoni  2003:  44).  Furthermore, 
in  Sartre’s  analysis,  far  from  destroying,  terror  unites,  indeed  it  constitutes  the 
“primary unity” of the pledged group. Through the combination of the “creative act
of the pledge” and the statute of terror, what Sartre calls “fraternity-terror” is born
( CDRI : 437).
Based on the synopsis so far, one might be inclined to agree with Raymond Aron’s
assessment  of  CDR ,  and  view  it  simply  as  articulating  “a  philosophy  of  violence”
(Aron  1975:  160,  214,  quoted  in  Santoni  2003:  45).  And  the  ethical  anxieties  that
might  be  aroused  in  the  reader  by  Sartre’s  talk  of  “fraternity-terror”  are  nowhere
addressed in  CDR itself, indeed are not addressed directly and substantively until
the 1964 “Rome Lecture”. In  CDR violence is interpreted more or less unambigu-
ously as the recuperation (or creation) of a right, and as counterviolence (violence
against the violation of freedom), and therefore presents itself as justified, even as
“cleansing”  and  regenerative  ( CDRI :  720;  Santoni  2003:  46).  Perhaps  the  clearest
expression of this legitimate revolutionary violence, for Sartre, was to be found in
anti-colonial violence. The violence of the Algerian insurrection, for example, in the

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 128
128 ALBERT CAMUS
midst of which  CDR was published, was according to Sartre “simply an adoption of
the despair in which the colonialist maintained the natives; its violence was simply a
negation of the impossible [i.e. the impossible condition of the colonized subject]
. .. The violence of the rebel  was the violence of the colonialist; there was never any
46 other.”
The second volume of  CDR , drafted in 1958, left unfinished and published post-
humously in 1985, should be read as an effort to apply the discoveries of the first 
volume to the question of “History”. Specifically, Sartre says in the first volume, “it
will  attempt  to  establish  that  there  is  one  human  history,  with  one truth  and  one
intelligibility” ( CDRI : 69). Sartre’s method of positing a single history is to interpret
history  as  a  “totalization”.  According  to  this  interpretation,  although  actions  and
events  follow  one  another  sequentially,  “the  relations  between  them  are  not  like
those of links in a chain”.
The dialectical claim [i.e. Sartre’s claim in  CDR ] is that while action A is fol-
lowed by action B and then B by C, the relations between them are such that
action B  contains action A, and action C contains both A and B. In Sartre’s 
terminology, action B  totalises action A, and action C totalises action B. Again,
using Sartre’s terminology, the relations between actions A, B and C from a
dialectical  point  of  view  are  relations  of  interiority,  and  this,  according  to
Sartre, is the point of view required to understand the historical process.
(Dobson 1993: 64 –5)
Further, since “the totalising nature of individual actions makes for dialectical intel-
ligibility”, “the bonds of interiority which make dialectical reason the right reason to
‘read’ history ensure that nothing is left ‘outside’ the ‘totalisation without a totaliser’,
47 which is History”. Consequently,  CDRII can be read as “an attempt to substitute
unity  for  plurality  at  the  level  of  history,  not  –  as  in  volume  one  –  through  the 
formal   demonstration   of   the   dialectical   intelligibility   of   ‘practical   structures’
(groups, organisations and institutions), but by revealing the dialectical intelligibil-
ity of  struggles ”. In order to do this Sartre seeks to show “the totalising movement”
present “at the heart of even the most apparently disunited society – one riven by
class struggle, for example: ‘if the class struggle is to be intelligible to the historian’s
dialectical reason, one must be able to totalise classes in struggle – and this comes
down to discovering the synthetic unity of a society riven through and through’ ”
(Dobson 1993: 98, quoting  CDRII : 15–16). Although he continues to see the “deep
source”  of  conflict  as  “scarcity”,  Sartre  now  suggests  that  each  particular  case  of 
disunity or conflict actually constitutes “an incarnation and singularisation of class
struggle as it unfolds in contemporary forms of capitalism.  All violence is ‘gathered
in, clarified and made explicit’ in the single conflict or act of violence . . . .In this way,
Sartre  believes,  violence  and  conflict  –  and,  of  course,  History,  the  main  focus  of
Critique II – can be rendered dialectically intelligible” ( CDRII : 23; Santoni 2003: 64,
quoting  CDRII : 50).

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 129
CAMUS AND SARTRE 129
This lengthy digression should serve as a sketch of the philosophical context in
which  the  ideas  regarding  violence  and  its  justification  expressed  in  the  “Rome
Lecture” can be understood. According to Santoni, on whose summary of the un-
published lecture I largely rely, the “justificatory question” at the heart of the lecture
can  be  put  thus:  “If  there  is  but  one  way  to  humanity  and  it  involves  means in-
compatible with a human world, isn’t action with humanity as its  end impossible?”
Sartre’s response to this question, says Santoni, “is in the negative: humanity as end
can continually look back at, scrutinise, alter, and moderate the means. Even terror
–  in  which  ‘subhumans  become  the  means  of  humanity’  –  introduces  sanctions 
to accompany its orders.” In order to better understand Sartre here it is important
to take into account what he has to say about the relationship between means and
ends.  Contrary  to  the  accepted  view,  but  perhaps  unsurprisingly  given  the  philo-
sophy of history he has developed in  CDRII , Sartre does not think that the means
can be considered separately from the ends in a given scenario. Accordingly, the so-
called “scale metaphor”, whereby means and ends are weighed against one another
in determining the moral justness of a given action, is rejected by Sartre in favour of
a conception of ends and means in which both are considered as constitutive parts
of human action, where “the end synthesises or totalises the means [and where] the
end does not come after the means”, but “pervades their use, keeps them together as
means and even guides them”. Accordingly, “justificatory questions”, of the type “If
there is but one way to humanity and it involves  means incompatible with a human
world, isn’t action with humanity as its  end impossible?”, which separate ends from
means  when  determining  moral  legitimacy,  “appear  to  be  misdirected  and /or  to
betray a radical misunderstanding of the structure of human action and the means–
end ‘unity’ on which Sartre here insists” (Santoni 2003: 145–7).
All this forces a radical reinterpretation of the possibility of legitimate political
violence because revolutionary means, forming a “synthetic unity” with revolution-
ary ends, can no longer be weighed independently of those ends. Looked at in this
way, it becomes obvious that for Sartre “revolutionary praxis requires no external
justification”. Given the baldness of this assertion, Santoni wonders “whether the
end of revolutionary praxis would preclude any means as part of its synthetic unity”,
or whether “all means [are] dialectically synthesisable with the ‘end’ of revolutionary
praxis”. Sartre provides a “quick answer” to this question, by asserting that “all means
are good except those that denature the end” (Santoni 2003: 147).
Santoni finds an illustration of the meaning of this denaturing of ends in Sartre’s
early  essay  What Is Literature? ,  in  which,  he  says,  “Sartre  had  expressed  serious
reservations  about  systematically  lying  to  a  party’s  militants  for  the  sake  of  abo-
lishing  oppression . . . .The  lie  itself,  [Sartre]  contended,  is  a  form  of  oppression, 
and  lying  would,  unfortunately,  contribute  to  the  creation  of  a  ‘ lied-to and  lying
mankind’ ” (Santoni 2003: 148). However, in the passage in question, Sartre does not
in  fact  assert  that  lying  is  impermissible  because it  creates  “a  lied-to and  lying
mankind”, but only  if it creates “a  lied-to and  lying mankind”. Although he claims
that “the politics of the Communist Party, which consist of lying to its own troops,

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 130
130 ALBERT CAMUS
of calumniating, of hiding its defeats and its faults, compromises the goal which it
pursues”, he also notes that “on the other hand, it is easy to reply that in war – and
48 every revolutionary party is at war – one cannot tell soldiers the whole truth”. In
other words, Sartre here does not object to lying because it might denature the revo-
lutionary end, but he will object to lying if it denatures the revolutionary end. This
point  is  highlighted  when  Sartre  goes  on  to  discuss  the  “permissibility  of  terror”.
Whereas the legitimate use of terror is assumed in both  CDR and his “Preface” to
Fanon’s  The Wretched of the Earth , in the “Rome Lecture” Sartre attempts to  explain
its moral legitimacy. He does so by characterizing it not as a revolutionary means
with the potential to denature the revolutionary end, but instead, within the context 
of the means–end synthetic unity, as “one of the ‘night time moments’ [ moments 
de nuit ] of ‘making the human’ ”; terror “is a necessary action of counterviolence”
against  oppressive  and  dehumanizing  systems  (Santoni  2003:  148,  quoting  the
“Rome Lecture”). As I have suggested earlier, probably the clearest instance of such
terror, for Sartre, is to be found in anti-colonial violence, such as was practised by
the Front de Libération Nationale in Algeria.
Notwithstanding the paradoxical relation between the assertion that “all means
are good except those that denature the end” and the assertion of the legitimacy of
terror  as  “necessary  counterviolence”,  Santoni  suggests  that  at  this  point  in  the 
lecture  “Sartre  proceeds  to  answer  the  kind  of  challenge  regarding  terror  that
Camus put to him [in the  Temps modernes exchange]”, by placing the following four
“‘enabling’ or ‘limiting’ conditions” on its permissibility (Santoni 2003: 149):
• Terror is permissible only as a “provisional expedient” and only when it can be
prevented  from  becoming  “an  alienating  system  like  that  of  the  oppressing
adversary”. In short, “if Terror is to be used only as a means to produce yet an-
other exploitative system or to keep human beings in a state of subhumanity, it
must  not be permitted”.
• Terror  is  permissible  only  “if  those  who  employ  Terror  can  preclude  and
therefore avoid all ideologies of Terror  . . .Stalin’s ‘socialism in one country’ is
an example of what would not be permissible”.
• Terror is permissible “only if no justification of Terror is offered other than its
necessity ”, meaning that if a less violent and equally effective option is available
then no grounds (such as, that it is “easier”) can justify resorting to it.
• Terror is permissible “only if Terror has its ‘origins in the masses’ ”. Further, it
must be considered “a deviation of humanity due to urgency”, and, more, “a
49 technique totally unjustifiable outside its effectiveness”.
Sartre  believed  that  on  meeting  these  conditions,  “terror  becomes  revolutionary 
justice”,  and  consequently,  “the  humanization  of  terror”  becomes  “possible  in 
principle ”. It is clear that the above conditions would sanction the violence of, for
example, the Algerian insurrection against French rule, but they would not sanc-
tion, says Santoni, “the institutionalised terror of the USSR, which made terror the
keystone  of  an  ‘ideologically  justified’  system  of  government”.  Although  Santoni

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 131
CAMUS AND SARTRE 131
suggests that Sartre’s argument constitutes “a belated elaboration and refined ration-
ale  for  what  he  and  Jeanson  were  militantly  contending  against  Camus  in  their 
1952 confrontation”, he acknowledges that it is not “completely without ambiguity”
(Santoni 2003: 151–2). However, I suspect that if we are to treat Sartre’s argument
as a  moral argument its “shortcomings” are evidently far more serious than Santoni
admits.
First, just as Sartre’s “denaturing of the end” criterion, mentioned earlier, “does
not easily or unambiguously distinguish what is not permissible”, his resort here to
terms such as “necessity” and “effectiveness” (not to mention such heavily weighted
terms  as  “ideologies”,  his  use  of  which  implies  the  Marxist  commonplace  that  it
itself was not an ideology) seems to undermine whatever moral sense his arguments
appear at first to possess. After all, legitimizing violence on the grounds of “effect-
iveness” is surely the opposite of an ethical or moral argument. Secondly, we note
that Sartre’s insistence on the synthetic unity of the means and ends (“the end does
not  come  after  the  means”,  he  says  at  one  point,  but  “pervades  their  use,  keeps 
them together as means and even guides them”) implies not only a certainty that 
terror  will  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  that  end,  but  that  the  end  itself  is 
inexorable (Santoni 2003: 152, 146). Thirdly, and finally, as Thomas Anderson has
observed, “none of the conditions Sartre presents involves distinguishing between
violence against innocent people and violence against aggressors seeking to destroy
human  beings.  Yet  such  a  distinction  seems  crucial  to  any  moral  consideration.”
Santoni,  too,  conceded  that  this  failure  on  Sartre’s  part  constitutes  a  “significant
50 omission”.
This  might  suggest  that  Sartre’s  arguments  in  defence  of  political  violence,
although self-evidently justificatory, are not meant to be  moral arguments. In this
view, although Sartre evidently seeks to justify political violence, and indeed sug-
gests a number of limiting conditions that can be applied to the use of such violence,
the arguments he deploys to this end are not themselves moral arguments. When
we consider his assertion, for instance, that in the context of revolutionary violence
“all means are good except those that denature the end”, we might conclude that
Sartre’s arguments are based simply on the expediency of revolutionary means in
achieving revolutionary ends. Similarly, we could explain Sartre’s failure to incor-
porate a consideration of innocent victims into his analysis of violence on the basis
that, in the context of revolutionary praxis (a context in which Sartre believed that
humanity  “does  not  yet  exist,  . . .is  incomplete,  lacking  and  alienated”),  there  are 
no  grounds  on  which  such  a  morality  could  be  established  (Santoni  2003:  142 
n.11). This view seems to be endorsed by Elizabeth Bowman and Robert Stone, who
note that “Sartre’s dialectical ethics” contains no “general rules or principles of right
action” because “for Sartre, no such positive norm is required to justify revolution-
ary praxis”. In fact, Bowman and Stone (who are probably the foremost experts on
Sartre’s “Rome Lecture”) note elsewhere that according to Sartre, “due to class, sex,
race, ethnic and other oppressions that deny freedom, a universal morality is not
now possible”, and that “revolt is ‘justified’ not by a morality (such an end is only in
process of construction) but by the oppression of systemic exploitation to which it

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 132
132 ALBERT CAMUS
responds” (Bowman & Stone 1986: 209; Bowman & Stone 2004: 8). They illustrate
this point with a pertinent contemporary statement from Sartre:
Sartre held that the mark of the “false intellectual” is to affirm  there is such a
universal  morality  “here  and  now”,  though  it  can  only  be  that  of  the  small
bourgeois class. By denying society is “an arena of struggle between particular
groups  . . .for the statute of universality” such intellectuals act as watchdogs
for that class. By contrast “true intellectuals” insist “man does not exist” but is
rather “the distant goal of a practical and daily enterprise” consisting of [the]
“liquidation of particularisms” in a movement of “universalization” on the part
of “the immense majority, particularized by the oppression and exploitation
which make of them the products of their products”.
(Bowman & Stone 2004: 24 n.22, quoting “A Plea for Intellectuals”, 
in Sartre 1974c: 249–58)
However,  Bowman  and  Stone  also  make  it  clear  that,  paradoxically,  Sartre  did
consider his justification of violence in the “Rome Lecture” to be a moral justifica-
tion, calling it a “socialist morality”, which asserts both “the present impossibility 
of being moral” and “the moral primacy of revolution”. Evidently the morality pro-
posed here is a revolutionary morality, which he pits against the various oppressive
moralities (sexist, racist, classist etc.) of the status quo. Sartre’s “socialist morality”,
they explain, “is a set of guidelines for securing conditions of concrete freedom that
will make moral conduct on such a universal standard possible” at some point in the
future (Bowman & Stone 2004: 6 – 8, 16). It may well be that, as Linda Bell argues,
Sartre believed that violence could never be legitimated according to what he him-
self calls “a universal morality”, but that question seems of little significance, given
that Sartre succeeded in granting political violence legitimacy according to a revo-
lutionary  morality  of  his  own  devising  (termed  an  “ interim morality  of  universal-
ization ” by Bowman and Stone), and given that he appears to have accorded such
51 violence unique authority in making such a future “universal morality” possible.
It is probably this absence of a moral sense not subsumed under the revolution-
ary agenda of the  CDR that leads Benny Lévy to suggest in  Hope Now that there is in
Sartre’s work “a profound tendency toward an ethic of violence” (Sartre 1996: 93). It
is also probably the basis of that “combination of moral neutrality and necessitar-
ianism”  that  Ronald  Aronson  identified  in  CDRII (Aronson  1987:  179,  quoted  in
Dobson  1993:  104).  Furthermore,  although  critics  may  disagree  about  the  legiti-
macy  of  interjecting  “extraneous  moral  judgements  into  [the]  properly  historical
and  theoretical  account”  of  CDRII ,  no  such  objection  can  be  made  regarding  the
“Rome  Lecture”  because  it  presents  itself  precisely  as  a  moral  defence  of  political
violence  (Aronson  1987:  179;  Dobson  1993:  104).  Although  Sartre  continued  to
reflect on the possibility of legitimate violence, most notably in  Hope Now (where,
contra CDR , he declares violence to be “the very opposite of fraternity” (Sartre 1996:
93)), it seems that the “ethical” argument contained in the “Rome Lecture” leaves a
great deal to be desired.

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 133
CAMUS AND SARTRE 133
Although  the  lecture  was  written  more  than  a  decade  after  the  dispute  with
Camus, we must remember that its approach to morality is distinctive only in its
articulation  of  the  so-called  limiting  conditions  on  terror,  and  its  general  thesis 
on  morality  and  violence,  which  is  so  obviously  at  odds  with  the  philosophy  of 
la mesure in  The Rebel , had been worked out much earlier. In fact, we see an early
expression  of  Sartre’s  posited  philosophy  of  “unfolding  totalization”  (Bowman  &
Stone 1991: 68) in his  Saint Genet: Actor and Martyr , which was published shortly
before his response to Camus’s letter in 1952:
Either morality is stuff and nonsense or it is a concrete totality which achieves
a  synthesis  of  Good  and  Evil . . . .The  abstract  separation  of  these  two  con-
cepts  expresses  simply  the  alienation  of  man.  The  fact  remains  that,  in  the 
historical situation, this synthesis cannot be achieved. Thus, any Ethic which
does not explicitly profess that it is  impossible today contributes to the bam-
boozling  and  alienation  of  men.  The  ethical  “problem”  arises  from  the  fact
that Ethics is  for us inevitable and at the same time impossible. Action must
give itself ethical norms in this climate of nontranscendable impossibility. It is
from this outlook that, for example, we must view the problem of violence or
that of the relationship between ends and means. To a mind that experienced
this  agony  and  was  at  the  same  time  forced  to  will  and  to  decide,  all high-
minded rebellion, all outcries of refusal, all virtuous indignation, would seem a
kind of outworn rhetoric                            .(Sartre 1964a: 186n                           . , emphasis added)
I  have  already  noted  that  Camus’s  quarrel  with  Sartre  over  The  Rebel was 
preceded  by  a  conceptually  related  dispute  over  Merleau-Ponty’s  “Le  Yogi  et  le
Prolétaire” in 1946. I have also noted that in his editorials in  Les Temps modernes
and  in  works  such  as  Baudelaire and  What is Literature? (both  1947)  Sartre  had
begun to articulate a political position plainly at odds with that of Camus, particu-
52 larly with regard to political violence. It could be said, however, that the extent and
nature of the differences between Sartre’s and Camus’s ideas on political violence
only  really  became  explicit  with  the  appearance  of  their  respective  plays,  Dirty
53 Hands (1948) and  The Just Assassins  (1949). Although the submerged dialogue we
can discern between the two plays can be seen to presage the very public disagree-
ment that followed a few years later, it is important that it be seen in this broader
context as well.
Immediately  on  comparing  the  two  plays  one  is  struck  by  the  clear  thematic 
similarities, the most important of which is their common preoccupation with the
question of the legitimacy of political violence. Both plays are concerned with in-
dividual  acts  of  political  assassination  (one  based  on  the  assassination  of  Grand
Duke Sergi, the other, much more loosely, on the assassination of Trotsky) and both 
generate a good deal of their dramatic momentum by pitting the arguments of a revo-
lutionary “realist” (Stepan in the case of  The Just Assassins , Hoederer in the case of
Dirty Hands ) against those of a revolutionary “idealist” (Kaliayev in the case of  The
Just Assassins , Hugo in the case of  Dirty Hands ). Although in the context of his play

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 134
134 ALBERT CAMUS
Sartre declared that “a good play ought to present problems, not solve them”, there
is abundant evidence that, as Simone de Beauvoir states, Sartre’s “sympathy went 
to Hoederer”, the revolutionary realist, rather than Hugo the idealist (Sartre 1974a:
188;  de  Beauvoir  1968:  160).  It  is  Hoederer  who  insists  that  revolution  “is  not  a 
question of virtue but of effectiveness”, who articulates and defends the concept of
“dirty hands”:
How  you  cling  to  your  purity,  young  man!  How  afraid  you  are  to  soil  your
hands! All right, stay pure! What good will it do? Why did you join us? Purity
is an idea for a yogi or a monk. You intellectuals and bourgeois anarchists use
it as a pretext for doing nothing. To do nothing, to remain motionless, arms at
your sides, wearing kid gloves. Well, I have dirty hands. Right up to the elbows.
I’ve plunged them in filth and blood. But what do you hope? Do you think you
can govern innocently? (Sartre 1989: 229, 218)
Sartre  himself  repeatedly  asserts  in  contemporary  interviews  that  “politics
requires us to ‘get our hands dirty’ ” and insists that in rejecting Hoederer’s “politics
of compromise”, Hugo “is still acting from the bourgeois idealism which was pre-
cisely what had made him rebel against his class and which he did not succeed in
54 overcoming”. An illustrative example of Hoederer’s willingness to dirty his hands
can be seen in his attitude to lying. In contrast to Hugo, who says that on joining the
(Communist) Proletarian Party “for the first time I saw men who didn’t lie to other
men”, Hoederer insists, “we have always told lies, just like any other party  . . .I’ll lie
when I must  . . .I wasn’t the one who invented lying . It grew out of a society divided
into  classes,  and  each  one  of  us  has  inherited  it  from  birth.  We  shall  not  abolish 
55 lying by refusing to tell lies, but by using every means at hand to abolish classes.”
Ironically, given Sartre’s insistence that Hoederer’s was also  his view, it seems that
the  public  (and  the  communists)  continued  to  interpret  the  play  as  being  anti-
communist,  something  to  which  Sartre  objected  and  that  ultimately  led  him,  in
December  1952,  to  prohibit  production  of  the  play  anywhere  without  the  impri-
56 matur of the local Communist Party.
This interpretation of  Dirty Hands , and its contrast with Camus’s evolving ideas
on the legitimacy of political violence (to which I will turn shortly), is given further
endorsement by Sartre in an interview with his Italian translator, Paolo Caruso, in
1964.  Although  he  admits  to  having  “great  understanding  for  Hugo’s  attitude”,
Sartre says that Hoederer “is the man I’d like to be if I were a revolutionary”. He fur-
ther relates that, after attending one of the play’s final rehearsals, Camus told him
there was a detail in the play he did not “approve of ”, and asked “Why does Hugo
say, ‘I don’t love men for what they are but for what they ought to be’  . . .and why
does Hoederer answer, ‘And I love them for what they are’? The way I see it [says
Camus], it should have been just the opposite.” Sartre insists that Camus’s interpre-
tation was based on a fundamental confusion: “He really though that Hugo loved
men for what they are since he didn’t want to lie to them, whereas Hoederer, on the
contrary, became in his eyes a dogmatic Communist who weighed men in terms of

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 135
CAMUS AND SARTRE 135
what they ought to be and who deceived them in the name of an ideal. This is just
57 the opposite of what I meant to say.” Ronald Aronson’s gloss on this statement is
instructive:  “For  Camus,  sticking  to  principle  and  refusing  to  lie  for  the  sake  of 
politics was inseparable from respecting people and loving them. For Sartre, acting
on  principle  dictated  being  true  to  long-term  ends”  (Aronson  2004:  106).  Sartre
himself goes on in the same interview to explain in some detail what he  did mean to
say in  Dirty Hands :
I  think  there  should  be  as  little  lying  as  possible within the limits imposed 
by the imperatives of praxis . Lying should not be condemned nor, of course,
approved  a priori (by making a Machiavellian technique of it, for instance) but
there is nothing abnormal about its happening, when circumstances require
it. When Hoederer says, “It is not I who invented the lie and I shall use it if it is
necessary”, I think he is quite right. There has never been a political situation
in which lying, by omission at any rate, does not become absolutely essential
 . . .Hoederer  tries  to  speak  the  truth  as  far  as  possible;  lying  is  not  in  his
nature,  except  that  he  does  not  recoil  either  from  lying  or  from  political 
58 murder when they are the necessities of praxis.
Where Sartre articulates and defends a view of history in which, as de Beauvoir
59 puts  it,  “the  vanity  of  morality”  confronts  “the  efficacy  of  praxis ”, it  is  hardly 
surprising  to  find  that  Camus  favoured  the  idealist’s  approach  to  the  use  of 
revolutionary  violence.  Although  Camus  was  far  from  considering  the  Socialist
Revolutionaries to be perfect models of legitimate political violence (we remember
that in “Defence of  The Rebel ” he criticized them for what he perceived to be their
complete lack of realism), he unambiguously favoured the revolutionary idealism of
Kaliayev over the realism of Stepan, and sought to construct his ethic of legitimate
violence precisely  against such realism as was by then being advocated by Sartre.
For  example,  Kaliayev’s  decision  not  to  throw  the  bomb  into  the  Grand  Duke’s 
carriage because it contained his nephew and niece provokes Stepan’s “realist” de-
claration that “nothing that can serve our cause should be ruled out”. Stepan also
makes explicit what for Camus is the implication of such “realism” in his assertion:
“Not until the day comes when we stop being sentimental about children, will the
revolution triumph and we be masters of the world” ( COP : 186, 185;  TRN : 337, 336).
Camus’s  favouring  of  idealism  over  realism  was,  naturally,  interpreted  by  Sartre 
and others as representing an ideology of “clean hands”, or the  de facto pacifism of a
“beautiful soul”; indeed, it was seen to involve the same “rejection of history” that he
60 and Jeanson identified in  The Rebel . None of this, though, should lead us to suspect
that Camus was, perhaps despite himself, a pacifist. If not entirely won over to the
view  of  Camus  as  pacifist,  Ronald  Santoni,  for  example,  repeatedly  exhibits  a 
tendency to articulate it: for example, he asserts near the end of his discussion of  The
Just Assassins that “it is evident that [Camus] is mobilizing all the arguments he can
against revolutionary violence and murder and putting before the reader the human
consequences of so-called justified murder” (Santoni 2003: 115). As I have shown

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 136
136 ALBERT CAMUS
elsewhere,  violence  remained  for  Camus  inevitable  and,  under  certain  circum-
stances,  legitimate.  His  main  concern  was  to  address  the  enthusiasm  with  which
some of his contemporaries embraced violence, and the arguments they offered in
its defence. Ronald Aronson, too, is ambiguous on Camus’s attitude to political vio-
lence. Although he recognizes that Camus was not a “pacifist”, he nonetheless high-
61 lights what he calls Camus’s preoccupation “with keeping his hands clean”. What
“clean hands” means for Aronson is not always very clear, for at one point he char-
acterizes it ( justly, I believe) as Camus’s insistence “on the use of violence only when
absolutely necessary, within limits, [and] in response to a vital threat”, yet elsewhere
he  characterizes  Camus  as  “the  man  who  so  decried  violence  and  sought  clean
hands”, and suggests that having “only reluctantly accepted violence” in  Letters to a
German Friend , after the Second World War Camus became “more and more visi-
ble as an opponent of political violence”, an opposition that, according to Aronson,
culminates in  The Rebel (Aronson 2004: 90, 219, 34). Whereas Camus deliberately
maintained  a  paradoxical  attitude  to  political  violence,  declaring  it,  for  example, 
“at the same time unavoidable and unjustifiable”, both Santoni and Aronson display
a tendency to read Camus as insisting that violence was simply “unjustifiable”, while
understating (though not necessarily discounting) the properly paradoxical nature
of  his  interpretation  of  political  violence.  Aronson  also  seems  to  see  in  The Just
Assassins an articulation of what I have called elsewhere the “life for a life” thesis,
whereby the revolutionary’s violent action is granted legitimacy only at the cost of
the revolutionary’s own life ( E : 355– 6; Aronson 2004: 117, 123, 124; Santoni 2003:
164).
In any event, what  Camus meant by “clean hands” can be readily discerned by a
cursory examination of his use of this phrase. He suggests, for example, that because
the French were not responsible for starting the Second World War, they entered it
with “clean hands”: “Time will tell”, he wrote as Paris was being liberated in August
1944,  “that  the  men  of  France  did  not  want  to  kill  and  that  they  went  with  clean
62 hands into a war that was not of their own choosing.” “The choice to kill was not
ours”, he says in an editorial from the previous day. “We were placed in a position
where we had either to kill or to bend our knees” ( CC : 15;  CAC8 : 148). What this
suggests is that “clean hands” for Camus did not necessitate the rejection of all vio-
lence, but only that violence be accepted under specific circumstances (in this case,
under  the  circumstances  of  an  unwanted,  unprovoked  war).  This  is  what  Camus
means when he says in  Letters to a German Friend that not only did the Resistance
go into war with clean hands, but that they will also emerge from the war with clean
63 hands. Therefore,  Camus’s  supposed  preference  for  clean  hands,  such  as  it  is
(expressed in print on three occasions between 1943 and 1944), does not in any way
64 preclude the possibility of legitimate violence.
A final observation that should be made here regarding Camus’s “clean hands”
versus Sartre’s  Dirty Hands is that the examples of legitimate political violence in
Camus’s works – the assassinations of Caligula and Sergi – quite literally involve the
protagonists dirtying their hands. As I have argued elsewhere, the direct involve-
ment of the perpetrator in his or her violence seems to have been central to Camus’s

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 137
CAMUS AND SARTRE 137
65 conception of its legitimacy. A commitment to “dirty hands”, a willingness, accord-
ing to Sartre, to “compromise between the ideal and the real”, was for Camus no
assurance of revolutionary commitment. For him, genuine fidelity to the revolution
necessitated a willingness not only to take an active part in it, but also, perhaps, to be
willing to sacrifice one’s own life in its defence. Perhaps with Sartre’s play in mind,
Camus’s  Kaliayev,  angered  by  Stepan’s  denigration  of  his  revolutionary  commit-
ment, shouts “Look! Do you think that hand will tremble? No, it won’t tremble. Do
you think that I shall hesitate when the Grand Duke is there in front of me? Surely
you cannot think that!”, and crucially, Kaliayev concludes: “And even if my arm did
begin to tremble  . . .I know a sure way of killing him  . . .I’d throw myself under the
horses’ feet” ( COP : 171;  TRN : 318). The question of dirty hands, then, is a pseudo-
question, one which implies that there are only two possible approaches to the issue
of political violence: the view that it is necessary and legitimate (“dirty hands”) and
the  view  that  it  is  never  necessary  and  never  legitimate  (what  Aronson  seems  to
mean by “clean hands”). Such talk of dirty and clean hands seems to permit little
more  than  a  fine  display  of  bombast  regarding  the  depths  of  one’s  revolutionary
commitment,  while  side-stepping  all  of  those  issues  that  it  might  be  said  should
be  at  the  heart  of  a  discussion  of  political  violence,  such  as  the  possible  criteria 
for ascribing to it a degree of moral legitimacy. Camus would certainly have found
something  rather  grotesque  in  the  implication  that  the  refusal  to  have  innocent
blood on one’s hands was to refuse to get one’s hands dirty, and indeed he objected
most  strenuously  to  the  conspicuous  cleanness  of  the  hands  of  precisely  those
defending a philosophy of dirty hands.
In the more general context of Sartre’s political evolution, it is important to point
out that at the time of Jeanson’s review of  The Rebel and the subsequent exchange of
letters, Sartre was in fact attempting to align himself publicly with the communists.
This  stage  of  his  political  development  culminated  in  the  writing  of  The  Com-
munists  and  Peace ,  which  coincided  exactly  with  his  split  with  Camus  in  1952:
indeed, Camus’s letter and Sartre’s response literally interrupt the serial publication
66 of the essay in  Les Temps modernes . According to Ronald Aronson, this lengthy
essay presented “the theoretical argument for his identification of the PCF with the
proletariat”, as well as the “social and historical basis for this identification”. What
this identification meant in practice, however, according to another critic, was that
“the Party’s politics must, therefore, be accepted”, since “the future of democracy is
in the hands of the working man and the Communist Party is the party of the work-
ing class” (Aronson 1980: 219; Burnier 1968: 83). Examining this essay now, we can
see  clearly  that  the  arguments  in  his  letter  to  Camus  are  entirely  consistent  with
those  in  The Communists and Peace ,  and  in  a  certain  respect  the  letter  and  the 
serialized  essay  form  a  coherent  whole.  Further,  given  the  extent  of  what  Sartre
called  his  “conversion”,  it  seems  plausible  to  suggest  that  although  he  may  not 
have sought such a dramatic public split with Camus, it was unlikely to have caused
him  much  upset  when  it  occurred.  He  had,  after  all,  decided  at  this  time  that 
“an anti-Communist was a rat”, and Camus was for Sartre precisely such an anti-
67 communist. As  Ronald  Aronson  illustrates,  the  “political  evolution”  evinced  in

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 138
138 ALBERT CAMUS
Sartre’s  attack  on  Camus  did  not  go  unnoticed  in  the  communist  press,  and  “the
break  earned  [him]  points  with  the  Party”  (Aronson  2004:  166).  Speaking  of  The
Communists  and  Peace and  Sartre’s  letter  to  Camus,  de  Beauvoir  asserts  that 
the two pieces of writing
had the same meaning: the postwar period was over. No more postponements,
no more conciliations were possible. We had been forced into making clear-
cut choices. Despite the difficulty of his position, Sartre still knew he had been
right to adopt it. [Quoting from Sartre’s unpublished notes, she continues] “I
had to take some step that would make me ‘other’. I had to accept the point of
view of the USSR in its totality.” (De Beauvoir 1968: 274)
Although  Sartre’s  attitude  to  the  communists  was  to  change  (notably  after  the
Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956), his view of Camus did not, and the position
taken  by  the  latter  on  Algerian  independence,  which  is  discussed  in  the  next 
chapter, was seen as conclusive proof of his fundamental “hostility to history”. After
Camus’s death in 1960 Sartre wrote little about their relationship, and what he did
write was often contradictory. For example, his frequently cited and anthologized
obituary associates Camus with the French  moralistes , and admires his “stubborn
humanism, strict and pure, austere and sensual, [which] delivered uncertain combat
against the massive and deformed events of the day”. He also observes that “by the
unexpectedness  of  his  refusals,  he  reaffirmed,  at  the  heart  of  our  era,  against  the
68 Machiavellians, against the golden calf of realism, the existence of the moral act”.
As profound and generous as these words seem, they are somewhat complicated by
Sartre’s own disdain for the  moralistes , and by subsequent comments made to his
friend John Gerassi:
There is a little falsehood in the obituary I wrote about Camus, when I say that
even when he disagreed with us, we wanted to know what he thought . . . .He
wasn’t a boy who was made for all that he tried to do, he should have been a
little crook from Algiers, a very funny one, who might have managed to write
a few books, but mostly remain a crook. Instead of which you had the impres-
sion that civilisation had been stuck on top of him and he did what he could
69 with it, which is to say, he did nothing.
However, as personally antagonistic as they may have remained, Sartre’s refer-
ence in his obituary to the “golden calf of realism” does seem to suggest a certain
self-criticism  and  a  softening  of  his  views  of  the  historical  imperatives  of  revolu-
tionary violence. In this light it is perhaps useful to follow Ronald Aronson in con-
sidering  the  Sartre  and  Camus  dispute  in  the  context  of  the  competing  values  of
politics and morality. For Aronson, Camus locates morality “outside history”, and
suggests that his morality, untethered from the weighty demands of the political,
70 too easily turned to moralizing. This, of course, was also the view of Sartre: “You
became violent and terrorist when History – which you rejected – rejected you in

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 139
CAMUS AND SARTRE 139
turn . . . .Your  morality  first  changed  into  moralism .  Today  it  is  only  literature .
71 Tomorrow  perhaps  it  will  be  immorality.” Although  there  is  no  evidence  that
Camus located the morality “outside history”, it is certainly the case that for him the
prerogatives of morality always outweighed those of politics (in so far as they could
be separated from the political). Sartre, as we have seen, developed a markedly dif-
ferent approach to the relationship between politics and morality. For him “ethics
became  indistinguishable  from  history  and  politics”,  and  “being  moral  involved
acknowledging that we and our world are inescapably violent”. Sartre “finally artic-
ulated the framework for an ethics that would satisfy him, namely, that radical polit-
ical change is the only path for creating a world in which moral human relations 
are possible” (Aronson 2004: 112). Clearly then, if Camus subordinated politics to
morality, Sartre subordinated morality to politics. Although Camus’s attempt at a
resolution of politics and morality may be seen to have failed, it was surely a far less
egregious failure than that committed by Sartre. Indeed Sartre seemed to recognize
that his attempt to forge a politically efficacious morality had been a failure when, in
the mid-1970s, he spoke frankly of his reasons for rejecting “moralism” in favour of
political realism: “you do it because it works, and  . . .you evaluate it according to its
efficacity rather than some vague notions having to do with morality, which would
only slow things up”. However, he also insists that “that whole idea didn’t sit too well
with me, it upset me no end, despite the fact that – ignoring my own better judge-
ment – I carried it through and finally arrived at a pure realism: what’s real is true,
and what’s true is real. And when I had reached that point, what it meant was that I
72 had blocked out all ideas of morality.”
This does appear to suggest a greater sympathy with Camus’s “stubborn human-
ism”,  his  principled  stand  “against  the  Machiavellians,  against  the  golden  calf  of 
realism” (Aronson (2004: 229) goes as far as to suggest that the unfinished second
volume of Sartre’s  CDR  “poses precisely the same questions” as  The Rebel : “how did
a revolution aiming at human emancipation create hell on earth?”). However, while
I have suggested when discussing  The Rebel that there are good reasons to consider
Camus as an advocate of “anti-political politics”, and while it is helpful to consider
his reconciliation of politics and morality by resort to this idea, there appears to be
a very different kind of ambivalence in Sartre’s attempt at the same reconciliation.
In the same interview in which he admits to a period of commitment to political
realism, he identifies as the moment when he reintroduced morality into politics his
encounter  in  the  late  1960s  with  the  Maoists,  saying  that  although  Marxism  had
always presupposed a morality, “it’s Mao who clarified it and gave it flesh” (Sartre
1978a: 80). Accordingly, we can say that Sartre’s reconciliation of politics and moral-
ity is neatly described in his defence of what he identifies as the distinct “morality”
of Maoist violence:
For the Maoists  . . .everywhere that revolutionary violence is born among the
masses, it is immediately and profoundly moral. This is because the workers,
who  have  up  to  that  point  been  the  objects  of  capitalist  authoritarianism,
become the subjects of their own history, even if only for a moment . . . .Yet

9780773534667_C05.qxd  10/09/2008  10:45 AM  Page 140
140 ALBERT CAMUS
even though the economic and political motives of the explosions of popular
violence are obvious, the explosions cannot be explained except by the fact
that these motives were  morally appreciated by the masses. That is, the eco-
nomic  and  political  motives  helped  the  masses  to  understand  what  is  the
highest immorality – the exploitation of man by man. So when the bourgeois
claims that his conduct is guided by a “humanistic” morality – work, family,
nation – he is only disguising his deep-seated immorality and trying to alien-
ate the workers: he will never be moral. Whereas the workers and the country
people, when they revolt, are completely moral because they are not exploit-
73 ing anyone.
Although the general idea of a reconciliation of morality and politics might indeed
be discernible in the works of both Camus and Sartre, we can only conclude that the
respective reconciliations they sought (let alone whatever reconciliation they might
be said to have achieved) were of markedly different varieties.