Camus’ Literary 
Ethics
Between Form and Content
Grace Whistler

Camus’ Literary Ethics
“From  an  ethical  perspective  enhanced  by  stylistic  sensitivity,  Grace  Whistler  
examines a number of ways in which Albert Camus gives form to some of his 
most important views in various works throughout his career. Her book is a fit -
ting response to one of Camus’ own concerns, since “donner une forme” is an 
expression  that  recurs  in  his  work  and  reveals  his  creative  process  and  artistic  
quest. Camus’ Literary Ethics: Between Form and Content also makes a theo -
retical  contribution  by  exploring,  clearly  and  methodically,  and  sometimes  in  
the work of other writers, the mutually beneficial relationships between litera -
ture  and  philosophy,  as  well  as  the  organic  links  between  language  and  
content.”
—Sophie Bastien,  Royal Military College of Canada , author of   
Caligula et Camus. Interférences transhistoriques , co-editor of  Camus,   
l’artiste and La Passion du théâtre. Camus à la scène
“Camus once observed: ‘If you want to be a philosopher, write novels.’ Perhaps 
it is the inability of most philosophers to write novels that leads them to think 
that Camus is not a philosopher. In her empathic and exacting study, Camus’ 
Literary Ethics: Between Form and Content, Grace Whistler shows that Camus 
saw a connection that some philosophers miss. She presents clear and convinc -
ing  evidence  that  Camus  excelled  at  doing  philosophy  by  writing  great  litera -
ture. Her argument does justice to Camus’ use of various literary forms to give 
expression  to  philosophical  content,  but  it  is  strongest  when  she  shows  how  
Camus composes novels expressing values worth living and dying for. This book 
should finally put to rest the distorted picture of the artist as an absurdist, ‘exis -
tentialist’, and nihilist.”
—George Heffernan,  Professor of Philosophy, Merrimack College, USA
“Grace Whistler, in this astute and authoritative study, argues persuasively that 
the true originality of Camus as an ethical thinker emerges not through focusing 
separately  on  his  philosophy  or  his  novels  but  through  recognising  how  the  
philosophical and the literary are inextricably integrated in his writing.”
—Peter Lamarque,  Professor of Philosophy at the University of York,   
UK , author of  The Philosophy of Literature  (2008) and   
The Opacity of Narrative  (2014)

Grace Whistler
Camus’ Literary 
Ethics
Between Form and Content

Grace Whistler
Department of Philosophy
University of York
York, UK
ISBN    978-3-030-37755-7                  ISBN    978-3-030-37756-4     (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG 2020
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and trans -
mission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or 
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover illustration: © Alex Linch shutterstock.com
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Acknowledgements
I am greatly indebted to a number of friends, colleagues, and advisors in 
my completion of this book. This volume was made possible by my edi -
tor  at  Palgrave  Macmillan,  the  inexhaustibly  helpful  Lauriane  Piette.  I  
extend my utmost thanks to Peter Lamarque, whose patience and exper -
tise have been indispensable to the success of this project. I am extremely 
grateful  to  my  husband,  Daniel  Whistler,  and  my  dear  friend  Garrett  
Mindt,  whose  moral  (and  philosophical)  support  has  sustained  me  
throughout. I owe much to Geoffrey Wall, George Heffernan and Maciej 
Kałuża, whose encyclopaedic knowledge and razor-sharp perceptiveness 
have helped to shape this project more than they know. I would also like 
to express my sincere appreciation to Catherine Camus, for her warmth, 
insight, and countless cups of tea, and Raphael Araújo, for encouraging 
me to put myself out there. My deepest thanks go to Rabi Zeglach and 
Hakima  Cherif-Zeglach,  for  showing  me  the  real  Algeria.  I  am  much  
obliged  to  Sophie  Bastien  and  Alexandre  Alajbegovic,  whose  welcome  
and enthusiasm continue to surprise me, and to Joshua Cockayne, with -
out whom I might still be in a black and white room. It remains for me 
to thank everyone at Centre Albert Camus in Aix-en-Provence, the Albert 
Camus Society, and La Société des Etudes Camusiennes for the invalu -
able  feedback  and  countless  opportunities  they  have  given  me  during  
my research.
v

Contents
  1       Introduction: Context, Form, and Content        1
 1      Camus  the  Philosopher?           1
 2  Philosophical Style: A Superficial Question?             4
 3  On the Possibility of a Literary Philosophy         14
 4  Camus’ Philosophy: Some Preliminary Reflections         20
 5  Camus’ Struggles with Rhetorical Form         30
 6      Chapter  Conclusion      35
 7      Chapter  Summary      36
References      43
  2  A  Post-Christian  Ethics         47
 1      Chapter  Introduction      47
 2      Camus  the  Christian?      48
 3      ‘Dialogue  Croyant-Incroyant’      51
 4      Faith  in  Nature      56
 5      Faith  in  Human  Nature      62
 6      Christianity  and  La Chute      64
 7      Chapter  Conclusion      66
References      70
vii

viii              Contents
  3  Narrating  the  Absurd         73
 1      Chapter  Introduction      73
 2  Authenticity and the Form of Thought         75
 3      The  Phenomenology  of  Passé Composé      80
 4      Doing  Philosophy  in  Style      84
 5      Chapter  Conclusion      90
References      94
  4     Myths,  Fables,  Parables,  Allegories      97
 1      Chapter  Introduction      97
 2  Philosophy (and the World) as Fable         99
 3  Political Allegory and Abstraction as a Force of Nature       102
 4  Myth and the Metaphysics of      L’Etranger                               107
 5  The Existentialist and the City of Salt       109
 6      Chapter  Conclusion   114
References                                                                                     117
  5     Dialogic  Ethics                                                                            121
 1      Chapter  Introduction   121
 2      Monology  and  Dialogy   123
 3      Dialogic  Ethics   127
 4      Didactic  Dialogues   130
 5      Failures  of  Dialogue   134
 6      Chapter  Conclusion   139
References                                                                                     143
  6  Absurd  Theatre:     Caligula  and Beyond                                        147
 1      Chapter  Introduction   147
 2      Time  and  Mortality   150
 3  Disintegration of Language (and Meaning)       154
 4  ‘Une autre face du tragique’       158
 5      Camus’  Absurd  Theatre   162
 6      Chapter  Conclusion   167
References                                                                                     172

     Contents      ix
7     A  Novelistic  Afterlife                                                                       175
  1   Chapter  Introduction       175
  2   From  Meursault  to  Harun       177
  3   Franciscan  Knowledge  and  ‘What-It’s-Like-Ness’       180
  4   Kno     wledge of the Other, from ‘The Other’   184
  5   Faith and Redemption: Meursault’s Defence       189
  6   Chapter  Conclusion       192
References                                                                                     195
  8      Conclusion:  Ethics  Through  Interdisciplinarity                        197
References                                                                                     200
   Index                                                                                                  201

1
Introduction: Context, Form, 
and Content
1    Camus  the Philosopher?
Anyone working on Camus in the context of contemporary philosophy 
is all too familiar with the experience of having to justify one’s reasons for 
doing so—Camus ‘the philosopher’ has long gone out of fashion in aca -
demic   philosophy.   Numerous   commentators   portray   him   as   a   
romancier / moraliste  whose ideas nevertheless lacked philosophical depth 
(e.g. Bronner  1999 ; Sherman  2008 ). Walter Kaufmann writes, ‘Camus is 
a fine writer, but not a philosopher’ (Kaufmann  1959 , 90), while Tony 
Judt nicknames him ‘Camus the Just’ (Judt  1998 , 100). As Jacob Golomb 
puts  it,  ‘Of  the  few  scholars  still  interested  in  Camus,  most  esteem  his  
literary genius but denigrate his importance as a philosopher’ (Golomb 
1994 , 268). Such pervading approaches can be traced all the way back to 
Camus’ famous spat with Sartre, who was perhaps the first to draw atten -
tion  to  what  he  saw  as  Camus’  ‘philosophical  incompetence’.  Sartre  
asked of him:
What if your book simply shows your philosophical incompetence? What 
if  it  is  made  up  of  second-hand  knowledge,  hastily  collected?  ...  And  if  
1 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_1

2   G. Whistler
your reasoning is inaccurate? And if your thoughts are vague and banal? ... 
You hate difficulties of thought and you hastily decree that there is nothing 
to  understand,  in  order  to  avoid  reproaches  of  not  having  understood  
things. (In Heims  2003 , 48)
As such, those working on Camus in philosophy often feel the need 
to argue the case for him to be considered a philosopher at all, such as 
Jane  Duran,  who  dedicates  an  entire  article  to  the  task.  She  tells  us,  
‘There  is  a  genuinely  philosophical  side  to  Camus,  and  that  side  is  
worthy  of  commentary’,  even  if,  as  she  puts  it,  ‘Camus  is  most  fre -
quently mentioned in literary contexts, even when the label ‘existen -
tialist’ is applied to him, or even when his work is cited in the same 
phrase  as  that  of  Sartre  and  Beauvoir’  (Duran   2007 ,  365–371).  
Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi, also coming to his defence, states, ‘If being a 
philosopher is to ask all these questions—not in theoretical, abstract, 
conceptual form, but ... through characters who refuse to be superhu -
man,  through  adventures  that  are  played  out  in  everyday  real  life—
then  yes,  Camus,  in  his  novels  as  in  his  essays,  was  a  philosopher’  
1 (Lévi-Valensi  1997 , 32).
This book will inevitably follow suit to a certain degree, as the need to 
2  but I  justify revisiting the philosophy of Albert Camus is ever present,
shall do this with a view to suggesting something more radical: that it is 
precisely  Camus’  philosophical  innovations  that  lead  him  to  be  over -
looked  by  contemporary  philosophy.  Camus   does  philosophy  differently , 
and the significance of his radical experimentation with form is often lost 
3  Within more  in the contemporary environment of analytic philosophy.
literary Camus scholarship, these stylistic innovations have of course not 
gone unnoticed. Thomas Hanna suggests that the ‘interplay between the 
philosophical  and  literary  concerns  of  Camus  is  largely  responsible  for  
the richness and value of his writings’ (Hanna  1958 , 35), and this is cer -
tainly true. Peter Roberts goes further still, suggesting that:
Camus’ distinctive blending of the literary with the philosophical prompts 
readers to reflect on themselves, their motivations and commitments, their 
relationships with others, and the very process of reflection itself. (Roberts 
2008 , 875)

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   3
Here, Roberts has hit on something which is at the very heart of the 
current book: the ways in which literary engagement might enrich phil -
osophical understanding. While Roberts does not examine this possibil -
ity  in  any  great  detail  himself,  his  emphasis  on  introspection  and  
relations with the Other points towards a further dimension to what I 
will be arguing for in this book—that is, the creative methods such as 
those utilised by Camus are particularly well suited to moral philosophy. 
The ambiguity often entailed in moral life is undoubtedly what is most 
compelling  about  many  great  works  of  literature  (such  as  Flaubert’s  
Madame Bovary  or Stendhal’s  Le Rouge et le Noir ), but such ambiguity is 
4   Hanna  sees   precisely  what  moral  philosophy  often  tries  to  eliminate.
Camus  as  ‘one  of  the  most  prophetic,  persuasive,  and  hopeful  moral  
philosophers of the mid-20th century’ (Hanna  1958 , viii)—I hope to 
show that his experimentation with genre is in fact his greatest contribu -
tion to moral philosophy. In a sense, this is a claim about the  methodol -
ogy  of moral philosophy, but as we will see, the methodological choices 
Camus  makes  have  implications  on  moral  content  as  well  as  philo -
sophical form.
Thus, this book is concerned with the  genre  (or  genres ) of moral phi -
losophy  and  to  what  extent  literary  writings  such  as  Camus’  can  be  
considered  within  this  bracket.  In  this  introductory  chapter,  I  will  
therefore begin by raising some questions as to the importance of the 
role of style in philosophy, followed by a contextual analysis of the rela -
tionship  between  literature  and  philosophy,  and  some  conditions  for  
the success of literary philosophy. I will also spend some time engaging 
with  the  two  most  fundamental  concepts  of  Camus’  philosophy  (i.e.  
‘the absurd’ and ‘revolt’), but I won’t do this extensively here, as these 
two concepts will crop up again and again in later chapters, when I will 
apply them to particular case studies of Camus’ philosophical and liter -
ary  writings.  Towards  the  end  of  this  chapter,  I  will  demonstrate  the  
struggle with rhetorical form which is so central to Camus’ contribu -
tion  to  moral  philosophy.  I  suggest  that  Camus  saw  the  relationship  
between form and content as essential to philosophical understanding, 
so an examination of the efforts he made towards interweaving the two 
is in itself facilitative in our ability to grasp his vision of the relationship 
between literature and philosophy.

4   G. Whistler
2    Philosophical Style: A Superficial  
Question?
The question of progress in philosophy is the subject of many a wry joke. 
Despite the thousands of years which have elapsed, we seem to still be 
asking ourselves the same questions: how does one live well? What sepa -
rates humanity from the rest of nature? Is there such a thing as a tran -
scendent  being?  Philosophers  today  are  still  searching  for  solutions  to  
the same problems that plagued Aristotle or Confucius millennia ago. In 
the last century, however, there is one fundamental change in (at least 
Anglo-   American) philosophy which certainly gives the illusion of prog -
ress: the way we communicate our ideas. A look back at the history of 
philosophy  reveals  myriad  modes  of  philosophical  expression;  from  
poems and aphorisms to dialogues and confessions, the incredible diver -
sity of philosophical writing is apparent. However, from the twentieth 
century, particularly in the analytic school, contemporary philosophers 
(following  the  lead,  it  has  to  be  said,  of  a  narrowly  selected  band  of  
canonical authors from the past) have moved away from these ambigu -
ous modes of expression, towards something which is clearer, more pre -
cise,  and  on  the  whole  more  uniform.  The  philosophical  treatise,  
provided it is grounded in strict reasoning and clear argumentation, has 
become the gold standard for contemporary academic philosophy, a fact 
which  led  Arthur  C.  Danto  to  remark  that  ‘textual  innovativeness  has  
abated in philosophy and all texts are pretty much alike’ (Danto  1984 , 
19).  Another  commentator  on  the  apparent  ‘homogeneity’  of  current  
philosophical style, Jon Stewart, writes, ‘This form of writing has come 
to dominate the field of academic philosophy so much that for anything 
to be accepted as genuinely  philosophical , it must be written in this fash -
ion’ (Stewart  2013 , 1). Thus, the plethora of earlier genres of philosophi -
cal  writing  has  all  but  become  extinct:  we  study  them  as  relics  from  a  
different  time,  decoding  and  paraphrasing  them  to  meet  our  current  
standards.
While  the  methods  of  analytic  philosophy  certainly  seem  to  yield  a  
degree  of  clarity  and  rigour  which  it  might  otherwise  be  difficult  to  
achieve,  one  cannot  help  but  wonder  if  it  is  even  possible  to  translate  

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   5
works in the history of philosophy into the current stylistic register with -
out losing something important. Jon Stewart argues that:
An examination of the mode of expression of the philosopher in question 
can  be  used  as  a  key  to  interpreting  his  thought  ...  the  mode  of  writing  
they use to express their idea is often inextricably bound up with the con -
tent of their philosophy and the arguments that they are trying to articu -
late. (Stewart  2013 , 10)
If, as he suggests, modes of writing are bound up with philosophical 
content,  this  not  only  indicates  that  it  would  be  reductive  to  try  and  
translate historical texts into the kind of argumentation favoured today, 
it also implies that there are certain areas of philosophy which may in fact 
be poorly suited to this mode of expression. I suggest that moral philoso -
phy  is  perhaps  one  such  area  (an  issue  I  will  return  to  later  on  in  
this chapter).
Considering  all  the  modes  of  philosophical  expression  which  have  
gone  out  of  fashion,  there  is  also  every  reason  to  question  whether  the  
kind of philosophical writing currently favoured by academic philosophy 
may  well  be  just  as  conditional  as,  say,  Plato’s  use  of  dialogue.  Stewart  
again writes, ‘Given the contingent nature of philosophical expression, it 
would  seem  inappropriate  and  problematic  to  assume  that  the  current  
mode of philosophical writing is the correct or genuinely scientific one’ 
(Stewart  2013 , 10). In other words, what’s to say that in 20 years or so, 
the style of writing favoured by academic philosophy won’t have changed 
yet again? It seems necessary, therefore, that we recognise that even con -
temporary analytic philosophy is  textual  and may in the future be subject 
to a similar kind of analysis and interpretation as historical philosophical 
writings are today. Berel Lang too argues for the necessity of acknowledg -
ing this possibility; he writes:
The image of philosophical thought as atemporal and undramatic, as itself 
non-representational, has been very much taken for granted ... Philosophers 
have  persistently  seen  themselves  and  persuaded  readers  to  see  them  as  
engaged in knowing, in contrast to doing or making and thus beyond the 
reach  of  time  and  of  rhetoric.  To  speak  of  philosophical  texts  as  literary  

6   G. Whistler
artefacts,  then,  whatever  difficulties  it  encounters  in  the  way  of  literary  
analysis,  forces  philosophy  to  an  awareness  of  its  historical  character—a  
necessary step if philosophy is to follow its own advice of knowing itself. 
(Lang  1990 , 22)
Any  reluctance  to  accept  the  textuality  of  philosophy,  Lang  sees  as  
unrealistic: ‘Only the philosopher who takes as his goal the idea of a dis -
embodied  text  ...  will  be  reluctant  to  acknowledge  that  ...  philosophy  
characteristically lives inside the text’ (Lang  1990 , 23). While recognising 
the  literariness  of  philosophy  does  not  in  itself  say  anything  about  the  
‘philosophicalness’ of literature, it does again point towards the contin -
gencies of philosophical writing, and reminds us that there may indeed 
be other ways of doing things.
Numerous other philosophers also raise concerns about the apparent 
disconnection between form and content in contemporary analytic phi -
losophy. John Cottingham writes,
The way many contemporary academic philosophers go about their task—
maintaining  an  astringently  dry  style  modelled  on  legalistic  or  scientific  
prose, scrupulously avoiding literary or other potentially emotive allusions 
... these techniques, even in the hands of the virtuoso practitioner, often 
seem  somehow  to  miss  the  mark,  or  at  least  to  need  supplementing.  
(Cottingham  2005 , 3)
This idea that contemporary philosophy needs supplementing in some 
way  is  echoed  by  Robert  B.  Louden,  who  suggests  that  the  practice  of  
abstracting which is so common in philosophy is particularly destructive 
when  approaching  morality.  He  suggests,  ‘The  philosopher’s  natural  
impulse towards abstraction needs to be continually checked in ethics if 
we are not to lose sight of our subject matter’ (Louden  1998 ). Of course, 
philosophical texts are often fleshed out with tailor-made examples, but 
these  tend  to  be  a  great  deal  more  precise  and  limited  than  any  drawn  
from experience in the real world; while thought experiments might help 
us to focus on the key philosophical issues at stake, arguably the difficulty 
of  identifying  and  characterising  a  moral  problem  is  of  philosophical  
value  in  itself.  It  is  therefore  in  the  context  of  such  concerns  that  this  

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   7
book is situated—I aim to take seriously the idea that ‘different literary 
forms  are  legitimate  means  of  philosophical  expression  and  entirely  
appropriate for certain sorts of philosophical arguments’, as Stewart puts 
it ( 2013 , 10).
This  dissatisfaction  with  academic  philosophical  writing  has  led  
numerous other theorists to look towards literature for alternative means 
of communicating philosophical ideas, in search of an approach which is 
more  representative  of  human  experience  than  abstract,  analytic  texts.  
For many, the virtue of the literary register lies in its capacity to integrate 
ambiguity succinctly within our encounter with a philosophical problem. 
Abdelkader  Aoudjit  argues  that,  when  people  read  literature  for  philo -
sophical content:
It helps them learn to pay attention to the context, details, and nuances of 
moral  situations.  ...  It  directs  them  to  accept  the  inevitable  ambiguities  
and difficulties in attempting to solve moral problems and thereby reflect 
on the importance and the limits of ethical theory. (Aoudjit  2012 , 53)
So, whereas precision and rigour in philosophy aim to eliminate partial 
cases and delineate apparent grey areas, it seems that literature illustrates 
something  essential  about  the  very  nature  of  morality  itself,  something  
that  perhaps  we  might  not  fully  grasp  from  reading  academic  philoso -
phy—that is, how very messy and vague moral life often can be. In Alison 
Denham’s words, ‘There are kinds of knowledge best conveyed by literary 
discourse.  They  are  kinds,  moreover,  which  are  especially  relevant  to  
sound  moral  judgement’  (Denham   2000 ,  350).  There  are  of  course  
numerous  other  titles  examining  the  possibility  of  reading  literature  as  
5  and so this idea is by no means novel (if we can excuse  moral philosophy,
the pun). To analyse the arguments of every contribution to the debate 
would merit an entire book-length study in itself—and indeed it would 
not be fruitful to do so here, as I simply aim to demonstrate the relevance 
of Albert Camus to this issue. We will, however, take a short detour to 
look at an exchange on this topic between two polar-opposites, Martha 
Nusbaum and Richard Posner.
Martha Nussbaum is very much an advocate for the reading of litera -
ture for philosophical content, and an important insight of hers is that we 

8   G. Whistler
approach  different  kinds  of  texts  with  differing  attitudes.  She  observes  
how different a reader’s attitude towards can be, depending on whether 
we approach it as ‘philosophy’ or ‘literature’. According to Nussbaum, a 
literary text,
enlists  in  us  a  trusting  and  loving  activity.  We  read  it  suspending  scepti -
cism; we allow ourselves to be touched by the text ... The attitude we have 
before a philosophical text can look, by contrast, retentive and unloving—
asking for reason, questioning and scrutinising each claim, wresting clarity 
from the obscure. Before a literary work we are humble, open, active yet 
porous. Before a philosophical work we are active, controlling, aiming to 
leave  no  flank  undefended  and  no  mystery  undispelled.  (Nussbaum  
1990 , 282)
For Nussbaum, the openness we allow ourselves when reading litera -
ture  is  a  positive  tool  for  comprehension,  and  this  certainly  seems  to  
make sense in the context of approaching morality. If we are to take into 
account the numerous factors which affect every moral decision we make 
(e.g.  intentions,  motivations,  emotional  biases),  a  position  of  openness  
will facilitate reflection and understanding much more than the unsym -
pathetic rigour with which we scrutinise a philosophical argument.
By now, we have heard numerous voices questioning the validity of 
the ways in which contemporary philosophy ‘does’ ethics—but as yet 
these  voices  have  gone  more  or  less  unchallenged.  Responding  to  
Martha Nussbaum’s claim that reading novels ‘develops moral capaci -
ties without which citizens will not succeed in making reality out of the 
normative conclusions of any moral or political theory, however excel -
6  Richard Posner represents significant chal - lent’ (Nussbaum  1995 , 12),
lenge to such views, asserting that reading literature for moral content 
is both misguided and reductive (Posner  1997 ). His reasons for this are 
threefold:
First,  immersion  in  literature  does  not  make  us  better  citizens  or  better  
people.  ...  Second,  we  should  not  be  put  off  by  morally  offensive  views  
encountered in literature even when the author appears to share them ... 
Third, authors’ moral qualities or opinions should not affect our valuations 
of their works. (Posner  1997 , 2)

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   9
The first of these points, I naturally will be contesting throughout the 
course  of  this  book,  but  nevertheless  I  think  it  worthwhile  to  look  at  
Posner’s  reasons  for  suggesting  this  here.  Posner  makes  the  observation  
that  ‘Moral  philosophers,  their  students,  literary  critics,  and  English  
majors are no more moral in attitude or behavior than their peers in other 
fields’ (Posner  1997 , 12). While at first glance this might seem blandly 
true as a broad generalisation, it is more problematic than it might first 
appear. As the reader is no doubt aware, Posner’s real target is Nussbaum’s 
claim  that  literature  can  be  morally  instructive,  but  in  critiquing  her  
arguments, he also (perhaps unwittingly) contests the usefulness of moral 
philosophy. There are certainly other reasons to read literature than moral 
improvement (e.g. entertainment), as Posner points out, so this accusa -
tion of  ethical  uselessness is not wholly condemning. But if the  study of 
ethics  is useless for moral improvement, we are left to wonder what the 
point of the discipline is. Is being morally good therefore simply a fluke? 
To me, this reveals a touch of nihilism which brings little to the current 
discussion, as it is not the place of this book to defend moral philosophy’s 
usefulness in general.
More to the point is his conviction that engaging with literature does 
not help us to become better people—in fact, Posner seems to think that 
reading literature can even make us worse people. He writes, ‘Cultured 
people are not on the whole morally superior to philistines. Immersion in 
literature and art can breed rancorous and destructive feelings of personal 
superiority,  alienation,  and  resentment’  (Posner   1997 ,  5).  Despite  this  
seemingly sceptical challenge to the arts in general, in the latter two of his 
assertions he in fact puts up a spirited defence of the value of literature, 
aside from any moral value it might have. In these assertions, Posner sug -
gests that (a) we should not be put off by morally offensive views encoun -
tered in literature even when the author appears to share them, and (b) 
authors’ moral qualities or opinions should not affect our valuations of 
their  works.  While  I  agree  with  both  of  these  points,  I  think  it  worth -
while to look a little closer, to see whether they really have as much bear -
ing on the validity of reading literature for ethical content as Posner suggests.
In  response  to  Posner’s  second  point,  I  think  it  suffices  to  say  that,  
despite ‘the world of literature [being] a moral anarchy’ (Posner  1997 , 5), 
as he puts it, bad examples are just as interesting, ethically speaking, as 

10   G. Whistler
7 good  ones —after  all,  conventional  moral  philosophy  uses  thought  
experiments depicting highly problematic human conduct as one of its 
primary tools. This response might also therefore be successful in address -
ing  the  third  of  his  points—just  because  an  author  might  hold  some  
repugnant views, it does not mean that they write ‘bad’ novels, or even 
that as readers, we are impressionable enough to adopt their views unre -
flectively. Posner himself writes:
Most  readers  accept  the  presence  of  obsolete  ethics  in  literature  with  the  
same equanimity that they accept the presence of obsolete military tech -
nology or antiquated diction or customs in literature, as things both inevi -
table,  given  the  antiquity  of  so  much  literature,  and  incidental  to  the  
purpose for which we read literature. (Posner  1997 , 7)
And  so  Posner  suggests  that  we  are  able  to  recognise  problematic  or  
outdated  content  in  literature,  and  that  in  fact,  most  readers  don’t  let  
such  content,  or  indeed  moral  judgements  about  the  author,  seriously  
affect their literary judgements.
What does not follow from this, however, is the assumption that this 
ability to distance ourselves critically from the moral content of a novel 
(or indeed the views of the author) means that we cannot learn anything 
from novels. In fact, my disagreement with Posner seems to stem from a 
difference in the kind of thing I suggest we might learn from novels. I do 
not mean to suggest we should be categorising novels, or the events and 
characters  in  them  as  ‘morally  good’  or  ‘morally  bad’—this  would  be  
rather unproductive, philosophically. Neither do I claim that we should 
naively seek out examples of good behaviour in novels and try to follow 
them in real life. Instead, I am suggesting that the moral content of nov -
els  is  something  that  promotes  reflection  and  compassion—even  (and  
perhaps particularly) the elements that we would consider to be morally 
bad. In our ability to identify obsolete values, we may also evaluate them 
from  the  outside  and  compare  them  to  our  own.  Consequently,  at  no  
point  in  this  book  will  I  be  looking  for  a  clear-cut  definition  of  moral  
good. When Camus’ philosophy points towards his own opinion of what 
is morally good (e.g. the concept of revolt), I examine this with interest 
as  to  how  he  communicates  his  ethics—that  is  to  say,  emphasising  the  
method and form, rather than simply evaluating the content.

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   11
Interestingly enough Posner admits that there are many things one can 
learn from reading literature. He writes:
In reading literature we are also learning about the values and experiences 
of  cultures,  epochs,  and  sensibilities  remote  from  our  own,  yet  not  so  
remote as to be unintelligible. We are acquiring experience vicariously by 
dwelling in the imaginary worlds that literature creates. We are expanding 
our emotional as well as our intellectual horizons. An idea can usually be 
encoded  straightforwardly  enough  and  transferred  more  or  less  intact  to  
another person ... Imaginative literature can engender in its readers emo -
tional responses to experiences that they have not had. (Posner  1997 , 19)
In this imaginative activity, Posner suggests that we respond emotion -
ally to experiences that do not belong to us—one would struggle to think 
of a more straightforward definition of empathy. However, Posner simply 
does not see this empathetic engagement as being morally significant. As 
he puts it, ‘I agree that literature is one path ... to a better understanding 
of  the  needs,  problems,  and  point  of  view  of  human  types  that  we  are  
unlikely to encounter at first hand. But I do not think that a better under -
standing of people makes a person better or more just’ (Posner  1997 , 19). 
Here  I  disagree  with  Posner—it  seems  clear  to  me  that  a  better  under -
standing of others (particularly one which stems from empathetic imagi -
native  engagement)  would  encourage  us  to  make  decisions  which  take  
the needs of others into consideration. There are undoubtedly countless 
examples of instances in which feelings of empathy or compassion impel 
people  to  behave  in  what  we  might  consider  a  morally  good  manner;  
when  we  see  the  suffering  of  others,  it  certainly  seems  to  be  a  normal  
human response to consider the possibility of alleviating it (the reasoning 
behind charity infomercials is based precisely on this notion). If we take 
empathy to be morally valuable in itself (as I suggest we should), then the 
question of how this empathy is developed (i.e. through the contempla -
tion of real or fictional suffering) seems somewhat irrelevant.
Something that Posner does grant to literature, however, is its ability 
to help us get to know ourselves better. He writes, ‘Literature helps us 
make sense of our lives, helps us to fashion an identity for ourselves’ 
(Posner  1997 ,  20).  He  accepts  self-knowledge  can  be  developed  
through  literature,  but  I  would  respond  that  this  only  happens  via  

12   G. Whistler
what me might call ‘other-knowledge’. We certainly do acquire a kind 
8  and in  of knowledge of the Other (i.e. characters) through literature,
encountering these different perspectives and personalities, we might 
get a sense of our own values and personalities aligning or juxtaposing 
with  them—I  suggest  that  this  is  how  we  might  improve  our  self-
knowledge from reading novels. We may also feel some compassion or 
empathy towards these characters (as Posner seems to suggest), and as 
I have argued, this can be morally valuable. Where I differ from Posner, 
then, is in suggesting that this emotional response is something that 
we can then productively apply to the real world. In studying ethics, 
we assume that the reasoning we practise in response to philosophical 
texts will have some bearing on the real world. I fail to understand why 
reasoning is the sole feature of moral philosophy which can have impli -
cations  outside  of  a  text—and  why  shouldn’t  the  very  real  sense  of  
compassion we sometimes feel for characters also have some applica -
tion outside of their fictional worlds? Just how a text might elicit this 
transferability is something that I will attempt to address throughout 
this book.
Of course, suggesting that the emotions might have a role to play in 
philosophical  reason  is  somewhat  controversial.  Numerous  sceptical  
voices in the history of philosophy object to the use of philosophical lan -
guage that appeals to the emotions or aesthetic judgements, perhaps the 
oldest  and  most  famous  example  of  which  being  poetry’s  proscription  
from the  polis  in Book Ten of Plato’s  Republic  (Plato  2011 ). This mistrust 
of emotive and literary rhetoric has been immensely influential through -
out  the  history  of  philosophy.  Let  us  take,  for  example,  the  following  
famous passage of Locke’s  Essay :
Language  is  often  abused  by  figurative  speech.  Since  wit  and  fancy  find  
easier entertainment in the world than dry truth and real knowledge, figu -
rative  speeches  and  allusion  in  language  will  hardly  be  admitted  as  an  
imperfection or abuse of it. I confess, in discourses where we seek rather 
pleasure and delight than information and improvement, such ornaments 
as are borrowed from them can scarce pass for faults. But yet if we would 
speak of things as they are, we must allow that all the art of rhetoric, besides 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   13
order  and  clearness;  all  the  artificial  and  figurative  application  of  words  
eloquence hath invented, are for nothing else but to insinuate wrong ideas, 
move the passions, and thereby mislead the judgment; and so indeed are 
perfect cheats: and therefore, however laudable or allowable oratory may 
render them in harangues and popular addresses, they are certainly, in all 
discourses  that  pretend  to  inform  or  instruct,  wholly  to  be  avoided;  and  
where truth and knowledge are concerned, cannot but be thought a great 
fault,  either  of  the  language  or  person  that  makes  use  of  them.  (Locke  
1975 , III.X.34)
According to Locke, rhetoric can be alluring and misleading, making 
it too dangerous a tool to be applied to philosophical problems, which 
should be approached with cool reason. While there can of course be ter -
rible consequences when our emotions run away with us (revenge, ‘crimes 
of passion’, etc.), I would emphasise that the particular emotion which I 
am arguing is most relevant for ethics is compassion. If we can develop 
our understanding of others through engaging with literature, as well as 
learning to respond to the suffering of others with compassion, this seems 
like  a  much  less  destructive  interplay  of  emotions  and  reason  than  is  
feared by Plato and his followers.
Considering the way in which readers sometimes find themselves sym -
pathising  with  the  unlikeliest  of  characters  (e.g.  Heathcliff  from  Emily  
Brontë’s  Wuthering  Heights ,  or  Dmitry  from  Dostoevsky’s   The  Brothers  
9   it  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  there  is  a  difference   Karamazov ),
between the ways in which we approach fictional and factual instances of 
immorality (as Nussbaum, and even Posner, seem to suggest). However, 
while this openness we experience certainly affects our ability to empathise 
with characters in literature (which is perhaps a good thing in itself ), and 
we might even believe (as I have argued here) that this empathetic devel -
opment might improve our ability to empathise with people in the real 
world,  this  kind  of  approach  still  leaves  a  number  of  questions  unan -
swered. For example, can literature really lay any claim on truth in the 
same  way  that  philosophy  aims  to?  Philosophy  persuades  using  reason  
and argumentation—is there such a thing as literary reasoning? This next 
section will try to answer some of these questions.

14   G. Whistler
3    On the Possibility of a Literary  
Philosophy
It  is  fair  to  say  that  all  philosophy  is  always  to  some  extent  concerned  
with truth. Traditionally conceived, philosophy is the practice of investi -
gating the world around us using our powers of reason, with a view to 
understanding it—and even ourselves—all the better. Whether or not we 
aspire to any grand notions of objective truth or universality, in philoso -
phy, real-life examples are used with a view to formulating a more general 
principle which we might apply to the world as it really is. Novels and 
other forms of literary narratives, on the other hand, focus on fictional 
characters which represent a view on a fictional world, and thus the ques -
tion  of  whether  they  can  really  tell  us  anything  true  is  a  tricky  one.  
However (excluding examples of fantasy, sci-fi, and surrealism which fol -
low  the  stories  of  non-human  characters  and  their  inner  lives),  many  
works of fiction attempt to portray human beings and their inner lives in 
a convincing, if not true-to-life manner—even if the truth that is being 
conveyed is something elusive, and the forms expressing it experimental. 
If they are well-written, they are to some degree successful in this venture, 
and something in them rings true to us; the more successful they are in 
this respect, the more we are likely to engage with them on a reflective 
level.  I  suggest,  therefore,  that  well-crafted  literary  examples  of  human  
beings and their moral lives are, so to speak, as relevant as any examples 
we might encounter from people in the real world, as our perspectives on 
the inner lives of people we meet are just as partial as the perspective we 
can  gain  from  fiction  (if  not  even  more  so).  The  moral  problems  that  
characters face are often simulations of real-life human problems, formu -
lated by a human author, intended for human moral engagement. This 
indicates that, as Nussbaum et al. suggest, novels and other fictional writ -
ings  are  perfectly  good  candidates  for  moral  engagement.  If  we  accept  
this, I see no reason why we would assume the moral insights we obtain 
from our engagement with literature to be false or useless, despite the fact 
that they are based on the lives of fictional characters.
Having  done  away  (for  our  purposes)  with  the  apparent  problem  of  
the fictional nature of moral examples in literature, it remains to be seen 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   15
whether such specific examples could have any bearing on the world in 
10  Bernard  general. In his seminal text  Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy ,
Williams raised concerns about the state of contemporary academic phi -
losophy, criticising it for being ‘determined to impose rationality through 
reductive theory’ (Williams  1983 , 219). He writes:
The resources of most modern moral philosophy are not well adjusted to 
the modern world ... It is not involved enough; it is governed by a dream 
of a community of reason that is too far removed ... from social and his -
torical  reality  and  from  any  concrete  sense  of  a  particular  ethical  life.  
(Williams  1983 , 219–220)
For Williams, the idea that, in the modern world, humanity could be 
united by any universal standard of ethics is outdated and unrealistic. 
The ethical clashes we encounter today (in a world in which previously 
established  values  are  continuously  being  challenged)  mean  that  par -
ticularity and subjectivity seem to deserve ever more serious consider -
ation in ethics.
As we have already said, philosophy often aims towards the formula -
tion of universal principles, which hope to be generally applicable. But 
while there may be objective truths about the universe, and perhaps even 
about human nature, I suggest that ethical engagement with subjective 
perspectives allows us to reflect on the possibility that there is no  moral  
truth—that is, no objective good and bad. In encountering perspectives 
which deviate from our own, the subject, as Mulhall puts it,
acknowledges herself as merely other to that other, her own way no more 
well-grounded than that of her other; in short, she learns from that other 
the  contingency  of  her  own  ways  of  going  on.  She  might  even  find  the  
other’s deviance to open up possibilities that her own conformity occludes, 
to  teach  her  something  about  herself  and  what  she  represents.  (Mulhall  
2002 , 317)
In essence, we can be shown the partiality of our own convictions, 
and from this we reason that  all  convictions are particular. But denying 
an  objective  basis  for  morality  is  not  the  same  as  saying  ‘it’s  all  just  

16   G. Whistler
subjective’, and therefore futile. Instead, the conflict between our own 
moral judgements and those of characters means that the only moral 
progress we can achieve is that of sincerely making an effort to compre -
hend perspectives which are contrary to our own (which is of course 
more difficult in the real world than when we are ‘open’ before a work 
of  literature).  In  this  sense,  I  suggest  that  this  approach  to  ethics  is  
rather ‘intersubjective’—not objective fact, nor entirely subjective, but 
instead something which must be understood in the context of differ -
ence and conflict, between the self and the Other. Works of fiction are 
particularly  opportune  arenas  for  this  kind  of  effort,  as  it  is  unusual  
that we would want to spend as much time trying to understand peo -
ple with values we find objectionable, as we do with fictional charac -
ters. I suggest, therefore, that perhaps the very fact of making this kind 
of  effort  (i.e.  attentively  engaging  with  opposing  moral  perspectives  
within fiction), we are better equipped to deal with moral quandaries 
in the real world.
So, as is becoming clear, the fact that literature deals with the particu -
lar and subjective, whereas philosophy normally aims towards generality 
and universality, is not so much of a problem as it first appeared; nor it 
seems is the issue of truth versus fictionality. What remains to be seen is 
whether  literary  philosophy  can  be  argumentative  in  the  same  way  as  
philosophy. At the bottom of this lies the question of what exactly phi -
losophy  is,  and  more  specifically,  whether  literary  philosophy  (i.e.  phi -
losophy presented in a literary frame) needs to meet the same criteria. As 
I defined it earlier, ‘philosophy is the practice of investigating the world 
around us using our powers of reason, with a view to understanding it—
and even ourselves—all the better’. The pivotal word in this definition is 
‘reason’, as defining human reason is not necessarily as easy as it might 
first appear. In contemporary analytic philosophy, the standard of reason -
ing aimed for is one that can be translated into formal logic, its validity 
and soundness testable in truth tables, its conclusions following neatly on 
from premises, and so on. In the real world, the moral decisions we make 
are rarely so easy to pick apart and examine. As I argued in the previous 
section, fiction’s ability to encompass this ambiguity is in many ways its 
strength. Here I would also like to suggest that narrative contains its own 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   17
kind  of  reason—one  much  more  like  the  one  we  practise  in  the  real  
world, outside of academic philosophy. Aoudjit writes:
Many  works  of  literature  depict  moral  problems  from  the  perspective  of  
those  who  experience  them  in  all  their  ambiguities  and  contradictions.  
Likewise, many works of literature ring more true to life than philosophy 
does because they present a person’s moral point of view in the context of 
the  narrative  or  narratives  that  shape  his  or  her  self-understanding.  
(Aoudjit  2012 , 52)
In other words, narratives in literature mimic a kind of narrative sense 
of self, situating moral issues within a context with a similar level of com -
plexity and nuance as they would be in real life.
I do not make such a claim about narrative understanding naïve of its 
contentiousness. Sartre once wrote, ‘A man is always a teller of stories, he 
lives  surrounded  by  his  own  stories  and  those  of  other  people,  he  sees  
everything that happens to him  in terms of  these stories and he tries to live 
11  While this  his life as if he were recounting it’ (in Strawson  2004 , 435).
seems to vouch for the human impulse towards narrativity, Sartre is really 
describing  our  tendency  to  tell  stories  as  something  negative  and  inau -
thentic. In other words, to act in accordance with what we thought our 
narrative  to  be  would  be  both  dishonest  and  fatalistic.  More  recently,  
Galen Strawson has voiced objections to the idea of narrativity. Not only 
does he agree with Sartre’s observation of the inauthenticity bound up in 
any impulse to narrate our lives, Strawson goes even further, dismissing 
the very idea that humans in general understand themselves narratively, 
and  thus  he  thinks  assigning  any  value  to  self-narrative  is  destructive  
(Strawson  2004 , 435). In light of these criticisms, I will now attempt to 
assuage some of the doubts we might have about narrativity.
Whilst I argue that real-life narrative often plays an important role in 
trying  to  understand  the  events  of  our  lives,  I  am  not  suggesting  that  
these narratives are always conscious or purposefully creative, or even that 
this implies destiny or reasonable justification (as Sartre suggests). I am 
merely suggesting that the process of endeavouring to understand oneself 
(and indeed the Other), involves testing hypotheses of cause (or motives) 
and effect (or actions). These are based in non-empirical evidence (such 

18   G. Whistler
as emotions and biases), and each evaluation we make is, in a weak sense, 
judging the plausibility of a story. As Walter Fisher, a pioneering advocate 
of narrativity, writes:
Rationality  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  persons  as  narrative  beings—
their inherent awareness of narrative probability, what constitutes a coher -
ent story, and their constant habit of testing narrative fidelity, whether the 
stories they experience ring true with the stories they know to be true in 
their lives. (Fisher  1984 , 7–8)
If we accept this perspective, self-narration is not necessarily a danger -
ous tendency, but in fact one that represents a huge potential for improved 
self-understanding which perhaps other scientific or even philosophical 
modes of enquiry are less well-equipped to deliver.
Furthermore, I am not assigning any special moral value to narrativ -
ity—that is, I am not saying that we  ought  to construct narratives about 
ourselves. I understand and agree with Galen Strawson’s suspicion of this 
approach;  telling  stories  to  ourselves,  about  ourselves,  can  no  doubt  be  
inauthentic, cowardly, or destructive, as Strawson suggests ( 2004 , 435) in 
that it could lead us to make excuses for our actions, in the hope of com -
ing off as a hero, rather than villain. In this respect, however, I suggest 
that this corruptibility is not singularly a feature of narrative—the skilled 
logician can ‘prove’ the morality of many an unconscionable deed. All I 
am suggesting is that narrative is a way of making sense of a series of (pos -
sibly  unconnected)  events.  Tying  events  together  in  this  way  does  not  
necessarily imply causality, but correlation can often help reveal a pattern 
that can help us to understand a set of data better. If we were to say of a 
play, ‘the ending didn’t make any sense’, we are probably referring to an 
internal logic to the plot (a combination of characters and their personal -
ity traits, events, and the responses to them that we, as readers, try and 
make sense of ). To say that the ending of a play ‘didn’t make sense’ is to 
suggest that according to the  logic  of the play, the conclusion didn’t follow 
from the premises. As well as the issue of corruptibility of narrative, there 
is also an element of human fallibility to be considered. But there are as 
many poor arguments in philosophy as there are false self-narratives, and 
misunderstanding and misinterpretation are just as possible with logical 
argumentation as in narrative. If we recognise this, then it becomes clear 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   19
that  poor  reasoning  may  be  just  as  destructive  or  inauthentic  as  poor  
self-narration.
Thus,  rather  than  arguing  that  all  stories  we  might  tell  ourselves  are  
true, or even that a narrative life is a good life, I am simply arguing that 
narrative  can  be  used  effectively  as  a  way  of  encouraging  reflection  on  
ethical  issues.  Richard  Wollheim  describes  the  action  that  facilitates  
moral reflection:
There is a natural assimilation of the stories that novels tell to those more 
primitive stories that we, idly and less idly, tell ourselves, and a feature of 
phantasy is that, as we tell it to ourselves, our viewpoint changes: we iden -
tify  now  with  one  character,  now  with  another,  now  with  some-thing  
impersonal that lies outside all characters. (Wollheim  1983 , 186)
Stories can only be fully evaluated when we know their endings, so it 
might be that narrative understanding is best applied to real life retroac -
12 —figuring  out  why  things  happened,  rather  than  deciding  what   tively
you should do in the future based on what sort of person you are ‘telling 
yourself ’ you are. We should not read fiction in the hope of finding guid -
ance for the exact situations we find ourselves in—rather I’m suggesting 
that  narrative  insight  into  the  experience,  emotions,  and  suffering  of  
characters (and consequently others) makes for a kind of moral education 
in itself. Reading literature does not provide propositional advice on how 
to deal with a moral dilemma, it is more like practice at the skill of nar -
rative reasoning, and thus comprehension.
We might also say that there are some things that philosophy can suc -
cessfully  talk  about  that  literature  can’t  (e.g.  metaethics)  and  we  might  
think  about  this  as  being  a  matter  of  precision  and  clarity  that  fiction  
can’t offer. However, this simply shows the degree of abstraction that phi -
losophy  has  reached  in  areas  such  as  this.  Bernard  Williams  hopefully  
suggested that:
There could be a way of doing moral philosophy that started from the ways 
in which we experience our ethical life. Such a philosophy would reflect on 
what we believe, feel, take for granted; the ways in which we confront obli -
gations and recognize responsibility; the sentiments of guilt and shame. It 
would involve a phenomenology of the ethical life. (Williams  1983 , 104)

20   G. Whistler
I suggest that literary approaches to ethics offer precisely what Williams 
envisaged. Philosophical literature speaks to the particular (the reader) on 
the subject of the general (human nature, etc.). Particular examples (e.g. 
plots) are what is needed to make general philosophical theses more per -
suasive.  The  setting  (which  might  simply  resemble  our  real  world  but  
with subtle emphasis on certain philosophical aspects of it) acts as a set of 
premises,  from  which  the  reader  must  draw  conclusions.  This  dialogue  
between particular and general, between subjective and objective, is what 
exemplifies the philosophical power of literature. It is not just strict rea -
soning  we  follow,  but  also  a  dialogue  between  particulars  against  the  
background of some more general truth about the world (or setting) we 
inhabit. It is for this reason that I suggest that moral philosophy is still 
philosophy even when it doesn’t just rely on logic, but other means too. 
Emotions are ineliminable when it comes to morality, as is bias, and while 
philosophy can attempt to circumvent them, we must acknowledge the 
fact  they  will  always  to  some  extent  be  there.  Creative  philosophical  
methods can use all the weapons in the arsenal of the human mind, and 
not just logic, which is often so much less persuasive than all the other 
experiences in life which test our preconceived ideas.
4    Camus’ Philosophy: Some Preliminary  
Reflections
Having  now  set  out  the  contextual  debates  which  surround  the  main  
thrust of this book, it is time to illustrate how these pertain to the literary 
philosophy  of  Albert  Camus.  As  I  have  argued  in  the  previous  section,  
one of the greatest assets of philosophical fiction is its ability to provide 
insight into the inner lives of characters, and the moral predicaments they 
find  themselves  in.  But  most  good  works  of  fiction  communicate  this  
kind of sense of the Other, so surely this cannot mean that most works of 
literature are also works of philosophy? Of course, I am not about to sug -
gest  that  it  does,  as  I  have  no  desire  to  collapse  the  boundary  between  
philosophy and literature altogether. I suggest instead that philosophical 
fiction like Camus’ harness this latent power within literature to further 
a  philosophical  venture,  exploring  some  philosophical  problem  with  a  

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   21
complex kind of reasoning which appeals to both rationality and emo -
tion. Thus, in the context of Camus’ work (and no doubt certain other 
philosophical works of fiction), literary style becomes philosophical style, 
because  of  the  philosophical  purpose  behind  it.  At  this  stage,  it  seems  
prudent to outline and evaluate exactly what this philosophical venture is 
in Camus’ case.
The  most  famous  of  Camus’  concepts  is  arguably  ‘the  absurd’.  
Understanding  this  concept  is  necessary  for  piecing  together  much  of  
Camus’ later philosophy, as the absurd is something which he takes for 
granted throughout. In Camus’ work, the term ‘absurd’ refers to a kind of 
existential dread that humans experience in contemplation of death, and 
of  living  life  in  a  universe  which  is  indifferent  to  us  and  everything  we  
care  about—we  must  all  die,  despite  our  powers  of  reason  and  ardent  
emotions.  The  absurd  is  not  a  characteristic  of  the  universe,  nor  some -
thing inherent in us as humans, but a feature of our encounter with the 
universe,  only  existing  in  our  contemplation  of  our  hopeless  condition  
(Camus  2005 ,  26).  The  reasoning  behind  Camus’  formulation  of  the  
absurd is more or less transparent: if there is no God, or possible tran -
scendence from this life, then our actions are without any transcendent 
meaning; as humans we are nevertheless invested in our worldly cares and 
fear death, thus our finitude seems unjust and incomprehensible: this is 
what  Camus  means  by  ‘the  absurd’.  Camus  concludes  that  our  caring  
about  this  life  is  enough  to  make  life  meaningful,  despite  our  mortal  
condition (Camus  2005 , 119).
This all seems straightforward enough, but Camus does make a num -
ber of claims which demand further investigation. First, he assumes that 
humans have a desire for immortality; this does seem to make sense in 
that  it  is  certainly  difficult  to  imagine  not  existing,  and  the  thought  of  
dying is something that we resist. We are also expected to accept his lack 
of belief in God or transcendence, but he at least offers some explanation 
for  this  premise:  that  humans  have  invented  Gods  to  try  to  find  some  
transcendent reasoning, which would make death seem less unfair. The 
absurd is not therefore a reaction to religion, but the other way around. 
The  absurd  precedes  everything  but  human  emotion,  and  our  natural  
fight or flight instinct in the face of death has become an innate part of 
the way we view the world, and we look for meaning which helps us in 

22   G. Whistler
some way to live on beyond the inevitable (even if this transcendence is 
fictitious).
What cannot necessarily be extrapolated from this (but what Camus 
nevertheless suggests) is that life is meaningful in spite of this—the mean -
ing of life resides within our care for life and the world around us. This 
means that human life has no objective value, except the subjective (and 
intersubjective) value we endow it with. Camus claims that this subjec -
tive value is objectively meaningful. This conclusion is particularly fitting 
to Camus’ choice of creative philosophical methods, balancing, as it does, 
on the divide between the particular and the general (as was discussed in 
the previous section). It is not that there is nothing but particularity, but 
the absurd creates a sense of particularity when we consider the inevitable 
end to all that we create in this life. Thus, the absurd resides precisely in 
our encounter with the objective, that is, the universe and its indifference 
to us as subjects. We might even say that the absurd is the conclusion that 
can be drawn from the premises of the human will to live, and the indif -
ference  of  the  natural  world  to  this  will  (not  that  Camus  phrases  it  in  
these terms).
But  as  Roger  Grenier  said,  ‘It  is  the  point  of  departure,  but  Camus  
didn’t  adopt  the  absurd  ...  Camus  settled  for  describing  the  absurd  in  
13  Camus  order to see how we might escape from it’ (Grenier  2014 , 48).
saw the absurd as a necessary starting point for any meaningful kind of 
ethics, as human life must be acknowledged as valuable precisely because 
there  is  no  hope  of  an  afterlife:  our  joys  and  suffering  are  all  there  is.  
André Malraux once told Camus, ‘You make a sort of morality out of the 
14  which is arguably exactly the point. Stephen Bronner explains,  absurd’,
‘He  never  embraced  the  relativism  generated  by  the  human  encounter  
with death and the absence of God. He sought to create a  positive  moral -
ity, if not a system of ethics, capable of providing rules for secular con -
duct’  (Bronner   1999 ,  152).  (Camus’  response  to  Christian  belief  in  
transcendence will be examined in more detail in Chap.  2). This ‘positive 
morality’ that Camus sought to create is developed most fully in  L’Homme 
révolté , in which he expounds his concept of ‘revolt’ as the basis for ethics. 
By  ‘revolt’,  Camus  refers  to  a  moment  of  inner  rebellion,  which  stems  
from the human recognition of the injustice of suffering. In this instant, 
as the human rails against their own mistreatment, according to Camus, 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   23
this  is  when  we  begin  to  feel  a  sense  of  solidarity  for  others;  he  writes,  
‘When he rebels, a man identifies himself with other men and, from his 
point of view, human solidarity is metaphysical’ (Camus  2000 , 22–23)—
it  is  a  sense  of  solidarity  for  all  other  humans  against  the  metaphysical  
injustice of finitude. The act of rebellion affirms the value of human life, 
representing human ‘unity against the suffering of life and death’ (Camus 
2000 ,  30).  For  Camus,  only  a  sense  of  human  suffering  can  found  a  
morality, so we must therefore open ourselves up to this ‘collective unhap -
piness’ (Camus  2000 , 28) to make ethical progress. As Camus put it in 
15 his own ethical  cogito , ‘I revolt, therefore we are’ (Camus  2006 , III: 79).
This reasoning follows on from the ‘absurd reasoning’ in  Le Mythe de  
Sisyphe   that  we  saw  earlier  on:  if  my  life  is  meaningful  in  spite  of  the  
absurd, then other people’s lives are meaningful too; if we recognise other 
people’s lives as meaningful (despite our mortal condition), then we feel 
solidarity towards them,  ergo : the absurd is the condition for morality—
we  as  humans  all  face  it  together  and  need  to  stand  up  for  each  other.  
Other  than  the  issues  concerning  the  absurd  which  we  have  already  
addressed,  this  argument  does  have  some  of  its  own  difficulties.  For  
example, Camus suggests that the recognition of meaningfulness of other 
lives leads to solidarity, and this doesn’t necessarily follow. It may be that 
instead we simply accept the value of human life abstractly, rather than be 
moved to feel a sense of solidarity to others, that is, this recognition may 
only  be  propositional.  However,  if  we  remember  what  was  said  in  the  
previous section about the power of literature to encourage empathy, this 
becomes much less of a problem for a writer such as Camus who endeav -
16  In his philosophi - oured to manifest all his philosophy in literary form.
cal  literature,  Camus  taps  into  this  latent  force  which  is  present  in  all  
literature, though it often lies dormant, and thus we are not  persuaded  of 
moral conclusions (such as solidarity), as you might be (propositionally) 
with a philosophical text. Instead, imaginative engagement makes Camus’ 
argument (that recognition of the value of others leads to solidarity) true 
performatively. Of course, he can only  argue  for this in his philosophical 
essays, and we might be persuaded to accept it, but it is only true really 
when we experience it for ourselves. It is for this reason that I suggest that 
Camus  ethics  is  necessarily  founded  on  imaginative  engagement  with  
   literature—literary  style  becomes  philosophical  style,  as  the  content  is  

24   G. Whistler
indivisible from form. As he put it himself, ‘If you want to be a philoso -
17 pher, write novels’ (Camus  2006 , II: 800).
Camus himself reinforces this point in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe , not only 
blurring the line between philosophy and literature (in this case novels), 
but also imbuing literature with philosophical importance. He writes:
The philosopher ... is a creator. He has his characters, his symbols, and his 
secret action. He has his plot endings ... The best [novels] carry with them 
their universe. The novel has its logic, its reasonings, its intuition, and its 
postulates.  It  also  has  requirements  of  clarity  ...  The  great  novelists  are  
philosophical novelists. (Camus  2005 , 96–97)
So,  according  to  Camus,  not  only  is  the  philosopher  a  creator,  any  
novelist worth his salt is also a philosopher. We might suggest that Camus 
himself  demonstrates  both  of  these  claims  in  his  own  works,  not  only  
through the distinctive style of his philosophical texts, but also in his lit -
erary achievements. But Camus provides his own examples; these ‘great 
novelists’ include the likes of ‘Balzac, Sade, Melville, Stendhal, Dostoevsky, 
Proust, Malraux [and] Kafka’ (Camus  2005 , 97–98). Camus explains that:
The preference that they have shown for writing in images rather than in 
reasoned arguments is revelatory of a certain thought that is common to 
them all, convinced of the uselessness of any principle of explanation and 
sure of the educative message of perceptible appearance. They consider the 
work of art both as an end and as a beginning. It is the outcome of an often 
unexpressed  philosophy,  its  illustration  and  its  consummation.  But  it  is  
complete only through the implications of that philosophy. It justifies at 
last  that  variant  of  an  old  theme  that  a  little  thought  estranges  from  life  
whereas much thought reconciles to life (Camus  2005 , 98).
This ‘educative message of perceptible appearance’ is the kind of moral 
growth that Camus believes fiction can offer. The ‘unexpressed philoso -
phy’ of a work of fiction is the ideas that (without necessarily being con -
scious  of  it)  we  are  brought  to  reflect  upon  by  the  text.  For  Camus,  
philosophical texts often rely too wholly on ‘principle[s] of explanation’ 
which ‘estrange’ us from life—such explanations are not conducive to the 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   25
type of philosophical reflection Camus wants to achieve, a comprehen -
sion which ‘reconciles to life’.
On numerous occasions Camus himself levied strong criticisms against 
the abstractions of philosophy and its reliance on pure reason. In  L’Homme 
révolté , he writes, ‘The unity of pure reason is false’ (Camus  2000 , 234), 
and  scathingly  spoke  of  ‘the  religion  of  reason’  (Camus   2000 ,  92).  He  
suggested that rationalist philosophy, when not tempered by feeling, was 
entirely  corruptible,  convinced  that  ‘philosophy,  which  can  be  used  for  
anything, even transferring murderers into judges’ (Camus  2000 , 11) and 
could lead us to commit ‘crimes of logic’ (Camus  2000 , 11). More than 
in any other sphere of philosophy, Camus thought that ethics was par -
ticularly poorly addressed when dealt with by the powers of reason alone. 
As Bronner suggested, ‘Camus is concerned with breaking the strangle -
hold  of  rationalist  ethics  in  the  name  of  morality  and  lived  experience’  
(Bronner  1999 , 44).
Camus’ creative works also comment on the dissonance between the 
incomprehensibility of the human condition and philosophy’s applica -
tion of rational language. A particularly crisp example of this is found in 
the  words  of  his  fellow  journalist,  Rambert,  in   La  Peste ,  as  he  tries  to  
justify his willingness to leave the quarantined city in order to be with his 
lover despite the risk of transmitting the infection to both her and the 
rest  of  the  outside  world:  ‘“No,”  Rambert  said  bitterly.  “You  cannot  
understand. You are talking the language of reason, you are thinking in 
abstract terms”’. This is more than just metaphilosophising, however, it 
is  performative;  in  experiencing  this  character’s  plight  for  ourselves  via  
the  text,  we  are  much  more  able  to  comprehend  (and  therefore  sym -
pathise with) his suffering, and consequently are more likely to forgive 
his  impulsive  selfishness.  As  readers,  we  too  ‘want  ...  with  all  [our]  
strength for Rambert to be back with his woman and for all those who 
loved one another to be reunited’ (Camus  2002 , 68), and here Camus is 
both commenting on philosophical form and encouraging philosophical 
reflection. Rambert continues to morally grow and develop throughout 
the novel, most notably through his dialogues with Rieux (such uses of 
philosophical  dialogue  to  encourage  moral  growth  will  be  the  subject  
of Chap.  5).

26   G. Whistler
While many careless readers of  Le Mythe   de Sisyphe  see the essay as a 
work of existentialist philosophy, biographer Olivier Todd suggests:
This essay seems more about morality than philosophy. And more about 
morality than about ethics, if morality aims at establishing rules for living, 
whereas ethics strives to analyse the concepts of morality, perhaps eventu -
ally  a  morality  to  be  founded  outside  the  one  imposed  by  moral  judge -
ments,  based  for  example  in  God  or  transcendent  reason  ...  As  a  writer,  
busy with the relations between aesthetics and ethics, he did not want to 
propose any universal morality. It was difficult enough to construct one’s 
18 own moral code. (Todd  1996 , 293)
While I would agree with Todd that Camus’ primary preoccupation is 
with the possibility of a morality which is grounded in the everyday, curi -
ously  Camus  sometimes  explicitly  railed  against  the  idea  of  morality  
itself, writing in his notebooks in 1959, ‘I’ve abandoned the moral point 
of  view.  Morality  leads  to  abstraction  and  injustice’  (Camus   2006 ,  IV:  
19  On closer inspection, however, it is clear that once again, he is  1298).
not accepting any kind of moral nihilism, but simply restating his belief 
that reason must always be tempered by the emotions. As Eve Morisi writes:
Albert Camus was at the same time profoundly sensitive to the existence of 
morality and critical with regard to this notion. He rejected certain defini -
tions, traditions and practices of morality: those of Morality with a capital 
‘m’, we might say. Morality ‘kills’ and ‘devours’ in Camus’ eyes, when it is 
formalised, dogmatic, abstract or blindly ambitious. It can, in such cases, 
lead us astray—to ignore, for example, the particularities and complexities 
20 of history and of individuals. (Morisi  2014 , 9)
In his words, ‘The irrational imposes limits on the rational which, in 
its  turn,  gives  it  moderation’  (Camus   2000 ,  259).  Elsewhere  he  writes,  
‘Philosophers are rarely read with the head alone, but often with the heart 
and all its passions which can accept no kind of reconciliation’ (Camus 
2000 , 105)—in other words, the reader, and the everyday moral agent, is 
not guilty of such abstractions. Eve Morisi uses the term  souci  to describe 
the kind of ethical approach towards others that Camus advocates. The 
word  souci  in French is often translated as ‘worry’ or ‘concern’, but Morisi 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   27
explicitly  uses  it  as  equivalent  to  the  English  word  ‘care’.  According  to  
Morisi,  this  is  what  Camus  wants  us  to  have  for  others—this  is  not  
abstract  moral  duty,  simply  a  way  of  approaching  our  fellow  human  
beings with care (Morisi  2013 , 29–31). In practice, humans have a keener 
sense of morality than can be achieved through the study of ethics, which 
explains  the  following  often  misquoted  claim  from  Camus:  ‘In  truth,  
what little of morality I know, I learned on the football pitches and the -
atre stages that remain to this day my true universities’ (Camus  2006 , IV: 
21  And so we see that, according to Camus, it is only through  830–831).
human interaction, and through artistic representation of human inter -
action, that we have any real hope of learning something about ethics.
For  Camus,  the  very  purpose  of  art  itself  is  something  ethical.  He  
wrote  in  his  notebooks,  ‘Justification  for  art:  the  true  work  of  art  aids  
sincerity,  reinforces  the  complicity  of  human  beings’  (Camus   2006 ,  II:  
22  and elsewhere, that art is ‘a means of moving the greatest num - 1017),
ber of people by giving them a privileged view of common suffering and 
23  Above all other art forms, Camus saw lit - joy’ (Camus  2006 , IV: 240).
erature as the most suitable method of approaching ethics:
Our  true  moralists  ...  haven’t  legislated,  they  have  painted.  And  by  that  
they have done more to illuminate the conduct of humans than if they had 
patiently polished some definitive formulas that were dedicated to under -
graduate dissertations. Only the novel is faithful to the particular. Its sub -
ject  is  not  the  conclusions  of  life,  but  its  very  unfolding.  (Camus  
24 2006 , I: 924)
As Sanson writes, Camus ‘never disassociated the aesthetic and ethical 
25 dimensions of writing’ (Sanson  2014 , 165).
We have already discussed at great length the possible reasons why lit -
erature can be so effective in provoking ethical reflection—both features 
of  the  works  themselves  and  also  the  ways  in  which  we  approach  and  
respond  to  works  of  art.  Naturally,  it  is  within  this  theoretical  context  
that this book aims to demonstrate Camus’ own contribution to ethics 
via literary techniques. While scholarship in the English language has all 
but overlooked Camus’ contribution to ethics, in French Camus scholar -
ship certain attentive readers have begun to comment on Camus’ literary 

28   G. Whistler
ethics. In his 2014 essay, ‘L’œuvre camusienne, un miroir éthique et exis -
tentiel’, Alexis Lager writes:
Camus’ work is a mirror because the experience of the author is also that of 
the reader, that of each and every one. The  I  of the character gives birth to 
the  I  of the reader, and this dynamic gives rise to a  we . From the ethical 
springboard that is Camus’ œuvre, the singular gives birth to the universal. 
26 (Lager  2014 , 213)
This is precisely the effect which was discussed earlier in this chapter. 
In encountering the Other, via the text, the reader is brought to reflect 
upon her own moral life—or as Lager put it, ‘The discovery of the self 
occurs  via  the  experience  of  those   others   that  are  the  characters,  and  in  
which  the  reader  does  not  cease  to  interrogate  themselves’  (Lager  
27 2014 , 214).
Despite how out of place Camus’ philosophical methods might seem 
to  the  contemporary  Anglo-American  analytic  philosopher,  as  we  saw  
earlier in this section, he is certainly not alone in the wider context of the 
history of philosophy. From Plato’s dialogues on goodness, to Nietzsche’s 
literary  exploration  of  the  ‘eternal  return’  in   Thus  Spoke  Zarathustra  
(Nietzsche  1974 ), Camus’ literary philosophy has an incredibly rich lin -
eage.  The  immediate  philosophical  climate  Camus  was  writing  in  was  
also  very  different  from  our  own.  For  example,  preceding  Camus’  own  
ventures (and no doubt in part inspiring them) were the literary endeav -
ours of Jean-Paul Sartre. In many respects, Sartre set the tone in French 
philosophy of the period, and Camus was spurred on by his example in 
both  content  and  form.  But  what  inspired  Camus  most  of  all  about  
Sartre,  perhaps,  was  where  he  thought  Sartre  had  gone  wrong.  Camus’  
critique of existentialism is central to his own philosophical innovations 
(as  discussed  in  Chap.   4),  but  Camus’  early  engagement  with  Sartre’s  
philosophical novel  La Nausée  seems to have helped him to formulate his 
own conception of the role of philosophy in literature, precisely by what 
Sartre (in his view) didn’t quite achieve.
In his 1938 review of  La Nausée , Camus wrote that:
A novel is never anything but a philosophy put into images. And in a good 
novel, all the philosophy has passed into the images. But if it overflows the 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   29
characters and action, the philosophy looks like a label stuck on the work, 
the  plot  loses  its  authenticity  and  the  novel  its  life.  Nevertheless,  an  
  enduring work cannot dispense with profound ideas. And this secret fusion 
of experience and ideas, between life and reflection on its meaning, is what 
28 makes the great novelist. (Camus  2006 , I: 794)
In other words, the novel must always retain its integrity as a work of 
art if it is to be successful in bringing about the kind of open reflection 
Camus wanted to achieve. The philosophical ideas behind any novel (or 
other form if literature) should therefore not dominate the text, and the 
author  must  not  enforce  her  stance  abstractly  or  dogmatically—this  is  
where  La Nausée  was unsuccessful, according to Camus. Camus’ theory 
of  art  is  therefore  imbued  with  a  sense  of  philosophical  humility.  He  
writes in  Le Mythe   de Sisyphe :
Let there be no mistake in aesthetics. It is not a patient inquiry, the unceas -
ing, sterile illustration of a book that I am calling for here. Quite the con -
trary, if I have made myself clearly understood. The book-novel, the work 
that proves the most hateful of all, is the one that most often is inspired by 
a  smug  thought. You demonstrate the truth you feel sure of possessing. But 
those are ideas one launches, and ideas are the contrary of thought. Those 
creators are philosophers, ashamed of themselves. (Camus  2005 , 112)
Meanwhile, fiction must not ‘forsake its initial and difficult lesson in 
favour  of  a  final  illusion’  (Camus   2005 ,  99),  the  author  must  not  be  
swept away by the desire for unity or beauty and abandon the philosophi -
cal ideas which drive this creation.
This kind of synthesis is something that Camus strove for throughout 
his entire œuvre—the ethical and the aesthetic being distinct, yet insepa -
rable, from his perspective. Harkening back to Jon Stewart’s ideas on the 
relationship between philosophical form and content, Bronner writes:
With Camus, the ethical interest always permeates the way in which it is 
expressed. The form is inextricably interwoven with content, and his works 
illustrates  an  obsession  with  the   craft   of  writing.  Camus  trespasses  the  
boundaries between art, politics, and philosophy, even while leaving them 
intact. He provides his readers, in the most basic sense, with a  literature of 
moral deliberation . (Bronner  1999 , xii)

30   G. Whistler
In  the  following  section  we  will  see  some  evidence  of  Camus’  own  
personal struggle for this synthesis of the ethical and the aesthetic, as well 
as the extent of the craftsmanship behind his works.
5    Camus’ Struggles with Rhetorical Form
In his early days as a writer, Camus gravitated towards journalism in the 
hope  of  communicating  his  ethical  concerns.  He  wrote  for  and  edited  
several newspapers and magazines throughout his life (including the  Alger 
29   often  favouring  the   Républicain ,  Paris  Soir ,  L’Express ,  and   Combat ),
exposition  of  social  injustice,  not  only  during  the  Nazi  Occupation  of  
France during the Second World War, but also in defence of the oppressed 
Berber and Arabic communities of his native Algeria (Parker  1966 , 21). 
As a journalist Camus experimented with style as much as in any of his 
other endeavours. As one critic writes:
Camus’s  Combat   editorials  are  a  workshop,  a  place  where  moral  didacti -
cism and homily are mixed with query and call to reconsideration, where 
utopianism  struggles  against  fatigue  at  the  hard  realities,  where  both  the  
high-flying rhetoric of the barricades and the hard-hitting rhetoric of ideol -
ogy critique were tethered by tragic lament (Young-Bruehl  1991 , xv).
Thus,  Camus  discovered  first-hand  the  difficulties  entailed  in  any  
attempt to communicate the experiences of others. Another commenta -
tor writes:
Camus  was  among  the  least  systematic  of  thinkers.  The  evolution  of  his  
thought  was  rarely  a  logical  or  highly  cerebral  process.  Rather,  his  ideas  
developed according to his visceral reactions to his experiences and obser -
vations.  This  is  why  Camus’  journalism,  in  which  he  recorded  and  com -
mented on what he believed to be the most important events of his day, 
provides so many insights into the rest of his work. The  Combat  writings, 
especially,  both  in  the  events  they  discuss  and  the  hopes  and  aspirations  
they reveal, represent an extremely important phase in the development of 
Camus’ thinking. (Gramont  1991 , 5)

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   31
In encountering the barriers of propaganda, and no less, the restrictive, 
clichéd language of the media, he was unconvinced of the ability of news -
print to convey authentic messages. This dissatisfaction is illustrated from 
the  perspective  of  Dr  Rieux  in   La  Peste ,  in  whom  Camus  is  ‘present,  
barely  disguised’  according  to  his  leading  biographer,  Olivier  Todd  
30 (1996 , 330):
Every  evening  on  the  airwaves  or  in  the  press,  pitying  or  admiring  com -
ments rained down on this solitary town; and every time, the doctor was 
irritated  by  the  epic  note  or  tone  of  a  prize-giving  address.  Of  course  he  
knew that the concern was genuine, but it could only express itself in the 
conventional language in which men try to explain what unites them with 
the rest of humanity. Such language could not be applied to the little, daily 
efforts of Grand, for example, and could not describe Grand’s significance 
in the midst of the plague. (Camus  2002 , 105–106)
Here  we  can  see  that  the  language  of  the  press  lacks  a  certain  reso -
nance;  torn  between  the  difficulty  entailed  in  trying  to  communicate  
‘genuine’ concern for individual suffering, and a reliance on truth claims 
which  is  the  theoretical  foundation  of  journalism,  ‘the  most  authentic  
sufferings  [are]  habitually  translated  into  the  banal  clichés  of  conversa -
tion’ (Camus  2002 , 60). As Camus once wrote in  Combat , ‘It may take a 
hundred issues of a newspaper to express a single idea’ (Camus  1991 , 61). 
For Camus, the kind of truth which is so difficult to express in journalism 
is  philosophical,  moral  and  existential,  but  how  best  to  propagate  this  
kind  of  reflection  is  something  which  the  young  Camus  had  difficulty  
settling on.
Elsewhere in  La Peste , Camus exposes his own personal struggle with 
choosing the right words. Fellow writer, Grand, struggles never-endingly 
with the opening line of his text, one of many variations of which is, ‘On 
a  fine  May  morning,  a  slender  woman  was  riding  a  magnificent  sorrel  
mare  through  the  flowered  avenues  of  the  Bois  de  Boulogne’  (Camus  
2002 , 103–104). But Grand is never satisfied that he has chosen the most 
appropriate  words  to  share  the  image  which  he  pictures  so  clearly  and  
makes endless synonymous substitutions. He feels unable to convey his 
own subjective (in this case aesthetic) experiences. As he replaces words, 

32   G. Whistler
he feels he has lost nuance or signification and is repeatedly thwarted by 
his venture. According to Olivier Todd, Camus ‘made fun of himself in 
his self-portrait as the pathetic Grand, who agonizes over writing a book. 
Grand keeps rewriting the same sentence, and Camus was on his third 
31   This  anxiety  towards  the  ade - version  of   La  Peste ’  (Todd   1996 ,  330).
quacy of words is something that Camus, like many writers, spent a great 
deal of his career confronting.
The first novel that Camus completed was  La Mort heureuse , though he 
was never satisfied that it conveyed his ideas well enough to have it pub -
lished,  doubting  ‘whether  [he  would]  be  able  to  realise  the  world  that  
32  This novel provides an important insight into the  live[d] inside [him]’.
formulation  and  development  of  Camus’  later  works,  however  ‘clumsy  
33  he thought its style to be. As one critic writes: and stiff’
From a literary point of view, [ La Mort heureuse ] is immature. The dia -
logue is artificial, reading more like a series of philosophical monologues 
than a natural flow of conversation. But it is for this very reason that  La 
Mort heureuse  is extremely interesting, for the thinking ‘behind’ the fic -
tion is in fact barely concealed at all; conversely, we might say that we 
can see here a Camus in transition, searching for a vehicle better suited 
to  his  thought  than  the  academic  prose  of  the  book  (Rathbone  
2017 , 126).
As  Camus  developed  the  material  from  this  abandoned  novel  into  
L’Etranger , he consulted Malraux (a writer whom he greatly admired) on 
matters  of  style.  His  personal  correspondences  from  this  period  reveal  
further trials with stylistics. In writing  L’Etranger , Camus had ‘sought for 
34  but Malraux commented that Camus’ ‘sentences  dryness in exposition’,
are a bit too systematically made up of subject, verb, complement, period. 
Sometimes it becomes a formula. Very easy to fix, by sometimes changing 
35   But  as  Camus  revealed  himself,  ‘Meursault  always   the  punctuation’.
limits himself to answering questions ... Thus he never affirms anything 
36   In   ...  Nothing  can  help  you  to  see  his  deeply  held  convictions’.
L’Etranger , Camus laboured for a style which, whilst granting the reader 
behind-the-scenes access to the mind of the protagonist, also requires us 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   33
to  engage  semantically  and  philosophically  in  order  to  understand  his  
interactions with the rest of the world. The intricacy of the style of this 
novel will be returned to in Chap.  3.
While it is no doubt true that most writers struggle with the develop -
ment of their own style, we know that with Camus, this anxiety is not 
simply  motivated  by  aesthetic  concerns;  Camus  believes  that  literary  
form is the best vehicle for philosophical ideas, so finding the best way of 
communicating  those  ideas  is  paramount  to  his  concern  as  a  writer.  
Camus’  earliest  published  philosophical  essay  is   Le  Mythe  de  Sisyphe , 
which attempts to address the problems which most concerned Camus—
morality,  mortality,  and  meaning.  Camus  struggled  equally  with  this  
work, confessing in a personal correspondence:
Since yesterday I have been full of doubt. Last night I started to write my 
essay about the absurd ... It must be written, from beginning to end, and 
everything must fit into one work, which is what I started to do yesterday, 
and after half an hour, everything fell apart. I wrote two pages which are 
puerile, compared to what I really think. I was not seeing clearly, and got 
lost in details. I stopped short, and suddenly thought maybe I’m not capa -
ble of writing this, since anyone can have ideas, but to make them fit into 
a work and to master them creatively is what makes a writer ... It needs 
37 total transparency to fully succeed.
By  this  time,  Camus  had  already  been  working  on  his  essay  for  two  
years (Todd  1996 , 221), so it is not entirely surprising that even the fin -
ished  piece  shows  signs  of  his  difficulty  with  integrating  ideas  and  
creativity.
Indeed, this early uncertainty is no doubt what prompted Camus to 
approach philosophical problems from multiple stylistic angles. Camus 
wrote in cycles; the ‘Sisyphus’ cycle, comprised of two plays ( Caligula  and 
Le Malentendu ), a philosophical essay ( Le Mythe de Sisyphe ), and a novel 
( L’Etranger ); the ‘Prometheus’ cycle, again including a novel ( La Peste ), a 
philosophical essay ( L’Homme révolté ) and two plays ( Les Justes  and  L’Etat 
de siège ); and unfinished at the time of his death, the ‘Nemesis’ cycle, in 
which  he  planned  to  include  a  novel  ( Le  Premier  Homme ,  which  was  
published posthumously in its decidedly unpolished form), a play ( Don 

34   G. Whistler
38 Faust ) and an essay ( Le Mythe de Némésis ).  In the first cycle of his  writing,   
Camus envisaged ‘several parts with each section embodied with different 
techniques,  and  their  results  illustrate  the  consequences  of  an  absurd  
39  During this period he was working on the idea that,  grappling with life’.
40  approaching the  as he put it, ‘Certain works can illustrate one another’,
problem of the absurd via multiple media. The themes he addresses in  Le 
Mythe de Sisyphe  echo those that readers of  L’Etranger  come to contem -
plate via different means:
In  its  way,  suicide  settles  the  absurd.  It  engulfs  the  absurd  in  the  same  
death. But I know that in order to keep alive, the absurd cannot be settled. 
It  escapes  suicide  to  the  extent  that  it  is  simultaneously  awareness  and  
rejection of death. It is, at the extreme limit of the condemned man’s last 
thought, that shoelace that despite everything he sees a few yards away, on 
the very brink of his dizzying fall. The contrary of suicide, in fact, is the 
man condemned to death. (Camus  2005 , 52–53)
This  contemplation  of  the  absurd,  mortality,  and  the  death  penalty  
permeates  these  works—and  both  literary  and  philosophical  texts  are  
intended to bring about reflection on the same philosophical problems. 
In 1943, Sartre commented on this decision to communicate his ideas in 
a kind of ‘parallel text’. He writes, ‘The very fact that Camus delivers his 
message in the form of a novel [is] ... an outraged acknowledgement of 
the limitation of human thought’, hinting again at Camus’ dissatisfaction 
with pure reason. Sartre continues, ‘It is true that he felt obliged to make 
a philosophical translation of his fictional message.  The Myth of Sisyphus  
is precisely that’ (Sartre  2007 , 80). Sartre seems to imply here that even 
in writing a philosophical essay alongside  L’Etranger , Camus is revealing 
his  own  uncertainty  with  philosophical  methodology;  dissatisfied  with  
reason alone, and convinced of the power of literature to help us engage 
with  philosophy,  he  nevertheless  struggled  with  style  and  doubted  his  
own ability.
Despite his essays acting as a kind of philosophical translation, they are 
nevertheless  heavily  reliant  on  metaphor  and  imagery:  phrases  such  as  
‘under a cruel sky’ (Camus  2002 , 79). or ‘with knives in our hand and 
lumps in our throats’ (Camus  2002 , 15) are powerful even isolated from 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   35
his  arguments,  and  they  certainly  do  bring  a  kind  of  literariness  to  his  
philosophical form—as indeed the use of the myth of Sisyphus to illus -
trate absurdity and defiance is an unusual philosophical device (Camus’ 
use of myths and allegories will be returned to later, as this is the main 
focus of Chap.  4).  Le Mythe de Sisyphe  is written chiefly in the first per -
son,  comprised  of  philosophical  observations  inspired  by  Camus’  own  
experiences, but episodes based on his own story are minimal and brief. 
Instead, Camus draws extensively on literary references (including char -
acters such as Don Juan, Don Quixote, King Lear, and of course, Sisyphus 
himself )—references which bring to mind stories and characters so well-  
crafted  and  well-known  that  readers  of  this  philosophical  treatise  are  
often  transported  to  the  original  contexts  of  these  characters,  a  space  
where aesthetic and empathetic appreciation take precedence.
6    Chapter  Conclusion
Camus once wrote in his notebooks, ‘Why is it that I am an artist and not 
a philosopher? It’s because I think according to words and not according 
41  Whilst I am reluctant to argue that  to ideas’ (Camus  2006 , II: 1029).
Camus is wrong about himself, I think that this quote sums up nicely the 
problem that I will be addressing throughout this book. The numerous 
theorists that I have drawn on already who hope to re-evaluate the dis -
tinction  between  philosophical  and  literary  registers  would  no  doubt  
agree that Camus’ works represent exactly the kind of alternative approach 
to philosophical style and substance which they advocate. Thomas Hanna 
writes, ‘It is the moral philosophy which underlies these novels and plays 
that gives them their force and desperation, and it is only in terms of this 
larger  philosophical  position  that  the  literary  works  of  Camus  can  be  
fully  understood’  (Hanna   1956 ,  232).  I  suggest  that  the  reverse  is  also  
true—only through a thorough examination of Camus’ literary methods 
can we truly appreciate Camus’ contribution to moral philosophy; here 
lies the aim of this book.
Over the course of this volume, I will therefore examine and analyse 
Camus’  specific  strategies  for  ‘doing  moral  philosophy’.  Camus  utilises  
diverse rhetorical and stylistic techniques in his philosophical and literary 

36   G. Whistler
works,  all  of  which  are  designed  to  elicit  philosophical  and  moral  
  reflection on the part of the reader. These techniques include philosophi -
cal dialogues, classical myths, fables, and even innovative uses of gram -
matical structures, and while I do not mean to suggest that Camus has hit 
on one specific superior method of philosophising, I do aim to demon -
strate his innovativeness as a moral philosopher—something which has 
been all but overlooked until now.
7    Chapter  Summary
The remainder of the book will be developed across seven further chap -
ters.  Each  chapter  targets  a  specific  issue,  but  all  share  a  general  form,  
oscillating between theoretical analyses and case studies of Camus’ own 
arguments and practice. My aim is to thereby not only theorise but dem -
onstrate  how  Camus’  work  conceptually  enriches  contemporary  ethics.  
In  many  cases,  readers  will  notice  that  I  draw  on  numerous  insightful  
works from early scholarship on Camus (such as Cruickshank 1957, or 
Slochower  1948).  It  should  be  noted  that  this  decision  represents  the  
huge rift that has developed within Camus scholarship; there was a time 
when ‘Camus the Philosopher’ was taken seriously in academia, but sadly 
those  days  are  long  gone.  While  there  are  a  few  exceptions  to  this  rule  
(e.g.  Lévi-Valensi   1997 ;  Srigley   2011 ),  Camus  is  these  days  much  
neglected in philosophical circles, and so it is often necessary to return to 
these  older,  yet  still  relevant  studies  of  Camus  to  overcome  this  fact.  
Naturally, this volume hopes to go some way in rectifying this dearth, as 
it is high time that philosophical Camus scholarship had its  renaissance .
Chapter  2 addresses Camus’ response to Christianity and the problem 
of suffering in the context of the early twentieth century. Due to his asso -
ciation with the existentialism movement, it is often assumed that Camus, 
like many other French intellectuals of the period, rejected Christianity 
altogether. For this reason, his sympathy with Christian thought is over -
looked,  and  it  seems  altogether  bizarre  that  some  theologians  even  
claimed Camus to be a convert. Among these wildly conflicting claims, 
Camus’  philosophical  response  to  Christianity  has  become  somewhat  
muddied;  in  this  chapter  I  attempt  to  rectify  this.  I  argue  that  Camus’  

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   37
entire  philosophy  is  underpinned  by  his  response  to  Christianity,  and  
that he wanted to re-establish the position of morality in the face of the 
problem of suffering. I thus demonstrate how his writings manifest his 
struggle  to  achieve  this  goal.  Camus  once  claimed,  ‘I  do  not  believe  in  
God  and  I am not an atheist’. This chapter aims to elucidate just what is 
meant by a statement like this, as well as to catalogue and analyse Camus’ 
innovative attempts at reconciling spirituality and suffering through phil -
osophical literature.
In Chap.  3 I examine the effect of the minimalist writing style used in 
L’Etranger , arguing that this novel gains its ability to bring about inter -
subjective experiences of Meursault, based on its direct, clear, and unme -
diated  language.  I  suggest  that  the  simplicity  of  certain  writing  styles  
suspends particular types of aesthetic judgements, instead allowing moral 
and personal features of the character to become more salient. I suggest 
that this technique was inspired by the authors of ‘Great American Novel’ 
(such  as  Hemingway,  among  others)  whose  writing  aims  for  acuteness  
and purity—a claim I go on to illustrate with textual case studies. Where 
Camus differs, I argue, is that his style is always underpinned by his phil -
osophical goals. Here I also examine French grammatical elements of the 
style of the novel which are overlooked in Anglophone Camus scholarship.
In Chap.  4, I examine the use of what I call ‘metaphorical’ techniques 
(myth,  fable,  allegory,  and  parable)  in  the  philosophical  and  literary  
works  of  Camus.  Drawing  on  theoretical  work  from  Lacoue-Labarthe’s  
The Subject of Philosophy , I argue that philosophy is bound by style, and 
as such, works which embrace the ambiguities of their medium are per -
haps  a  more  appropriate  method  of  approaching  the  uncertainties  of  
lived experience than contemporary analytic methods. I offer a detailed 
analysis of Camus’ own attempts—including myth in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe , 
La Peste  as fable, or  Le Renégat  as an allegory for a philosophical critique, 
among others.
Following  Mikhail  Bakhtin’s   Problems  of  Dostoevsky’s  Poetics ,  Chap.   5 
examines  the  function  of  dialogue  in  the  novels  of  Camus,  presenting  
him as an heir to Dostoevsky’s dialogic approach to philosophical prob -
lems.  I  introduce  my  own  concept  of  ‘dialogic  ethics’,  referring  to  a  
method of moral problem solving which I identify as being present in the 
novels of both authors. I suggest that by engaging imaginatively with the 

38   G. Whistler
characters of novels as moral agents, dialogue gives us the opportunity to 
recalibrate  our  responses  to  the  beliefs  of  others,  opening  ourselves  up  
before evaluative points of view that we would otherwise have good rea -
son  to  resist.  I  therefore  argue  that  dialogue  in  Camus’  novels  (and  
Dostoevsky’s)  presents  an  alternative  yet  effective  approach  to  abstract  
moral reasoning.
Chapter  6 examines a strand in twentieth-century literature which cer -
tainly takes up Camus’ mantle in terms of ‘doing moral philosophy’ by 
creative  means—that  is,  the  movement  known  as  the  ‘Theatre  of  the  
Absurd’. This term was coined by Martin Esslin in his 1961 essay of the 
same name, and it is used to refer to the stylistic innovations of a number 
of artists (including Beckett, Ionesco, Pinter, Adamov and Genet) who, 
according to Esslin, have ‘renounced arguing  about  the absurdity of the 
human  condition;  [their  work]  merely   presents   it  in  being’.  Numerous  
scholars (including Esslin, Serreau and Lupo) have suggested that, despite 
Camus himself having written several plays which attempt to communi -
cate the absurd, his theatre exhibits none of the radical experimentation 
with form that the Theatre of the Absurd does. I suggest that this analysis 
doesn’t  entirely  do  Camus  justice,  and  thus  I  attempt  to  show  in  this  
chapter that Camus’ theatre contains germinal elements of the methods 
that Esslin attributes to absurd theatre, examining the three short plays-  
within-   a-play  in  Caligula  as pieces of absurd theatre in their own right.
In Chap.  7, I continue to demonstrate that the world of literature has 
to some extent succeeded in taking up Camus’ mantle, this time by exam -
ining  the  novel   Meursault,  contre-enquête ,  written  by  Kamel  Daoud,  
another important successor to Camus. Here I borrow Eleonore Stump’s 
concept of ‘Franciscan knowledge’ as presented in  Wandering in Darkness  
(2010).  Meursault,  contre-enquête   is  written  from  the  perspective  of  
Harun,  the  brother  of  the  dead  ‘Arab’  from   L’Etranger .  An  important  
feature to note is that in the world of  Meursault, contre-enquête , both the 
character  Meursault  and  the  novel   L’Etranger   exist  (though  referred  to  
under an alternative title,  L’Autre ), and through reading  L’Etranger , Harun 
comes to know his enemy, becoming accepting of Meursault as a subject, 
and acknowledging his own similarities. While  Meursault, contre-enquête  
is  framed  around  issues  relating  to  postcolonial  identity,  I  suggest  that  
Daoud has borrowed something important from Camus’ own methods, 

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   39
and that what Harun and readers in general gain from encounters with 
novels is Franciscan knowledge, and intersubjective knowledge of charac -
ters, and thus, others.
In the short concluding chapter of this book, I look back on the issues 
approached  by  the  preceding  chapters,  suggesting  that  contemporary  
ethical theory would benefit greatly from a diversification in method, and 
that  much  can  be  learned  from  Camus’  own  attempts.  For  millennia  
authors have dealt with ethical matters via literary means, and it is a very 
recent  development  in  the  history  of  philosophy  that  we  have  come  to  
only take seriously works which apply ‘analytic’ methods. Morality is in 
its essence messy, and therefore it requires an approach which doesn’t aim 
to tidy it up—making clear-cut examples that can be dissected and anal -
ysed. Camus is by no means the only theorist to have a problem with the 
application of abstract reasoning to morality, but he has come a long way 
in developing a method which is more sensitive to the matter at hand.
Notes
1.  In French: ‘Si être philosophe, c’est pour poser toutes ces questions, non 
sous forme théorique, abstraite, conceptuelle, mais ... à travers des per -
sonnages qui refusent d’être des surhommes, à travers des aventures qui 
se jouent dans la quotidienneté de la vie réelle, alors, oui, Camus, dans 
ses romans comme dans ses essais, a été philosophe.’
2.  A colleague from the White Rose Aesthetics Forum, Dr Aaron Meskin, 
drolly suggested I entitle this book ‘Camus for Grown-ups’, highlighting 
how little this philosopher is taken seriously in the current climate.
3.  Of course, Camus’ literary stylings are still innovative in literary terms, 
but  they  aren’t  nearly  as  radical,  we  might  say,  as  the  likes  of  Joyce  or  
Breton. But what is radical about Camus is his free use of creative meth -
ods  in  communicating  philosophical  ideas,  as  opposed  to  the  literary  
stylings themselves, innovative as they are.
4.  This  is  of  course  not  a  categorical  judgement;  certainly  some  analytic  
philosophers recognise the necessity of addressing moral ambiguity (e.g. 
Hampshire  1991 ; Foot  2002 ; MacIntyre  2007 ; Murdoch  2013 ). Rather, 
I point this out in order to illuminate the context of Camus’ critique of 
philosophical abstractions.

40   G. Whistler
5.  Including  Beardsmore   1972 ;  Carroll   2002 ;  Diamond   1982 ;  Hamilton  
2003 ; John  1998 ; Landy  2008 ; Nussbaum  1983 ; Palmer  1992 ; Raphael 
1983 ; and Skilleås  2001 .
6.  It is important to acknowledge that Nussbaum has quite different proj -
ects in  Love’s Knowledge  and  Poetic Justice . In  Love’s Knowledge  she pro -
motes  the  use  of  novels  (notably  those  of  Henry  James)  as  a  necessary  
supplement to moral philosophy. In  Poetic Justice  she promotes the use 
of novels (e.g. those of Dickens) as elements of a moral education, aimed 
especially at law students. Posner has different arguments against the two 
projects. Against the  Love’s Knowledge  project he argues that her readings 
of James are reductive and that other possible readings wouldn’t serve the 
ends of moral philosophy at all (these arguments, being aimed solely at 
her  reading  of  James,  are  not  particularly  relevant  to  the  aims  of  this  
book—although the issue of different readings and interpretations of the 
works discussed in this book will necessarily come up again throughout). 
Against  the   Poetic  Justice   project,  he  uses  the  above  arguments  to  the  
effect that most literary works are useless at making people better, more 
moral, citizens. While this book is not concerned with the kind of moral 
education that law practitioners require, some of Nussbaum’s claims in 
Poetic Justice  are certainly relevant to the current project because Camus 
is not only concerned with the idea that novels could contribute to moral 
philosophy (as Nussbaum argues in  Love’s Knowledge ), but also that peo -
ple might become better citizens (i.e. more morally reflective people) by 
reading novels (which is Nussbaum’s primary concern in  Poetic Justice ).
7.  Eaton  argues  precisely  this  in  her  paper  ‘Robust  Immoralism’  (Eaton  
2012 ).
8.  For a discussion of the kind of knowledge this might be, see Chap.  7.
9.  Or to use Eaton’s examples, Hannibal Lecter from the novels of Thomas 
Harris,  or  Humbert  Humbert  from  Nabokov’s   Lolita   (Eaton   2012 , 
281–292).
10.   While  Camus  isn’t  mentioned  in   Ethics  and  the  Limits  of  Philosophy , 
Williams nevertheless uses a quote from  La Chute  as an epigraph: ‘Quand 
on n’a pas de caractère, il faut bien se donner une méthode’, which trans -
lates  as  ‘When  you  don’t  have  character,  you’d  better  get  yourself  a  
method’ (Williams  1983 , xviii). Williams’ choice of quote, which seems 
to be directed at contemporary ethics’ over reliance on method, illumi -
nates  the  relevance  of  Camus  and  his  vision  of  the  role  of  character—
both fictional and moral.
11.   Strawson’s translation.

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   41
12.   In spite of the importance Goldie bestows future-directed narratives (see 
Goldie  2014 ).
13.   In  French:  ‘Ça,  c’est  le  point  de  départ.  Mais  Camus  n’adopte  pas  
l’absurde. Il décrit l’absurde. ... Camus se contente de décrire l’absurde 
pour voir comment on peut en sortir.’ (my translation).
14.   Letter  from  André  Malraux,  30  October  1941  (in  Todd   1996 ,  282;  
translation from Todd  1998 , 134).
15.   In French, ‘Je me révolte, donc nous sommes’ (my translation).
16.   To claim that Camus manifested  all  his philosophical content in literary 
form may at first seem like somewhat of an exaggeration. However, if we 
consider  that  his  two  most  substantial  philosophical  essays  were  each  
part of ‘cycles’ of writing which also encompass multiple literary works 
on the same themes, this immediately becomes more plausible. The mat -
ter of these ‘cycles’ will be returned to later on in this chapter.
17.   In   French,   ‘Si   tu   veux   être   philosophe,   écris   des   romans’   (my   
translation).
18.   Translation from Todd  1998 , 142–143.
19.   In  French,  ‘J’ai  abandonné  le  point  de  vue  morale.  La  morale  mène  à  
l’abstraction et à l’injustice’ (my translation).
20.   In  French,  ‘Albert  Camus  était  à  la  fois  profondément  sensible  à  
l’existence d’une morale et critique à l’égard de cette notion. Il en rejetait 
certaines  définition,  tradition  et  pratique:  celles  de  la  Morale  pourvue  
d’une majuscule, pourrait-on dire. La Morale ‘tue’, ‘dévore’, aux yeux de 
Camus, quand elle est formelle, dogmatique, abstraite, ou aveuglément 
ambitieuse. Elle peut, en ce cas, conduire à faire fausse route—à ignorer, 
par exemple, les particularités et complexités de l’histoire et des indivi -
dus.’ (my translation).
21.   In French, ‘Vraiment, le peu de morale que je sais, je l’ai appris sur les 
terrains de football et les scènes de théâtre qui resteront mes vraies uni -
versités.’ (my translation).
22.   In French, ‘Justification de l’art: La véritable œuvre d’art aide à la sin -
cérité, renforce la complicité des hommes’ (my translation).
23.   In French, ‘un moyen d’émouvoir le plus grand nombre d’hommes en 
leur offrant une image privilégiée des souffrances et des joies communes’ 
(my translation).
24.   In French, ‘Nos vrais moralistes ... n’ont pas légiféré, ils ont peint. Et par 
là ils ont plus fait pour éclairer la conduite des hommes que s’ils avaient 
poli patiemment ... une certaine de formules définitives, vouées aux dis -
sertations de bacheliers. C’est que le roman seul est fidèle au particulier. 

42   G. Whistler
Son objet n’est pas les conclusions de la vie mais son déroulement même.’ 
(my translation).
25.   In  French,  ‘[Camus]  n’a  jamais  dissocié  les  dimensions  esthétique  et  
éthique de l’écriture’ (my translation).
26.   In French, ‘L’œuvre camusienne et un miroir parce que l’expérience de 
l’auteur est aussi bien celle du lecteur, celle de tout ou chacun. Du  je  des 
personnages naît le  je  du lecteur, et cette dynamique fait s’édifier un  nous . 
A travers ce tremplin éthique qu’est l’œuvre camusienne, le singulier fait 
naître l’universel.’ (my translation).
27.   In French, ‘la découverte de soi passe par l’expérience de ces  autres  que 
sont  les  personnages  et  dans  lesquels  chaque  lecteur  ne  cesse  de  
s’interroger.’ (my translation).
28.   In French, ‘Un roman n’est jamais qu’une philosophie mise en images. 
Et dans un bon roman, toute la philosophie est passée dans les images. 
Mais il suffit qu’elle déborde les personnages et les actions, qu’elle appa -
raisse  comme  une  étiquette  sur  l’œuvre,  pour  que  l’intrigue  perde  son  
authenticité et le roman sa vie. Pourtant une œuvre durable ne peut se 
passer de pensée profonde. Et cette fusion secrète de l’expérience et de la 
pensée, de la vie et de la réflexion sur son sens, c’est elle qui fait le grand 
romancier’.
29.   For further biographical information see Todd  1996 .
30.   Translation in Todd  1998 , 133.
31.   Translation in Todd  1998 , 131.
32.   As  Camus  wrote  in  a  letter  to  Marguerite  Dobrenn  dated  17  August  
1937 (translation Todd  1998 , 65).
33.   As he wrote in a letter to Jeanne Sicard on 2 August 1937 (translation in 
Todd  1998 , 72).
34.   As Camus wrote to his friend Pascal Pia on 2 June 1941 (translation in 
Todd  1998 , 133).
35.   Relayed to Camus by letter by Pia, dated 27 May 1941 (translation in 
Todd  1998 , 131).
36.   In  an  unsent  letter  to  the  critic  Rousseaux,  1942  (translation  in  Todd  
1998 , 151–152).
37.   Letter to Francine, 26 November 1939 (translation in Todd  1998 , 92).
38.   An  entry  in  his  notebooks  reads  ‘The  third  cycle  is  love:  Le  Premier  
Homme, Don Faust, Le Mythe de Némésis’ (Camus  2006 , IV: 1245 in 
French,  ‘Le  troisième  étage,  c’est  l’amour:  Le  Premier  Homme,  Don  
Faust. Le Mythe de Némésis’).

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   43
39.   Letter to his friend Claude de Fréminville, undated (translation in Todd 
1998 , 105).
40.   Letter to André Malraux, 15 November 1941 (translation in Todd  1998 , 
134).
41.   In French, ‘Pourquoi suis-je un artiste et non un philosophe? C’est que 
je pense selon les mots et non selon les idées’ (my translation).
References
Aoudjit,  Abdelkader.  2012.  Teaching  Moral  Philosophy  Using  Novels:  Issues  
and Strategies.  Journal of Thought 47  (Fall): 49–66.
Beardsmore,  R.W.  1972.  Learning  from  a  Novel.   Royal  Institute  of  Philosophy  
Lectures  6: 23–46.
Bronner, Stephen. 1999.  Camus: Portrait of a Moralist . Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press.
Camus,  Albert.  1991.   Between  Hell  and  Reason:  Essays  from  the  Resistance  
Newspaper  Combat,  1944–1947 .  Translated  and  edited  by  Alexandre  de  
Gramont. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press.
———. 2000.  The Rebel . Translated by Anthony Bower. London: Penguin.
———. 2002.  The Plague . Translated by Robin Buss. London: Penguin.
———.   2005.    The   Myth   of   Sisyphus .   Translated   by   Justin   O’Brien.   
London: Penguin.
———. 2006.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi et al. 
Paris: Gallimard.
Carroll, Noel. 2002. The Wheel of Virtue: Art, Literature, and Moral Knowledge. 
The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism  60: 3–26.
Cottingham, John. 2005.  The Spiritual Dimension . Cambridge: CUP.
Danto,  Arthur  C.  1984.  Philosophy  as/and/of  Literature.   Proceedings  and  
Addresses of the American Philosophical Association  58 (1): 5–20.
Denham, Alison. 2000.  Metaphor and Moral Experience . Oxford: OUP.
Diamond, Cora. 1982. Anything but Argument?  Philosophical Investigations  5 
(1): 23–41.
Duran, Jane. 2007. The Philosophical Camus.  The Philosophical Forum : 365–371.
Eaton, Anne. 2012. Robust Immoralism.  Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism  
70: 281–292.
Fisher, Walter R. 1984. Narration as a Human Communication Paradigm: The 
Case of Public Moral Argument.  Communication Monographs  51: 1–22.

44   G. Whistler
Foot,  Philippa.  2002.   Virtues  and  Vices  and  Other  Essays  in  Moral  Philosophy . 
Oxford: Clarendon.
Goldie,  Peter.  2014.   The  Mess  Inside:  Narrative,  Emotion,  and  the  Mind . 
Oxford: OUP.
Golomb,  Jacob.  1994.  Camus’s  Ideal  of  Authentic  Life.   Philosophy  Today   38  
(3): 268–277.
de Gramont, Alexandre. 1991. Introduction. In  Between Hell and Reason: Essays 
from  the  Resistance  Newspaper  Combat,  1944–1947 ,  3–35.  Translated  and  
edited by Alexandre de Gramont. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press.
Grenier, Roger. 2014. “Vue de l’intérieur: les éthiques de Camus” (interviewed 
by  Eve  Morisi).  In   Camus  et  l’éthique ,  ed.  Eve  Morisi,  31–53.  Paris:  
Classiques Garnier.
Hamilton, Christopher. 2003. Art and Moral Education. In  Art and Morality , 
ed. J.L. Bermúdez and S. Gardner, 37–55. London: Routledge.
Hampshire, Stuart. 1991.  Innocence and Experience . Harvard UP.
Hanna, Thomas L. 1956. Albert Camus and the Christian Faith.  The Journal of 
Religion  36 (4): 224–233.
———. 1958.  The Thought and Art of Albert Camus . Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Heims, Neil. 2003. Biography of Albert Camus. In  Albert Camus: Comprehensive 
Biography and Critical Analysis . Broomall: Chelsea House Publishers.
John, Eileen. 1998. Reading Fiction and Conceptual Knowledge: Philosophical 
Thought in Literary Context.  The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism  56 
(4): 331–348.
Judt,   Tony.   1998.    The   Burden   of   Responsibility .   Chicago:   University   of   
Chicago Press.
Kaufmann,   Walter.   1959.   Existentialism   and   Death.    Chicago   Review    13   
(2): 75–93.
Lager,  Alexis.  2014.  L’œuvre  camusienne,  un  miroir  éthique  et  existentiel.  In  
Camus et l’éthique , ed. Eve Morisi, 195–214. Paris: Classiques Garnier.
Landy,  Joshua.  2008.  A  Nation  of  Madame  Bovarys:  On  the  Possibility  and  
Desirability  of  Moral  Improvement  through  Fiction.  In   Art  and  Ethical  
Criticism , ed. Gary L. Hagberg, 63–94. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lang, Berel. 1990.  The Anatomy of Philosophical Style . Oxford and Cambridge, 
MA: Basil Blackwell.
Lévi-Valensi, Jacqueline. 1997. Si tu veux être philosophe.... In  Albert Camus et 
la  Philosophie ,  ed.  Anne-Marie  Amiot  and  Jean-François  Mattéi,  21–33.  
Paris: Presses Universitaire de France.
Locke,  John.  1975.   An  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding .  Edited  by  
P.H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon.

1    Introduction: Context, Form, and Content   45
Louden,  Robert  B.  1998.   Examples  in  Ethics .  Routledge  Encyclopedia  of  
Philosophy. Taylor and Francis. Accessed 17 December 2017.  https://www.
rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/examples-in-ethics/v-1 .
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 2007.  After Virtue . Notre Dame: Notre Dame UP.
Morisi, Eve. 2013.  Albert Camus: le souci des autres . Paris: Classiques Garnier.
———. 2014. Albert Camus, la morale et l’éthique. In  Camus et l’éthique , ed. 
Eve Morisi, 9–30. Paris: Classiques Garnier.
Mulhall, Stephen. 2002. Ethics in the Light of Wittgenstein.  Philosophical Papers  
31 (3): 293–321.
Murdoch, Iris. 2013.  The Sovereignty of Good . London: Routledge.
Nietzsche,   Friedrich.   1974.    Thus   Spoke   Zarathustra .   Translated   by   R.   J.   
Hollingdale. London: Penguin.
Nussbaum,  Martha.  1983.  Flawed  Crystals:  James’s  The  Golden  Bowl  and  
Literature as Moral Philosophy.  New Literary History  15 (1, Autumn): 25–50.
———. 1990.  Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature . Oxford: OUP.
———. 1995.  Poetic Justice: The Literary Imagination and Public Life . Boston: 
Beacon Press.
Palmer, Frank. 1992.  Literature and Moral Understanding: A Philosophical Essay 
on Ethics, Aesthetics, Education, and Culture . Oxford: OUP.
Parker, Emmett. 1966.  Albert Camus: Artist in the Arena . Madison: Wisconsin 
University Press.
Plato. 2011.  The Republic . Edited by Giovanni R.F. Ferrari. Translated by Tom 
Griffith. Cambridge: CUP.
Posner, Richard. 1997. Against Ethical Criticism.  Philosophy and Literature  21 
(2): 1–27.
Raphael,  David  Daiches.  1983.  Can  Literature  Be  Moral  Philosophy?   New 
Literary History  15 (1): 1–12.
Rathbone, David. 2017. Postscript. In  Between Plotinus and Saint Augustine by Albert 
Camus . Translated and edited by David Rathbone. Accessed 5 February 2018. 
http://www.academia.edu/11350881/Albert_Camus_Between_Plotinus_  
and_Saint_Augustine_ .
Roberts, Peter. 2008. Bridging Literary and Philosophical Genres: Judgement, 
Reflection  and  Education  in  Camus’   The  Fall .  Educational  Philosophy  and  
Theory  40 (7): 873–887.
Sanson,  Hervé.  2014.  Ethique  et  responsabilité  chez  Albert  Camus  et  Albert  
Memmi: De quelques convergences et divergences. In  Camus et l’éthique , ed. 
Eve Morisi, 165–178. Paris: Classiques Garnier.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 2007. A Commentary on  The Stranger . In  Existentialism Is a 
Humanism . Translated by Carol Macomber. New Haven: Yale University Press.

46   G. Whistler
Sherman, David. 2008.  Albert Camus . London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Skilleås,  Ole  Martin.  2001.  Philosophy  in  Literature?  In   Philosophy  and  
Literature: An Introduction . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Srigley,  Ronald  D.  2011.   Albert  Camus’  Critique  of  Modernity .  Columbia:  
University of Missouri Press.
Stewart,  Jon.  2013.   The  Unity  of  Content  and  Form  in  Philosophical  Writing . 
London: Bloomsbury.
Strawson, Galen. 2004. Against Narrativity.  Ratio  17 (4): 428–452.
Todd, Olivier. 1996.  Albert Camus: Une Vie . Paris: Gallimard.
———.   1998.    Albert   Camus:   A   Life .   Translated   by   Benjamin   Ivry.   
London: Vintage.
Williams, Bernard. 1983.  Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy . London: Fontana.
Wollheim, Richard. 1983. Flawed Crystals: James’s The Golden Bowl and the 
Plausibility  of  Literature  as  Moral  Philosophy.   New  Literary  History   15  (1,  
Autumn): 185–191.
Young-Bruehl,  Elisabeth.  1991.  Foreword.  In   Between  Hell  and  Reason:  Essays  
from  the  Resistance  Newspaper  Combat,  1944–1947 ,  xi–xv.  Translated  and  
edited by Alexandre de Gramont. Hanover: Wesleyan University Press.

2
A Post-Christian Ethics
1    Chapter  Introduction
The magnitude of suffering experienced and witnessed in the first half of 
the  twentieth  century  understandably  led  many  people  to  re-evaluate  
their  moral  and  spiritual  position  in  the  world,  and  consequently  their  
faith also. No doubt for some, religious faith provided sufficient consola -
tion, but many others rejected religion altogether, unable to accept that 
any theodicy could justify the immense pain and chaos around them. The 
art that the World Wars inspired naturally embodies the whole spectrum 
of spiritual responses to suffering and doubt, from the liturgy of T. S. Eliot’s 
‘Ash-Wednesday’ all the way to the desolation of Anselm Kiefer’s ‘Black 
Flakes’,  and  everything  in  between.  What  is  of  interest  to  this  chapter,  
however,  is  not  to  be  found  at  either  extreme,  but  somewhere  in  the  
middle.  Albert  Camus,  being  born  in  1913  in  predominately  Catholic  
French Algeria, having lost his father in the First World War, and being 
an active member of the French Resistance, is an artist who was perfectly 
situated to feel the full force of this spiritual upheaval, and naturally this 
is manifested in his writings. Camus wanted to re-establish the position 
47 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_2

48   G. Whistler
of  morality  in  the  face  of  the  problem  of  suffering,  and  his  writings  
  manifest this struggle to do so. Camus once wrote in his notebooks, ‘I do 
1  I  not believe in God  and  I am not an atheist’ (Camus  2006c , IV: 1197).
hope to elucidate just what is meant by a statement like this, and thus this 
chapter catalogues and analyses Camus’ innovative attempts at renegoti -
ating  the  relationship  between  spirituality  and  suffering  through  litera -
2 ture—an essential dimension to any reconstruction of Camusian ethics.
So multifaceted was Camus’ engagement with Christian thought that 
he is construed in Christian scholarship as everything from an avid athe -
ist  to  a  ‘crypto-Christian’.  I  will  therefore  begin  by  unpacking  some  of  
these claims and attempting to give a firm account of Camus’ complex 
stance  with  regard  to  Christianity,  making  reference  both  to  his  philo -
sophical works, and the life that informed them (Sects.  2 and  3). Following 
on from this, I shall begin my investigation of Camus’ creative approaches 
to  theological  and  moral  problems—not  only  the  manifestation  of  his  
criticisms, but also his longing for spiritual coherence. Here I also formu -
late a notion of a kind of ‘secular faith’ which I attribute to Camus (Sects. 
4  and   5).  The  subsequent  section  (Sect.   6)  will  take   La  Chute   as  an  
extended case study, as not only is this work particularly rich in Christian 
imagery,  it  also  epitomises  the  spiritual  conflict  of  mid-twentieth-   
century art.
2    Camus  the Christian?
Albert Camus grew up in French Algeria in the early twentieth century, 
in the poor, working-class district of Belcourt, Algiers. While Catholicism 
was an important part of French society, the poorer classes generally only 
observed religion as a formality, the grandeur of the Church and its teach -
ings seeming so very far from the mundane struggles of everyday life. In 
such an environment, Christianity represented little more to the Camus 
family than the ceremonial pomp of special occasions, and thus the moral 
and metaphysical aspects of religion did not always seem relevant to the 
young Albert, despite his being confirmed in a local church, and having 
received holy communion (Todd  1996 , 33). But in spite of (and perhaps 
precisely  because  of )  the  indifference  to  religion  in  which  Camus  was  

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   49
raised,  as  a  young  adult  he  became  fascinated  with  early  Christian  
thought, the distance from religion that his upbringing entailed allowing 
him  to  approach  the  philosophical  side  of  Christianity,  and  evaluate  it  
from the outside. This early interest in Christianity as philosophy inspired 
him  to  write  his  dissertation  on  Plotinus  and  Saint  Augustine  for  the  
Diplôme  d’Études  Supérieures ,  which  he  submitted  to  the  University  of  
Algiers  in  1936  (Camus   2006c ,  I:  999–1081).  Religion  had  of  course  
been a complicated issue in France ever since the country’s ‘dechristian -
isation’ during the Revolution, but neither politicised  laïcité  nor existen -
tialism’s Nietzschean mantra of ‘God is dead’ would inspire anti-clericalism 
in Camus, and he continued to engage with Christian thought through -
out the entirety of his career. As Matthew Sharpe put it, ‘We will con -
tinually  see’  evidence  that  ‘Camus’  thought  developed  in  continual,  
decisive dialogue with Catholic writers ... [and] the Christian tradition’ 
(Sharpe  2015 , 102).
Of  course,  Camus’  concern  with  religion  comes  not  from  a  place  of  
belief, but rather from a preoccupation with human finitude, and a yearn -
ing  for  meaning  and  coherence  in  the  face  of  suffering  and  death.  
Nevertheless, his engagement with Christian thought is so extensive that 
interpretations of his stance vary tremendously. Despite his being a self-  
professed  agnostic,  many  writers  continue  to  refer  to  ‘Camus’  atheism’  
(e.g. Blackburn  2011 , 315), while one critic, who refers to Camus as ‘the 
lay  saint’,  claims  that  while  Camus  was  ‘profoundly  opposed  to  all  
Christianity stands for’ (Peyre  1960 , 23), he ‘found himself posthumously 
serving  as  a  theme  for  many  sermons’  (Peyre   1960 ,  20).  Others  have  
called him ‘a religious thinker’ and ‘a religious moral philosopher’ (Hanna 
1956 , 224), or suggested that ‘Camus’s apparently anti-religious thought’ 
is marked as ‘secretly religious’ by the very fact he considers death to be a 
problem at all—apparently this proves that he ‘works within the essen -
tially  religious  apprehension  that  life,  if  it  is  to  have  meaning,  must  in  
some way be extended’ (Wood  1999 , 93). These supposed ‘subterranean 
theological  residues  at  work  in  Camus’  own  corpus’  (Cristaudo   2011 , 
152), at the extreme, have even inspired several bizarre claims (for which 
there  appears  to  be  no  real  evidence)  that  Camus  in  fact  converted  to  
Christianity in secret. While Jean Sarrochi (a sometime respected Camus 
scholar) called him a ‘crypto-Christian’ (Gaetani  2017 , 51), perhaps the 

50   G. Whistler
strangest of all comes from Protestant Minister Howard Mumma, who 
claims to have befriended and personally converted Camus. The tall tale 
goes like this:
In 2000 a Methodist minister from Ohio by the name of Howard Mumma, 
then 90 years old, wrote a book entitled Albert Camus and the Minister. 
According to Mumma, Camus had been visiting the American Church in 
Paris to listen to organist Marcel Dupré, and during his attendance of the 
services he had become deeply interested in Mumma’s sermons. After a few 
weeks  he  approached  Mumma,  and  a  friendship  between  the  two  men  
developed. According to Mumma, Camus had never really read the Bible 
before  their  meeting—Camus  apparently  had  a  Latin  Bible,  which  he  
would on occasion consult to check a point, but he had not actually read it 
in its entirety. The Protestant Mumma then bought Camus a French trans -
lation  as  a  gift,  which  he  did  read.  As  Mumma  tells  it,  until  that  time,  
Camus had never thought of the Bible as a composition in which allegory, 
symbol,  metaphor,  and  historical  fact  all  weave  seamlessly  to  convey  
insights about the relationship between God and man, which cannot sim -
ply  be  cashed  out  as  empirical  items.  Mumma,  in  other  words,  showed  
Camus  how  to  read  the  Bible  like  any  well-educated  theologian  today.  
(Cristaudo  2011 , 146)
While there is no evidence for the veracity of this story (and indeed 
the  idea  that  Camus,  an  author  so  skilled  at  allegorical  writing,  had  
only  previously  considered  literal  interpretations  of  the  Bible  seems  
preposterous),  it  would  be  careless  to  hastily  dismiss  it  as  the  wishful  
imagination of an old evangelist. The very idea that Camus converted 
to Christianity has serious implications—if the entirety of his thought 
was  simply  a  journey  towards  conversion,  this  undermines  his  entire  
philosophy.  Camus  strove  towards  a  moral  philosophy  that  was  not  
founded  on  religion,  and  such  a  change  of  heart  would  relegate  his  
entire œuvre to a series of stepping stones. Gaetani puts it rather more 
harshly,  saying,  ‘ si  Camus  tombe,  sa  philosophie  tombe  avec  lui ’—if 
Camus falls, his philosophy falls with him (Gaetani  2017 , 60). Rather 
than dismiss this fanciful story as irrelevant, however, it would instead 
be prudent to investigate why it is that a Christian minister would even 
want Camus on his side.

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   51
3    ‘Dialogue  Croyant-Incroyant’
Of course, most believers will attest that faith is not something constant 
and reassuring, despite what some atheists might assume. Believers expe -
rience times of doubt and uncertainty, and in fact these incidents are a 
necessary part of faith; even non-religious philosophers can identify with 
the need to question and investigate our assumptions in order to formu -
late better theories, and thus something resembling certainty. A philoso -
pher like Camus, non-Christian though he may be, nevertheless spent a 
great deal of his career tackling the challenges of Christianity, and saw the 
value in dialogue between believers and non-believers (Camus  2006c , II: 
3  so it is easy to understand why Christians themselves would find  471),
engaging with his works a fruitful pursuit. In fact, there are undoubtedly 
several  key  areas  of  Camus’  philosophy  which  respond  directly  to  
Christian  thought;  these  include  (but  perhaps  are  not  limited  to)  the  
faith/reason dichotomy, suffering, transcendence, and of course morality 
itself. Before demonstrating Camus’ creative approach to such matters, it 
would be prudent to outline his philosophical responses. As we saw in the 
introductory chapter, the absurd, which Camus explains in  Le Mythe de 
Sisyphe , signifies the incongruity between the human desire for meaning 
and order, and the chaos and indifference of the universe. Camus writes 
that ‘The absurd is sin without God’ (Camus  2005 , 40), and by this he 
means that like original sin, humans are born with this curse: it is through 
no fault of our own, but we are condemned to strive for meaning in this 
finite existence. As Wood puts it, the absurd ‘is the sentence passed on us 
by life’ (Wood  1999 , 94). This understanding of humanity’s place in the 
universe is something that acts as a foundation for all of Camus’ philoso -
phy, and it is necessary to keep it in mind when considering his responses 
to Christianity.
In an insightful article, Daniel Berthold ( 2013 ) points out that the 
philosophies of Camus and Kierkegaard are in many ways more similar 
than  they  might  at  first  appear.  While  Kierkegaard  is  very  much  a  
Christian philosopher, the picture of faith he presents is by no means 
one of quiet contentment, it is one of painful struggles in the face of 
obscurity  and  suffering  (Kierkegaard   1974 ).  Kierkegaard’s  concept  of  
anxiety  is  also  extremely  close  to  Camus’  concept  of  absurdity;  both  

52   G. Whistler
illustrate the profound sense of isolation the human experiences facing 
our place in the universe. In turn, Camus certainly seems to have under -
stood the struggle at the heart of faith, writing, ‘I have the impression 
that faith is not so much a peace as a tragic hope’ (Camus  2006c , II: 
4 —quite   contrary   to   Hermet’s   suggestion   that   ‘Christianity    476)
appeared to [Camus] as an illusion, at the same time as a consolation 
and a need at the age when our strength leaves us: it’s a religion for old 
5  As Wood put it, ‘It is within this tradi - people’ (Hermet  1976 , 141).
tion  of  unstable  belief  that  his  thinking  breathes  its  unbelief ’  (Wood  
1999 ,  89).  What  is  often  overlooked,  however,  is  the  reverse  effect,  
which is nevertheless true: Camus’ work exhibits a certain kind of faith -
6 —in  fulness.  Camus’  faith,  however,  is  not  in  God,  but  in  the  Other
human nature—despite the doubt and suffering he saw all around him 
(but, exactly what this faith entails, I shall return to shortly). Camus’ 
faith in human nature, and the rejection of pure reason it entails, can 
also be seen as a ‘tragic hope’ in the light of the World Wars.
While Camus’ Masters dissertation is neither his most mature nor his 
developed  response  to  Christianity,  it  does  illustrate  more  clearly  than  
anywhere else the kind of Christianity that he admired most. He writes, 
‘The dialogue of Faith and Reason is brought to light for the first time by 
Saint Augustine ... Reason becomes more supple. It is illuminated by the 
light of Faith ... It is not  about  God that you must believe, but  in  God’ 
7  Camus, being interested in Christianity  as  phi - (Camus  2006c , I: 1073).
losophy, was content to blur this line between faith and reason. As such, 
the  convergence  between  Greek  and  Christian  thought  that  Camus  
describes  in  this  text  is  perhaps  more  illuminating  in  terms  of  Camus’  
own thought than in the history of ideas—he writes:
[Neoplatonism] is a perpetual effort to reconcile contradictory notions ... 
Mystical Reason, sensitive Intelligence; immanent and transcendent God: 
the  oppositions  abound.  However,  they  all  mark  a  constant  balance  
between the emotional and the intellectual, the religious aspect of the prin -
ciples  and  their  explicative  power.  In  this  dialogue  of  heart  and  Reason,  
truth  can  only  express  itself  in  images  ...  pouring  the  intelligible  into  
  tangible form, giving to intuition that which belonged to Reason. (Camus 
8 2006c , I: 1058–1059)

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   53
Here and elsewhere many of the claims he makes about Plotinus and 
Augustine could just as easily be said of Camus himself, considering his 
reliance on metaphor and imagery in philosophical writing: he was with -
out a doubt ‘Greek in his need for coherence; Christian in the worries of 
9  When he writes that ‘Plotinus  his sensibility’ (Camus  2006c , I: 1063).
describes  intelligence  in  a  sensual  fashion.  His  reason  is  living,  fleshed-   
out,  and  moving  like  a  mixture  of  water  and  light’  (Camus   2006c ,  I:  
10  the style here is straight out of Camus’ own lyrical essays, a pagan  1042),
mixture of carnality and mysticism.
Camus describes what he sees as the Christian ‘disdain for speculation’, 
writing, ‘It is to the children that the Kingdom of God is promised, but 
also to the savants who have known to give up their knowledge in order 
11  While  to understand the truth of the heart’ (Camus  2006c , I: 1010).
this would ordinarily seem like a harsh criticism coming from a philoso -
pher,  we  know  that  Camus  believed  that  reason  is  not  the  sole  key  to  
philosophical truth. As one critic writes:
Camus rejects theories, reasonings, and abstractions as a whole ... A per -
sonal ethic is born in the consideration of the other. Solidarity is revealed 
at the same time as it is felt ... It’s looking at the other as another self. It is 
to give it a face, a form, a limit, it is to register it perhaps first of all in the 
12 spheres of the carnally communicable (Abdelkrim  2006 , 222–223).
This is the kind of secular faith to which he aspires, which is why ‘he 
proceeded less by purely abstract analysis than by personal engagement 
with problems that arose in the course of his life’ (Royal  2014 , 27–28). 
Camus’ vision of ethics is therefore a kind of empathetic empiricism—we 
must feel before we truly know.
For  the  young  Camus,  another  of  the  things  that  was  so  powerful  
about Christianity was its depiction of suffering and death—something 
which we all must face, according to him, on our quest of an authentic 
life in the face of the absurd. In his dissertation on early Christian thought 
(several years before he wrote  Le Mythe de Sisyphe ), he writes:
True  Christians  are  those  who  have  realised  this  triumph  of  the  martyred  
flesh. Jesus being man, the whole stress had been put on his death:   physically, 

54   G. Whistler
we know of hardly anything more horrible. It is ... the torn-up hands and 
cracked joints, that one should contemplate to imagine the terrifying image 
13 of torture that Christianity has made its symbol (Camus  2006c , I: 1007).
He  takes  this  contemplation  of  suffering  to  be  central  to  Christian  
thought. For example, he recounts the story of a fourth-century bishop 
who predicts an impending apocalypse. According to Camus, the genera -
tion  of  Christians  who  believed  in  this  prophecy  represent  a  ‘unique  
example  of  a  collective  experience  of  death’.  Echoing  the  Heideggerian  
concept  of  ‘being-towards-death’  (Heidegger   2010 ),  he  argues  that  ‘To  
realise the idea of death gives our life a new meaning’ (Camus  2006c , I: 
14 —this is a claim which is at the heart of his philosophy, and it is  1007)
therefore clear that Camus would like to replicate this collective experi -
ence of death, in order for us to appreciate the gift of life while we still 
possess it.
But suffering does not only signify the catalyst for authenticity—it is 
also  central  to  Camus’  rejection  of  transcendence.  While,  according  to  
Camus,  contemplation  of  suffering  and  death  is  precisely  what  makes  
humans wish for an afterlife (Camus  2005 , 32), it is also the reason we 
must reject this fantasy—we must never be reconciled to suffering, as to 
legitimise it would be unjust. The idea that an omnipotent God would 
allow  the  existence  of  so  much  suffering,  therefore,  is  unacceptable  to  
Camus, and entails what he refers to as ‘metaphysical injustice’ (Camus 
2000b , 29–31). In a speech entitled ‘The Unbeliever and the Christians’ 
15   which  was  addressed  to  a  congregation  at  a   (Camus  2006c ,  II:  470),
Dominican monastery in 1946, Camus said, ‘I share with you the same 
horror of evil. But I do not share your hope, and I continue to struggle 
against this universe in which children suffer and die’ (Camus  2006c , II: 
16  This is exemplary of Camus’ approach to the problem of suffer - 471).
ing. Not only does he acknowledge the Christian moral response to suf -
fering,  he  also  suggests  that  for  him,  there  could  never  be  a  sufficient  
theodicy. He considers human life to be sacred, and therefore the only 
solution is to fight against cruelty. From a theistic perspective, one might 
attribute meaning to the suffering itself, but from an agnostic perspective 
it  would  make  more  sense  to  accept  that   life  isn’t  fair ,  and  in  fact  the  
existence  of  God  can  feel  irrelevant  when  we  are  truly  touched  by  the  

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   55
suffering of the Other. There is no solution to the problem of suffering, 
and thus this is agnosticism chosen on ethical grounds.
It is because of his approach to suffering and transcendence that Camus 
also rejects the legitimacy of political violence. If we think it just to com -
mit murder in the name of an ideal (no matter how lofty), we believe that 
the  ideal  is  somehow  transcendent  to  human  life.  For  Camus,  the  end  
never justifies the means—morality resides in every action, never a future 
goal  which  justifies  immorality  (Camus   2000b ,  135).  Truly  virtuous  
motives therefore could never permit violence in the name of an ideal—
nothing  is  worth  causing  human  suffering.  Camus,  above  all  then,  
believed in the value of human life. He wanted to demonstrate the value 
of morality in a godless universe, and thus he had a ‘yearning for a non-  
Christian concept of the sacred’ (Rathbone  2017 , 121). Unlike the exis -
tentialists,  Camus  rejected  the  idea  of  radical  freedom.  In   Le  Mythe  de  
Sisyphe ,  he  writes,  ‘The  absurd  does  not  liberate,  it  binds.  It  does  not  
authorise all actions. Everything is permitted does not mean that nothing 
is forbidden’ (Camus  2005 , 65). While he doesn’t develop his moral phi -
losophy fully until later in his career, it is clear from very early on that the 
lack of a guiding power should not mean the lack of morality. But as we 
saw in the previous chapter, for Camus, even moral theory is corruptible. 
As  Cristaudo  put  it,  Camus  ‘shares  a  deep  affinity  with  the  traditional  
Christian  rejection  of  the  idea  of  salvation  through  morality,  and  for  
much the same reason—that the concrete requirements of love cannot be 
compressed into a moral formulation’ (Cristaudo  2011 , 147). The kind 
of morality Camus wished for, then, was more holistic than this—some -
thing  in  fact  much  closer  to  the  Christian  ideal—Camus’  ideal  moral  
philosophy  is  one  of  concern  for  the  Other,  founded  on  empathy  and  
understanding.
The unifying theme of Camus’ third cycle of philosophy was to be, as 
he put it, ‘love’ (Royal  2014 , 25). As he died before its completion, and 
left  behind  only  a  few  vague,  hand-written  notes,  we  can  hardly  guess  
how  his  moral  philosophy  would  have  been  developed  in  these  works.  
From what he published in the years before, however, we can speculate 
on the role he envisaged the concept of love playing in moral philosophy. 
Rowan  Williams,  theologian  and  former  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  
writes that ‘At the heart of the desperate suffering there is in the world, 

56   G. Whistler
suffering  we  can  do  nothing  to  resolve  or  remove  for  good,  there  is  an  
indestructible energy for love’ (Williams  2007 , 10). This is the essence of 
both Christian and Camusian ethics. Indeed, on many occasions, Camus 
spoke  of  love  with  regard  to  ethics.  In   Combat ,  the  French  Resistance  
newspaper that he wrote for and edited, he writes, ‘Humanists have much 
in common with Christians: [Christians] are taught to love their neigh -
bour. Yet others who do not share their faith may yet hope to arrive at the 
same goal’ (Camus  2006a , 32). In his notebooks, he jotted down numer -
ous  notes  about  love,  many  harkening  back  to  a  Christian  ideal.  He  
writes,  ‘Whoever  gives  nothing  has  nothing.  The  greatest  misfortune  is  
17   and   not  to  be  unloved,  but  not  to  love’  (Camus   2006c ,  IV:  1136),
‘Recognise the necessity of enemies. Love that they exist ... Recover the 
greatest  strength,  not  to  dominate  but  to  give.  (Camus   2006c ,  IV:  
18  While he was not alive long enough to properly develop a sus - 1272).
tained account of his philosophical conception of love, we may speculate 
that Camus’ ethics would have continued embody this focus on love as a 
kind of human solidarity, not abstracting from life, or upholding theo -
retical ideals, but responding to the Other with love and compassion (a 
conception of love which represents yet another philosophical difference 
which separates Camus from Sartre and the existentialists).
4    Faith  in Nature
Having seen Camus’ conceptual responses to Christianity on a number 
of themes, it is now time to look at his creative responses. I suggest that 
there are two distinct types of secular faith which are manifest in Camus’ 
works,  specifically  faith  in  the  world  (nature)  and  faith  in  humanity  
(human nature). As has already been made clear in the previous section, 
the  term  ‘faith’  does  not  entail  any  kind  of  constant  reassurance,  but  
instead a hopeful effort to trust, for trust’s own sake. Naturally there are 
differences between the kind of faith or trust we might have in a deity and 
any other kind, but I suggest that the kinds of faith that Camus’ works 
exhibit (in the world and in humanity) add up to and compensate for the 
absence of religious faith. As we will see, the relief that a believer might 
experience in surrendering to the will of God is manifested instead in a 

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   57
kind of communion with the universe which, comparable to a religious 
experience,  depicts  acceptance  of  death  and  trust  in  nature’s  order.  
Meanwhile, the experience of a personal relationship that believers may 
nourish through prayer comes instead from the praxis of cultivating com -
prehension and compassion (an ethical endeavour we can practise in the 
real world which, as I argue throughout this book, can also be facilitated 
by encounters with fiction). Camus’ earlier works are most characterised 
by  the  representation  of  this  faith  in  the  world—a  rejection  of  vertical  
transcendence in favour of horizontal. Conversely, in response to suffer -
ing witnessed in WWII, his later works are predominantly characterised 
by his insistence on the necessity of rebuilding faith in humanity, and a 
firm moral ground which circumvents abstraction. As we will see, each of 
these  categories  is  replete  with  Christian  imagery.  As  one  critic  puts  it,  
‘Camus inverts all religious categories, in the process converting them out 
of their baleful literalism and into the metaphorical’ (Wood  1999 , 94). I 
will  now  attempt  to  demonstrate  a  movement  in  Camus’  work  which  
begins  with  the  subversion  of  Christianity,  but  moves  on  towards  the  
kind of faith in the world which was outlined above.
When Camus wrote in the preface to the English edition of  L’Etranger  
that Meursault is ‘the only Christ we deserve’ (Camus  2000a , 119), this 
contentious comment reflects his subversive approach to religious imag -
ery.  Camus  ‘was  drawn  to  the  figure  of  Jesus  Christ,  because  of  Jesus’  
humanity, his humility, his suffering and his compassion for the suffering 
of  others’  (Blackburn   2011 ,  322),  and  while  it  would  be  farfetched  to  
apply  such  a  definition  to  Meursault,  on  further  examination  it  does  
become clear that he represents a sort of inverted Christ, a misunderstood 
individual who is put to death by the masses. As Patrick writes:
He is offered up as a tribal sacrificial victim, not to placate the whims of a 
revered  god,  but  to  insure  the  validity  of  the  social  structure  ...  Neither  
attempts to save his life, for each knows that, by doing so, he would lose 
the validity of that life, its authenticity and its redeeming quality that are 
only sustained if they are maintained to the end. (Patrick  1975 , 162)
Thus  he  is  a  martyr  in  a  godless  universe,  which  is  characterised  in  
numerous subtle allusions, such as how, on the day of Meursault’s trial, 

58   G. Whistler
his  friend  Emmanuel  fails  to  present  himself  in  court  to  give  evidence.  
Emmanuel, meaning ‘God is with us’ in Hebrew, a name which, at the 
19  persecution, echoes not only, as Scherr writes, an  hour of Meursault’s
‘existential  “absent  God”’  (Scherr   2009 ,  197),  but  also  the  God  whom  
Christ  beseeches  from  the  cross,  ‘My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  
forsaken me?’
There are numerous other subtle moments of allusion to the figure of 
Christ—Meursault is even at one point depicted with a halo—he tells us, 
‘The chaplain looked at me almost sadly. By now I had my back right up 
against  the  wall  and  my  forehead  was  bathed  in  light’  (Camus   2000a , 
114).  This  is  also  manifested  in  his  non-judgemental  acceptance  of  
Raymond  Sintés’  friendship,  a  violently  sinful  man  whom  he  will  ulti -
mately  sacrifice  his  life  for.  Raymond  asks  whether  they  are  ‘ copains ’, 
approximately equivalent to ‘mates’ in English, with its literal origins in 
the Latin ‘with+bread’, that is, sharers of bread (the English ‘companion’ 
originating from the same etymological root). Meursault and Raymond 
are irrevocably bonded by a breaking of bread, as the evening on which 
they dine together is when Meursault is passively coerced into Raymond’s 
grubby  affairs,  which  eventually  lead  to  his  demise.  The  blood  sausage  
and wine upon which they sup are ‘a caricature of the wine and bread that 
are Christ’s body and blood in the Mass and at the Last Supper’ (Scherr 
2009 , 194)—at this Black Mass, it is Meursault who betrays himself. This 
scene also echoes the temptation of Christ in Matthew 4:1–11 and Luke 
4:1–13 (Scherr  2009 , 194–195), in which hunger is a corrupting force, 
but  of  course  Meursault  succumbs  where  Christ  doesn’t.  Meursault  is  
martyred on Raymond’s account, as his violent dispute would no doubt 
have continued if Meursault had not stepped in. He is also the sacrificial 
lamb of societal propriety; in his unflinching honesty he is willing to die 
for authenticity. It is also interesting to note that Raymond shares a sur -
name with Camus’ own mother, Catherine Sintés, a hard-working, illit -
erate woman who was always a symbol of love and innocence for Camus. 
In  Le  Premier  Homme ,  a  fictionalised  autobiography,  he  describes  the  
mother of the protagonist, Jacques Cormery—she led ‘a life resigned to 
suffering’  (Camus   2013b ,  61),  ‘her  gentleness  was  her  faith’  (Camus  
2013b , 129), ‘she does not know Christ’s life except on the cross, yet who 
is closer to it?’ (Camus  2013b , 239), and most strikingly, ‘His mother  is  

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   59
Christ’ (Camus  2013b , 232). This nomenclative decision represents, on 
Camus’ part, a desire to forgive. We are encouraged to contemplate the 
possibility that Raymond Sintés is just as innocent, sinful, and capable of 
suffering as any of us.
But Camus’ symbolic treatment of Meursault as a Christ figure is just 
one element of the novel’s response to Christianity. The mixture of inno -
cence and culpability that Meursault represents, as well as his meaning -
less   martyrdom,   are   both   somewhat   superficial   compared   to   the   
philosophical movements made behind these features, which are far too 
often overlooked. Right at the end of the novel, whilst awaiting execu -
tion, there is a passage of Meursault’s story which most truthfully repre -
sents  Camus’  own  philosophical  stance  in  the  novel.  Meursault,  upon  
contemplating his imminent death, is transfigured. He does not look to 
a higher power to save him from his fate, however, like so many literary 
deathbed conversions. On the contrary, he has a kind of secular epiphany, 
a moment of communion with the world:
I  woke  up  with  the  stars  shining  on  my  face.  Sounds  of  the  countryside  
wafting in. The night air was cooling my temples with the smell of earth 
and salt. The wondrous peace of this sleeping summer flooded into me. At 
that  point,  on  the  verge  of  daybreak,  there  was  a  scream  of  sirens.  They  
were  announcing  a  departure  to  a  world  towards  which  I  would  now  be  
forever  indifferent.  For  the  first  time  in  a  very  long  time  I  thought  of  
mother.  I  felt  that  I  understood  why  at  the  end  of  her  life  she’d  taken  a  
‘fiancé’ and why she’d pretended to start again. There at the home, where 
lives faded away, there too the evenings were a kind of melancholy truce. 
So close to death, mother must have felt liberated and ready to live her life 
again. No one, no one at all had any right to cry over her. And I too felt 
ready to live my life again. As if the great outburst of anger had purged all 
my ills, killed all my hopes, I looked up at the mass of signs and stars in the 
night sky and I laid myself open for the first time to the benign indifference 
of the world. (Camus  2000a , 117)
Here  Meursault  recognises  the  ‘benign  indifference’  of  the  universe  
that he will become part of very soon, as his concerns do not transcend 
death. This does not bring him despair, however, as life from this moment, 
so  close  to  death,  seems  all  the  more  beautiful  and  sacred.  Meursault’s  

60   G. Whistler
understanding  here  even  leads  him  to  empathise  with  his  mother,  his  
recently discovered immanence being something they—and indeed all of 
us—have in common.
The contemplation of immanence that Meursault is swept away by in 
this final scene is something that characterises Camus’ early works, where 
they illustrate a kind of horizontal transcendence. Camus spent his youth 
in  Northern  Algeria,  with  its  breath-taking  (and  to  this  day)  unspoilt  
Mediterranean landscapes, he clearly experienced an acute sense of com -
munion with the world. He writes in  Noces :
Unity  expresses  itself  here  in  terms  of  sea  and  sky.  The  heart  senses  it  
through a certain taste of the flesh that constitutes its bitterness and great -
ness.  I  am  learning  that  there  is  no  superhuman  happiness,  no  eternity  
outside the curve of the days ... Not that we should behave as beasts, but I 
can see no point in the happiness of angels. All I know is that this sky will 
last longer than I shall. And what can I call eternity except what will con -
tinue after my death? What I am expressing here is not the creature’s com -
placency  about  his  condition.  It  is  something  quite  different.  It  is  not  
always easy to be a man, even less to be a man who is pure. But to be pure 
means to rediscover that country of the soul where one’s kinship with the 
world  can  be  felt,  where  the  throbbing  of  one’s  blood  mingles  with  the  
violent pulsations of the afternoon sun. (Camus  1970 , 90)
The kind of transcendence that Camus depicts does not appeal to any -
thing  outside   of  this  world,  it  appeals  precisely   to   this  world—as  some -
thing powerful, beautiful, and incomprehensible, that will outlive us, but 
that we are part of, and will continue to be after we are dead; as David 
Rathbone writes, ‘His concept of transcendence is explicitly this-worldly, 
and  inseparable  from  a  kind  of  hyper-immanence’  (Rathbone   2017 , 
126–127). This horizontal transcendence is therefore almost pantheistic, 
as all the spiritual feeling and profundity of emotion that humanity expe -
riences is part of our physical world. As Camus writes in  La Mort heu -
reuse ,  ‘The  body  has  a  soul  in  which  the  soul  has  no  part’  (Camus  
2013a , 70).
This blurring of the line between physical and spiritual experience is 
portrayed in numerous ecstatic moments in Camus’ works, exhibiting a 
hunger for life and the world which often borders on sexual, as it does 

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   61
Noces  (‘nuptials’ in English). Perhaps brought on by Camus’ own experi -
ence of suffering as a tuberculotic, the life and death of the body becomes 
spiritual in itself, and the will to life almost lustful. In  La Femme adultère , 
a short story from  L’Exil et le Royaume  (Camus  2006b ) the protagonist 
Janine is not adulterous in the literal sense, but in escaping the drudgery 
of her mundane life (accompanying her husband, a travelling salesman, 
on unfulfilling business trips) for a moment in the Algerian wilderness in 
the final scene of the story, she experiences the same kind of horizontal 
transcendence  that  Meursault  and  the  young  Camus  of   Noces   do.  The  
title  is  of  course  taken  from  a  story  in  John  8:3–11,  ‘The  Adulterous  
Woman’, in which Jesus prevents a woman’s stoning by insisting that the 
first stone be cast by one who is free from sin. Here Camus is playfully 
toying with a spiritual/sexual encounter with the world—in his universe 
there is of course nothing sinful about Janine’s illicit consummation with 
nature. Surrendering to the sublime is at once visceral and spiritual, the 
lustful  will  to  live  contrasted  by  humility  before  nature  and  accep -
tance of death.
But the life of the physical is as mundane as it is profound, it consists 
in the everyday, even if we are sometimes able, philosophically speaking, 
to peek behind the curtain. As Claire in  La Mort heureuse  said, ‘On good 
days, if you trust life, life has to answer you’ (Camus  2013a , 73). All we 
can do, as part of this world, is to trust in it, to have faith in the vitality 
which belongs to it, and to us. As Rathbone put it, ‘Thus is transcendence 
conceived by Camus: temporary, pure, and strictly mundane’ (Rathbone 
2017 , 131). This relationship between profoundly spiritual feeling, and 
the mundane physicality of matter we are part of, is so elusive that indeed 
the creative methods favoured by Camus are the only way to speak of a 
faith in it. Rathbone again writes:
It  can  only  be  evoked  with  symbols,  for  life  must  be  transformed  from  
absurdity into meaningfulness by being taken as itself symbolic of the inde -
structibility  of  life  itself.  This  is  not  a  representation  of  an  other-worldly  
eternal  or  immortal  life,  but  an  appreciation  that  the  fleeting  and  fragile  
lives of mortals can themselves come to symbolise the inseparable and ever -
lasting mixture of vitality and mortality that is the reality of all life in this 
world. (Rathbone  2017 , 136)

62   G. Whistler
Camus thus sees the rejection of vertical transcendence as a return to 
something   much   older,   which   predates   Christianity;   for   Camus,   
Christianity  corrupts  horizontal  transcendence  and  the  kind  of  pagan  
communion with the world which celebrates the sacredness of life itself. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  undeniable  that  this  rejection  is  very  much  brought  
into being by his own experience of the events of the twentieth century, 
and the beginnings of an ethical element to this theory might have been 
present in 1942 when  L’Etranger  was published, but the following decade 
crystallised the urgency of such a venture for Camus, as can be seen in the 
development of his ethics throughout the later creative works.
5    Faith in Human Nature
As has become abundantly clear, Camus’ agnosticism by no means ren -
ders life meaningless—despite the absurdity of our condition, human life 
is  sacred  to  Camus.  What  is  also  becoming  more  salient,  too,  is  that  
Camus derives his ethics precisely from the fact that this life is all there is, 
as the suffering in this life becomes more tragic without the mitigating 
power of transcendence. It is therefore in contemplation of the suffering 
of the twentieth century that Camus introduces to his writing a welcome 
and  resounding  faith  in  humanity.  The  philosophical  concept  which  
Camus utilised to expound this type of faith is ‘revolt’, as he formulates 
in  L’Homme  révolté   (Camus   2000b ,  51),  referring  to  a  kind  of  human  
solidarity that we have a duty to acknowledge in this brief existence (refer 
back to the previous chapter for a more in-depth analysis of the concept). 
Alongside this philosophical text, he also develops the idea of revolt in  La 
Peste , an ethical fable which represents the need to struggle in the name 
of the Other, whether that be against disease or totalitarianism.
Throughout  this  novel  there  are  numerous  questions  and  answers  
directed at Christian thought, all within the ethical framework of revolt 
and  solidarity.  Dialogue  between  the  narrator,  Doctor  Rieux,  and  the  
priest, Father Paneloux, are a key area in which these ideas are developed. 
Paneloux’s  responses  to  the  suffering  of  the  plague  is  the  driving  force  
behind many of these conversations: early on in the novel he is able to 

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   63
dismiss the plague as an act of God, a warning to sinners to change their 
ways or be stricken too, echoing the Vichy discourse of penance France 
would have been so familiar with at that time (Ryan  1980 , 149), but as 
he  comes  to  witness  the  suffering  of  innocents  first-hand  he  is  thrown  
into spiritual turmoil. Surely we must trust the divine wisdom and love 
of God in these trying times? Rieux rejects this stance absolutely, telling 
him, ‘I have a different notion of love; and to the day I die I shall refuse 
to love this creation in which children are tortured’ (Camus  2002 , 169). 
Paneloux adopts the rhetoric of fire and brimstone in his sermons, while 
in reality he cannot accept this suffering either, and just like the telling 
nomenclature of Emmanuel in  L’Etranger , he pleads to a seemingly absent 
God,  ‘My  God,  save  this  child!’  (Camus   2002 ,  168).  Elsewhere  in  the  
novel, Tarrou, a fellow combatant of the plague, formulates his own ethi -
cal  response  to  suffering.  His  search  for  morality  without  God  is  a  
Quixotic  endeavour  to  become  ‘a  saint  without  God’  (Camus   2002 , 
196). For Rieux, the difficulties posed simply by being human in the face 
of  universal  suffering  is  enough,  but  Tarrou,  who  realises  that  the  pure  
and perfect ideal of sainthood is something so divorced from our every -
day struggles, believes the task of being human is even more ambitious 
(Camus  2002 , 197).
Of course, Camus believes that the only way for humans to make any 
progress is to work tirelessly at the paradoxically unavoidable and impos -
sible task of simply being human (as indeed he tells us all the way back 
in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe ), and as well as Rieux, he paints other portraits of 
the kind of secular saviour we need to move on from the horrors of war 
and totalitarianism. One such example is d’Arrast, in the short story  La 
Pierre qui pousse  from the collection  L’Exil et le Royaume . Set in a remote 
town in Iguape, Brazil, this is yet another example of Camus’ image of a 
pre-    Christian  world.  While  the  tribal  people  of  the  town  do  observe  
Christianity, it is a ritualistic, pagan interpretation which seems so alien 
to d’Arrast on his arrival, fresh from France. Out of respect and friend -
ship  towards  one  of  the  townspeople  who  is  unable  to  perform  his  
annual ritual of carrying a boulder through the town to the church, he 
takes the task upon himself, instead carrying the boulder (Sisyphus-like) 
to the hearth of his friend, who is suffering from exhaustion, where he is 

64   G. Whistler
welcomed  and  celebrated.  In  this  action,  d’Arrast  sets  a  precedent  for  
the   humanisation   and   secularisation   of   their   practices.   Thomas   
Claire writes:
In examining the wealth of Christian imagery in ‘La Pierre qui pousse’, it 
is essential to note the distinction between d’Arrast and the Christ of the 
Christian tradition as seen by Camus: unlike Christ, who became an insti -
tutionalized figure preaching salvation through faith in the future, d’Arrast 
opens the way for the people of Iguape to find fulfilment in their present 
circumstances by teaching them that man must be directly responsible for 
his actions. (Claire  1976 . 28)
d’Arrast’s  actions  are  in  honour  of  human  frailty  and  kinship  which  
eludes social expectation, the solidarity which inspired him to take up his 
friend’s burden also provoking his subversion of religious rites (as well as 
20  Camus sees  echoing Simon of Cyrene’s shouldering of Christ’s burden).
this as the only possible way forward for any kind of humanist morality, 
as is summed up by the following sentiment taken from the aptly named 
Le Premier Homme . The protagonist, Jacques Cormery, loosely based on 
the young Camus himself, considers himself to be ‘with no past, without 
ethics, without guidance, without religion, but glad to be so and to be in 
the light’ (Camus  2013b , 150). This  ‘Bildungsroman  émotionnelle’ is, as 
21   one critic put is, ‘very much the book of others’ (Grouix  1997 , 189),
and  it  is  easy  to  see  why.  After  the  horrific  events  of  the  early  to  mid-   
twentieth  century,  all  that  is  left  to  do  is  to  start  from  scratch—not  in  
innocence,  like  Adam  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  but  in  experience  and  
humility. In these portrayals of revolt and human solidarity, Camus offers 
examples which encourage faith in humanity.
6    Christianity  and  La Chute
While  La  Chute   is  perhaps  Camus’  most  bleak  novel,  it  is  also  the  one  
that  is  rooted  most  deeply  in  Christian  imagery—so  much  so  that  it  
would be impossible to examine it comprehensively in this short chapter. 
The title obviously alludes to the story of Adam and Eve, and much like 

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   65
that story,  La Chute  mourns a loss of innocence—but of course it is not 
the paradise of the garden of Eden that is lost, but the relative bliss of a 
time  before  the  Holocaust  and  trench-warfare.  The  protagonist,  Jean-   
Baptiste Clamence, a self-proclaimed ‘Judge-Penitent’, confesses his sor -
did life-story to a stranger in a bar over the course of several evenings, and 
leads the reader through a nightmarish version of Amsterdam, the city’s 
concentric  canals  mimicking  the  circles  of  hell  in  Dante’s   Inferno . 
Clamence, unlike his creator, has no sense of the sacred, and his stories 
paint   a   picture   of   feigned   selflessness,   cynicism   and   cowardice.   
Nevertheless, this novel is (as Maher writes) ‘positively crying out for ... 
spiritual redemption’ (Maher  n.d. ). The reader, in the position of a priest 
hearing confession, is told (for example) of the night that Clamence, the 
sole witness to a woman’s suicide as she jumped from a bridge in Paris, 
instead  of  trying  to  save  her  simply  left  the  scene  without  backward  
glance.  Clamence  is  apparently  haunted  by  this  episode  and  ironically  
(considering his namesake John the Baptist) Clamence cannot stand the 
sight of water, and will no longer cross a bridge at night. This sarcastic 
raconteur cannot escape his own sins, let alone cleanse those of others: he 
tells  us,  ‘With  me,  there  is  no  benediction,  no  absolutions  are  handed  
out’  (Camus   2006d ,  82).  The  list  of  such  allusions  and  symbols  in  the  
novel goes on.
While there isn’t room in the current chapter to thoroughly catalogue 
the full wealth of religious imagery in  La Chute , it is certainly important 
to  try  and  understand  the  role  that  Christianity  has  in  this  novel,  and  
Camus’ response to the moral questions which arise in the text. Clamence, 
on the surface, lived a life of virtue. He was a lawyer who specialised in 
representing vulnerable people (such as widows and orphans), went out 
of his way to perform good deeds, and was duly successful and celebrated 
for it. But Clamence is the epitome of a selfish moralist—he does all the 
right things for all the wrong reasons. When Clamence finally owns up 
to  himself  about  his  duplicitous  egotism,  he  abandons  his  career  and  
adopts  the  mysterious  title  of  ‘Judge-Penitent’,  seeking  (or  so  it  seems)  
22  He confesses his mis - redemption through the practice of confession.
treatment of women, numerous misdeed and betrayals, and even a bizarre 
episode in which he adopts the position of ‘Pope’ presiding over a POW 
camp, and legitimises stealing water from a dying prisoner because of his 

66   G. Whistler
fictitious  spiritual  importance.  But  unfortunately  for  Clamence,  where  
there is no God, there is no divine redemption. Maher writes, ‘The exis -
tentialists had killed God, yet they offered nothing to replace Him, thus 
leaving a guilt-ridden man like Jean-Baptiste Clamence with nowhere to 
turn ... And so he turns to his only alternative, his fellow man’ (Maher 
n.d. ). And so Clamence spends his days in bars, waiting for a sympathetic 
listener (reader) to come along and share in his spiritual anguish.
While  it  is  true  that  Clamence  has  no  one  to  turn  to  but  his  fellow  
man, it is not the case, that  La Chute  ‘provides no answers, only painful, 
almost desperate questions’, as Maher goes on to suggest (Maher  n.d. ). 
Through  Clamence’s  endless  embittered  chatter,  the  desire  for  a  Christ  
figure is ever present. He recounts an anecdote about a man who, whilst 
a friend was imprisoned, spent every night sleeping on a hard floor out of 
solidarity to his friend. When Clamence asks, ‘Who would sleep on the 
floor for us, my dear sir?’ (Camus  2006d , 21), the simple humility and 
solidarity that Clamence begs for in such a question, however, is nothing 
miraculous or transcendent—in fact this moving image of self-sacrifice is 
purely human. This is the kind of gesture that echoes Camus’ emphasis 
on love and solidarity that we have already seen elsewhere, and in fact, as 
Barry and Paterson write, ‘Camus seems to be telling us that the key to 
human  community  or  communion  is  found  in  the  human  Christ  who  
alone  was  free  and  willing  to  “sleep  on  the  floor  for  us”’  (Barry  and  
Paterson  1976 , 41), and thus  La Chute  ‘may ... be read as an extended 
struggle towards dialogue and relation’ (Barry and Paterson  1976 , 38). In 
the world of  La Chute , there is no God, no ultimate redemption, and we 
must live with our guilt—but through recognition of our position in the 
world, and solidarity with our fellow human beings, we can all take on 
the role of the human Christ, and have faith in each other.
7    Chapter  Conclusion
As we have seen, Camus spent a great deal of his career responding to the 
questions  raised  by  Christianity,  particularly  focusing  on  theological  
responses to suffering. Camus’ non-belief is not motivated by nihilism, or 
even  scepticism  towards  mysticism  or  concepts  of  the  sacred—in  fact  

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   67
Camus’  creative  works  demonstrate  his  understanding  and  respect  for  
these  aspects  of  Christian  thought  and  writing.  As  John  Cruickshank  
writes, ‘What makes Camus so significant, and in many ways representa -
tive, a figure of his own generation is the fact that he experienced a reli -
gious  need  in  its  widest  sense  yet  was  unable  to  accept  religious  belief ’  
(Cruickshank  1967 , 324). Camus personally rejects Christianity on the 
grounds that he can see no reason that suffering could ever be legitimised, 
but  his  critique  of  Christianity  is  really  only  aimed  at  ‘phantasmic  
Christianity,  that  is,  Christianity  when  it  is  pathological  in  its  other -
worldliness,  and  either  indifferent,  masochistic,  or  destructive  to  the  
world’  (Cristaudo   2011 ,  154),  and  thus  he  continued  to  engage  with  
Christian  thought,  his  ‘brilliant  working  at  the  frontier  between  belief  
and unbelief ... and his effort to live honestly and decently despite the 
ideological horrors of the twentieth century’ (Royal  2014 , 26) character -
ising his creative works, and motivating his choice of Christian symbol -
ism to illustrate moral problems.
In this chapter I have given a brief account of Camus’ ethical response 
to  suffering,  demonstrating  just  some  of  the  instances  in  his  creative  
works when he has used Christianity as a springboard for developing his 
moral response to the chaos of the early to mid-twentieth century. From 
secular  Christ-figures  to  prophetic  plagues,  Camus  elaborated  his  need  
for a secular faith explicitly through Christian symbolism, thereby dem -
onstrating both his respect for Christian thought and scripture, as well as 
critiquing the ways in which its morality failed to respond to the suffering 
around him. As one critic writes, ‘The works of Camus ... have asked the 
right questions and constrained Christians to evolve ever more satisfac -
tory  answers  to  them’  (Peyre   1960 ,  21).  Through  his  rich  weaving  of  
Christian imagery and humanist ethics, Camus formulates a kind of faith 
that  he  sees  as  the  only  way  to  move  forward—faith  in  nature  and  in  
humanity itself. Given the extent to which Camus investigated Christian 
theology, it is hardly a surprise that Minister Mumma saw his potential as 
a powerful ally. After all, what could be more persuasive in the process of 
conversion than the idea that Camus, who had voiced so many nuanced 
concerns   with   Christianity,   had   finally   had   his   doubts   assuaged?   
Unfortunately for Mumma, Camus’ stance on Christianity is by now too 
clear  to  make  his  story  believable—nevertheless,  Camus’  responses  to  

68   G. Whistler
Christianity should earn him a place in Christian ethics for many years to 
come. Having examined Christianity as a key conceptual springboard for 
Camus’ ethics, and analysed his theoretical and creative responses to it, 
the  following  chapter  will  now  move  on  to  Camus’  own  metaphysical  
understanding of the universe. Returning to the concept of the absurd (as 
discussed  in  Chap.   1),  Chap.   3  aims  to  unpack  the  various  rhetorical  
devices used in  L’Etranger , arguing that these creative methods encourage 
a kind of non-propositional engagement with the concept of the absurd.
Notes
1.  In French, ‘Je lis souvent que je suis athée, j’entends parler de mon athé -
isme. Or ces mots ne me disent rien, ils n’ont pas de sens pour moi. Je ne 
crois pas à Dieu  et  je ne suis pas athée’.
2.  This  chapter  is  adapted  from  an  earlier  article  originally  published  in  
Nordisk  judaistik/Scandinavian  Jewish  Studies ,  under  the  title  ‘“ Saints 
without  God”:  Camus’s  poetics  of  secular  faith ’  (Whistler   2018a ) .   I  am  
much indebted to the journal for granting me permission to revisit this 
material here.
3.  In French, ‘un dialogue croyant-incroyant’.
4.  In  French,  ‘j’ai  l’impression  que  la  foi  est  moins  une  paix  qu’une  
espérance tragique’.
5.  In French, ‘Le christianisme lui est apparu alors comme une illusion, en 
même temps qu’une consolation et un besoin à l’âge où les forces nous 
abandonnent: c’est une religion de vieillards’.
6.  My conception of ‘The Other’ is roughly in line with that of Levinas’ (as 
developed in Levinas  1987 , and elsewhere), but it is not within the scope 
of the current book to engage with Levinas’ work in any great detail.
7.  In French, ‘La dialogue de la Foi et de la Raison est mis pour la première 
fois en pleine lumière par Saint Augustin ... Cette raison s’assouplit. Elle 
s’éclaire des lumières de la Foi. ... Ce n’est pas à Dieu qu’il faut croire, 
mais  en Dieu’ .
8.  In French, ‘C’est un perpétuel effort pour concilier des notions contra -
dictoires  ...  Raison  mystique,  Intelligence  sensible,  Dieu  immanent  et  
transcendant,  les  oppositions  abondent.  Elles  marquent  toutes  cepen -
dant un balancement constant entre le sensible et l’intellectuel, l’aspect 
religieux des principes et leur pouvoir explicative. Dans ce dialogue du 

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   69
cœur et de la Raison, la vérité ne peut s’exprimer que par des images ... 
couler l’intelligible dans une forme sensible, rendre à l’intuition ce qui 
appartenait à la Raison’.
9.  In French, ‘Grec par son besoin de coherence, Chrétien par les inquié -
tudes de sa sensibilité’.
10.   In French, ‘Plotin décrit l’intelligence de façon sensuelle. Sa Raison est 
vivante, étoffée, émouvante comme un mélange d’eau et de lumière’.
11.   In French, ‘C’est donc aux enfants que le Royaume de Dieu est promis, 
mais aussi aux savants qui ont su dépouiller leur savoir pour comprendre 
la vérité du cœur’, ‘Ce dédain de toute spéculation’.
12.   In  French,  ‘Camus  rejette  en  bloc  les  théories,  les  raisonnements,  les  
abstractions  ...  Une  éthique  personnelle  voit  le  jour  dans  la  prise  en  
considération  de  l’autre.  La  solidarité  se  révèle  en  même  temps  qu’elle  
s’éprouve ... C’est regarder l’autre comme un autre soi-même. C’est lui 
donner un visage, une forme, une limite, c’est l’inscrire peut-être avant 
toute chose dans les sphères du charnellement communicable’.
13.   In French, ‘les vrais Chrétiens sont ceux qui ont réalisé ce triomphe de la 
chair martyrisé. Jésus étant homme tout l’accent a été porté sur sa mort: 
on ne connait guère de plus horrible physiquement. C’est ... aux mains 
déchirées et aux articulations craquelées, qu’il faut songer pour imaginer 
le terrifiant image de torture que le Christianisme a érigée en symbole’.
14.   In French, ‘l’exemple unique d’une expérience collective de la mort ... 
réaliser  cette  idée  de  la  mort  revient  à  doter  notre  vie  d’un  sens  
nouveau.
15.   In French, ‘L’Incroyant et les Chrétiens’.
16.   In  French,  ‘Je  partage  avec  vous  la  même  horreur  du  mal.  Mais  je  ne  
partage pas votre espoir et je continue à lutter contre cet univers où des 
enfants souffrent et meurent’.
17.   In French, ‘Qui donne rien n’a rien. Le plus grand malheur n’est pas de 
ne pas être aimé, mais de ne pas aimer.’
18.   In French, ‘Reconnaître la nécessité des ennemis. Aimer qu’ils soient ... 
Récupérer  la  plus  grande  puissance,  non  pour  dominer  mais  pour  
donner.’
19.   The figurative images which abound in Camus’ portmanteau nomencla -
ture of the name Meursault (in  L’Etranger ) or Mersault (in  La Mort heu-
reuse ) are truly striking. This name evokes numerous words and meanings 
in French;  la mer  (the sea),  meurs  (a form of the verb ‘to die’),  la mère  
(mother),  le soleil  (the sun),  le sol  (meaning ‘soil’ or ‘earth’), and  un saut  
(a leap). The name conjures other more complex images, such as a leap 

70   G. Whistler
in  to  death  (‘ meurt ’  and  ‘ saut ’),  the  giving  of  the  mother  to  the  earth  
(‘ mère ’ and ‘ sol ’), as Meursault does in  L’Etranger , and the deadly heat of 
the sun (‘ meurt ’ and ‘ soleil ’) which overcomes Meursault on that fateful 
day at the beach. See Longstaffe ( 2007 , 80) for further discussion of this 
topic.
20.   A dimension of this story which was pointed out to me by Prof Sophie 
Bastien.
21.   In French, ‘ Le Premier Homme  est bien le livre des autres’.
22.   See Whistler ( 2018b ) for a fuller examination of the role of confession in 
Camus’ work.
References
Abdelkrim,  Zedjiga.  2006.  Le  discours  moral  de  la  chair.  In   Albert  Camus:  
l’exigence  morale ,  ed.  Agnès  Spiquel  and  Alain  Schaffer,  221–230.  Paris:  Le  
Manuscrit.
Barry,  Catherine,  and  William  Paterson.  1976.  The  Concepts  of  Community  
and Christology in Camus’ The Fall.  Christianity and Literature  25: 37–42.
Berthold,  Daniel.  2013.  Kierkegaard  and  Camus:  Either/Or?   International 
Journal of Philosophy and Religion  73: 137–150.
Blackburn,  Vivienne.  2011.  Albert  Camus:  The  Challenge  of  the  Unbeliever.  
Scottish Journal of Theology  64 (3): 313–326.
Camus,  Albert.  1970.   Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays .  Edited  by  Philip  Thody.  
Translated by Ellen Conroy Kennedy. New York: Vintage.
———. 2000a.  The Outsider . Translated by Joseph Laredo. London: Penguin.
———. 2000b.  The Rebel . Translated by Anthony Bower. London: Penguin.
———. 2002.  The Plague . Translated Robin Buss. London: Penguin.
———.   2005.    The   Myth   of   Sisyphus .   Translated   by   Justin   O’Brien.   
London: Penguin.
———.  2006a.   Camus  at  Combat:  Writing  1944–1947 .  Edited  by  Jacqueline  
Lévi-Valensi. Oxford: Princeton University Press.
———.   2006b.    Exile   and   the   Kingdom .   Translated   by   Carol   Cosman.   
London: Penguin.
———. 2006c.  Œuvres complètes I–IV.  Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi et al .  
Paris: Gallimard.
———. 2006d.  The Fall . Translated by Justin O’Brien. London: Penguin.
———. 2013a.  A Happy Death . Translated by Richard Howard. London: Penguin.

2    A Post-Christian Ethics   71
———. 2013b.  The First Man . Translated by David Hapgood. London: Penguin.
Claire, Thomas. 1976. Landscape and Religious Imagery in Camus’ ‘La Pierre 
Qui Pousse’.  Studies in Short Fiction  13 (3): 321–330.
Cristaudo, Wayne. 2011. The Johannine Christianity of Albert Camus.  Culture, 
Theory and Critique  52 (2–3): 145–161.
Cruickshank, John. 1967. Albert Camus: Sainthood without God. In  Mansions 
of the Spirit: Essays in Literature and Religion . Edited by George A. Panichas. 
New York: Hawthorn.
Gaetani, Giovanni. 2017. ‘Les avocats de Camus’: faire le point sur les différen -
tes  tentatives  de  christianiser  sa  vie  et  sa  pensée.  In   Albert  Camus:  Carte  
Blanche . Le Pontet: Barthélemy.
Grouix, Pierre. 1997. Sens du monde, sens des autres: lyrisme humain et altérité 
dans  Le Premier Homme . In  Camus et le Lyrisme , ed. Jacquéline Lévi-Valensi 
and Agnès Spiquel, 183–194. Paris: Sedes.
Hanna, Thomas L. 1956. Albert Camus and the Christian Faith.  The Journal of 
Religion  36 (4): 224–233.
Heidegger,  Martin.  2010.   Being  and  Time .  Translated  by  Joan  Stambaugh.  
Albany: SUNY.
Hermet, Joseph. 1976.  Albert Camus et le Christianisme . Paris: Beauchesne.
Kierkegaard, Søren. 1974.  The Sickness unto Death . Translated by Walter Lowrie. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1987.  Time and the Other . Translated by Richard A. Cohen. 
Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.
Longstaffe,  Moya.  2007.   The  Fiction  of  Albert  Camus:  A  Complex  Simplicity . 
Bern: Peter Lang International Academic Publishers.
Maher,  Jimmy.  n.d.   Camus,  The  Fall,  and  the  Question  of  Faith .  Accessed  30  
October 2017.  http://maher.filfre.net/writings/camus.htm
Patrick, Henry. 1975.  Voltaire and Camus: The Limits of Reason and the Awareness 
of Absurdity . Banbury: The Voltaire Foundation.
Peyre, Henri. 1960. Camus the Pagan.  Yale French Studies  25: 20–25.
Rathbone, David. 2017. Postscript. In  Between Plotinus and Saint Augustine by 
Albert Camus . Translated and edited by David Rathbone. Accessed 5 February 
2018.  http://www.academia.edu/11350881/Albert_Camus_Between_Plotinus_  
and_Saint_Augustine_ .
Royal, Robert. 2014. Camus: Between God and Nothing.  First Things .
Ryan, Stephen. 1980. Pétain and Vichy: Abandonment, Guilt, ‘Love of Harlot,’ 
and Repetition Compulsion.  The Journal of Psychohistory  8 (2, Fall): 149.
Scherr, Arthur. 2009. Meursault’s Dinner with Raymond: A Christian Theme in 
Albert Camus’s  L’Etranger .  Christianity and Literature  58 (2): 187–210.

72   G. Whistler
Sharpe,  Matthew.  2015.   Camus,  Philosophe:  To  Return  to  Our  Beginnings . 
Leiden: Brill.
Todd, Olivier. 1996.  Camus: Une Vie . Paris: Gallimard.
Whistler, Grace. 2018a. ‘Saints without God’: Camus’s Poetics of Secular Faith. 
Nordisk judaistik/Scandinavian Jewish Studies  29 (1): 49–61.
———.  2018b.  ‘Forgive  Me  Reader,  for  I  Have  Sinned’:   Disponibilité   and  
Confession in the Works of Albert Camus.  Life Writing  15 (3): 385–397.
Williams, Rowan. 2007.  Tokens of Trust . London: Canterbury Press.
Wood, James. 1999. Camus and Twentieth-Century Clarity: The Sickness unto 
Life.  The New Republic .

3
Narrating the Absurd
1    Chapter  Introduction
Whenever Albert Camus is discussed outside of Camus scholarship, the 
first of his works mentioned is without exception  L’Etranger ; it therefore 
seems prudent to dedicate the first extended case study of this book to the 
novel .  Too often dismissed as a youthful manifesto of indifference, this 
text  is  in  fact  a  lot  more  ambitious  than  that.  Certainly,   L’Etranger   is  a  
philosophical novel concerned with the absurd (a concept that was exam -
ined in Chap.  1), but to really appreciate the full depth of this novel, it is 
necessary to examine the stylistic and linguistic intricacy of Camus’ com -
position. While a number of articles make an attempt at this task (a selec -
tion  of  which  I  will  make  reference  to  later  on),  they  are  by  no  means  
definitive: not only do they tend to have a rather narrow scope, and there 
is  also  a  distinct  lack  of  communication  between  French  and  English  
language scholarship on the matter. Consequently, the following chapter 
will  try  to  formulate  a  more  holistic  account  of  the  stylistic  venture  of  
L’Etranger ,  whilst  also  attempting  to  bridge  the  French/English  divide  
that is so prominent in the literature. While this is a worthwhile goal in 
73 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_3

74   G. Whistler
itself,  I  pursue  it  with  the  intention  of  backing  up  a  more  substantial  
claim: that Camus strives for an authenticity of style which allows us to 
see into the world of Meursault and his own encounter with the absurd. 
I suggest that Camus wants us to experience this world in as unmediated 
a fashion as possible, in order for its moral and philosophical content to 
come across more poignantly (as opposed to the dry exposition of logic-  
based prosed that I argued against in Chap.  1). As we have already seen, 
for Camus meaning lies not in the world itself, but in our ability to create 
meaning—something which Meursault himself is only able to do when 
he is forced to leave his world behind. Another task of the current chap -
ter,  following  the  lead  of  Chap.   1,  is  therefore  to  map  out  the  relation  
between the stylistic form of the novel and its philosophical content.
In a 1946 essay on the task of the writer, George Orwell writes:
A  scrupulous  writer,  in  every  sentence  that  he  writes,  will  ask  himself  at  
least four questions, thus: What am I trying to say? What words will express 
it? What image or idiom will make it clearer? Is this image fresh enough to 
have  effect?  And  he  will  probably  ask  himself  two  more:  Could  I  put  it  
more  shortly?  Have  I  said  anything  that  is  avoidably  ugly?  (Orwell  
2004 , 113)
Camus’  L’Etranger   demonstrates  just  the  kind  of  scrupulousness  that  
Orwell describes. Every word is in its right place, and the style is striking 
in its economy. The simplicity of the style gives the reader a real sense of 
the man Meursault—even what is left out communicates volumes about 
his  personality.  We  shall  explore  in  more  detail  later  how  the  simple  
descriptions  express  indifference,  his  blunt  dialogue  betrays  his  social  
clumsiness,  and  the  novel  as  a  whole  invokes  an  authentic  experience  of  
the man and the absurd world he lives in. As a writer similarly concerned 
with authenticity, Orwell makes claims in his theoretical essays (such as the 
one quoted above) that will help me to elucidate my own. I will therefore 
utilise Orwell’s ideas on style, as well as Richard Lehan’s essays on Camus’ 
American heritage and Sartre’s own commentary on  L’Etranger  (two com -
mentaries  which  are  as  relevant  and  insightful  today  as  they  were  at  the  
time of publication), as a means of unpacking Camus’ stylistic venture in 
the novel. In the next section (Sect.  2), I will begin my examination of the 

3    Narrating the Absurd   75
style  of   L’Etranger   by  making  reference  to  some  important  influences  of  
Camus’, that is, Ernest Hemingway and James M. Cain, suggesting that 
Camus continued their search for stylistic authenticity in his own work. 
The following section (Sect.  3) will take a look at a particular stylistic fea -
ture of  L’Etranger  which is regularly overlooked by English scholarship—
that  is,  Camus’  innovative  use  of  the  French   passé  composé   tense.  Here  I  
examine the consequences of such a choice, in terms of linguistic rhythm, 
philosophical and social implications, and the unusual temporal vantage 
point this tense lends to the novel. In the final section (Sect.  4), I turn to 
the philosophy behind the style. Most readers of Camus are familiar with 
the concept of the absurd, but here I suggest that  L’Etranger  goes beyond 
this concept, and that through our experience of the mind of Meursault 
(facilitated by Camus’ stylistic innovation), we are able to accompany our 
protagonist on his moral and philosophical journey.
2    Authenticity and the Form of Thought
Despite  the  75  years  since  its  publication,   L’Etranger   is  still  unable  to  
shake-off its reputation as a kind of nihilistic rite of passage; this is per -
haps to do with Camus’ association with the existentialist movement. At 
the heart of existentialism are the tenets of authenticity and radical free -
dom, and for many, this is what Meursault appears to represent. But as 
Jacob Golomb put it, ‘Meursault does not become a hero of authenticity 
because he kills the Arab without any reasonable motive. His authenticity 
is acquired only after the murder, and more precisely, after he is sentenced 
to death’ (Golomb  1994 , 270). Only when his freedom, and ultimately 
his life, is being taken away from him is Meursault able to realise that his 
life is not just a matter of indifference—he loves his life and is loath to 
leave  it  all  behind.  And  so,  this  is  a  novel  about  authenticity,  but  that  
authenticity isn’t to be found where it is usually sought. However, I sug -
gest that authenticity is not only a focal point of Meursault’s philosophi -
cal   epiphany—the   novel’s   style   is   also   painstakingly   crafted   with   
authenticity  in  mind.  But  Camus  is  by  no  means  original  in  this  ven -
ture—the relation between the simplicity of prose and the authenticity of 
communication can naturally be traced back to the American Novel.

76   G. Whistler
In  his  commentary  on   L’Etranger ,  Sartre  cited  an  apparently  popular  
idea   that    L’Etranger    resembles   something   like   ‘Kafka   written   by   
Hemingway’ (Sartre  2007 , 88) and this comparison, while imprecise, hits 
on something important. Like Kafka, Camus’ subject matter is the incom -
prehensibility of the human experience, but like the novels of Hemingway, 
the style of  L’Etranger  is often clipped, brief, and abrupt. It is not within 
the  scope  of  this  chapter  to  address  what  we  might  call  ‘the  Kafka  in  
L’Etranger ’ (this will be returned to in the following chapter), but this sec -
tion will examine ‘the Hemingway in  L’Etranger’  in some detail. While the 
prose of these novels is simpler than many, there is more going on here 
than immediately meets the eye; in fact, their simplicity is an attempt to 
communicate the human experience nakedly, without appealing to grand 
literary sensibilities that might detract from the force of the novel.
‘The American Novel’ is characterised above all by a desire for authen -
ticity: authentic characters, descriptions, sensations, and language are the 
most recognisable features of these works. Camus has traditionally been 
compared most often to Hemingway, and there certainly are similarities. 
Richard Lehan’s comparative studies of  L’Etranger  and  The Sun Also Rises  
offer some insights into how the styles of these novels achieve this feeling 
of authenticity, pointing out how sentence structure seems to reflect the 
characters’ developing awareness of the world around them. He writes:
The nouns are syntactically structured with anticipatory subjects, or with 
predicate adjectives, so that a noun usually precedes an adjective, empha -
sizing that the narrator first becomes aware of things and then responds to 
their qualities... The object of each sentence usually becomes the subject of 
the next clause. (Lehan  1964 , 236)
Take for example, the sentence, ‘The trees were big, and the foliage was 
thick’ (Hemingway  2004 , 102), recounted by Jake Barnes in Hemingway’s 
1926 novel, or the phrase ‘un petit chalutier qui avançait, imperceptible -
1   from  Camus’   ment  dans  la  mer  éclatante’  (Camus   2006 ,  I:  169),
Meursault.  The  little  details  are  given  morsel  by  morsel,  following  on  
from each other with their own kind of natural, temporal logic, allowing 
the reader to experience the world of the character with immediacy. As 
Lehan put it, ‘Mind and emotion are caught up in the natural sequence 

3    Narrating the Absurd   77
of things’ (Lehan  1964 , 236)—in other words, the style in both of these 
novels  allows  us  to  experience  the  world  from  the  vantage  point  of  the  
protagonists, as they encounter it.
Because of similarities such as this, it is often overlooked that, at the 
time  of  writing   L’Etranger ,  Camus  was  heavily  influenced  by  James  
M. Cain’s 1934 novel,  The Postman Always Rings Twice  (Adam and Noël 
1995 , 66) .  This novel (though not as well-known as its filmic adaptation) 
is a classic American Novel. Its characters are down to earth, unpreten -
tious people, and though the plot is dramatic and suspenseful, it is highly 
believable—authentic.  The  plot  of  Cain’s  novel  itself  is  also  somewhat  
similar to that of  L’Etranger.  Richard Lehan remarks:
The  climax  of  each  novel  is  a  murder  followed  by  litigation;  the  novels  
conclude in a murder-cell, the hero waiting ultimate execution, talking or 
writing to a priest. Both Frank Chambers and Meursault are social misfits, 
passive  heroes  who  respond  to  immediate  stimuli,  react  rather  than  act.  
The novels are told from an immediate point of view, secure narrative com -
pression, and employ retrospective narration; they end ironically with the 
hero dying for a crime other than the one for which he is guilty; each novel 
secures a prophetic sense of doom and anticipates the hero’s fate; both use 
the climax tendentiously. Cain’s novel, of course, lacked a symbolic struc -
ture and a metaphysical frame of reference. (Lehan  1964 , 235)
Here  Lehan  points  out  some  key  narrational  and  structural  similari -
ties, and he is right to emphasise the difference being the lack of philo -
sophical content in Cain’s novel (we shall return to the philosophy behind 
L’Etranger  later on in this chapter).
Perhaps the most distinctive feature of the style of  L’Etranger  is its short 
sentences. Throughout the novel, the first-person narrative in which the 
story is told, as well as Meursault’s interactions with other characters, are 
both  characterised  by  concise  sentences.  For  example,  take  the  famous  
opening lines of the novel, ‘Aujourd’hui, maman est morte. Ou peut-être 
2  One need look no further than  hier, je ne sais pas’ (Camus  2006 , I: 141).
the  very  first  page  to  characterise  the  thoughts  of  Meursault—they  are  
truncated and follow on from one another in an abrupt fashion. We get 
a  sense  that  the  way  in  which  the  world  presents  itself  to  Meursault  is  

78   G. Whistler
uncomplicated and un-analytic. He tells us later on, ‘I’d rather got out of 
the habit of analysing myself ’ (Camus  2000 , 65), but it is not just himself 
that he accepts without question, it is everything he encounters. From his 
friendship with the dubious Raymond to his physical surroundings, the 
short  sentences  in  which  he  expresses  himself  mimic  his  thought  pro -
cesses, offering a window into Meursault’s subjectivity.
When  Meursault  is  triggered  to  reflect  further,  these  afterthoughts  
either  follow  in  a  second  short  sentence  or  follow  a  conjunction,  for  
example, the following sentence describing the behaviour of the inhabit -
ants  of  the  retirement  home:  ‘Ils  se  taisaient  quand  nous  passions.  Et  
3  This  derrière nous, les conversations reprenaient’ (Camus  2006 , I: 143).
effect has also been commented upon by Renaud. He asks:
Why does Camus keep to these short sentences? For a start, they reflect the 
life of Meursault in recalling the small acts that follow one another without 
any grand logic, or that briskly detach themselves, instead of flowing from 
one to another—that which gives life a unity that Meursault doesn’t ques -
tion.  We  find  many  simple  conjunctions  and  notably  temporal  conjunc -
tions,  likewise  a  large  number  of  temporal  adverbs.  By  contrast,  in  the  
subordinate clauses there are few emotional or volitional connections. This 
truncated  style  also  justifies  itself  on  the  grounds  of  plausibility.  Perhaps  
the reader does not understand it straight away, but soon it becomes appar -
ent  that  the  narrator  is  in  the  process  of  recounting  a  period  of  his  life.  
4 (Renaud  1957 , 295)
In other words, events, scenery, people, all flow past the island that is 
Meursault, giving the reader the impression that all this is happening in 
real-time, momentarily captured by the unquestioning gaze of our pro -
tagonist.  If  we  look  at  the  following  passage  from   The  Postman  Always  
Rings  Twice ,  one  could  easily  make  the  same  observations  as  we  have  
already about  L’Etranger :
Next thing I knew, the guys on the stretcher picked me up and followed the 
young guy, White, out of the courtroom. Then they went with me on the 
double across a couple of halls into a room with three or four cops in it. 
White said something about Katz, and the cops cleared out. They set me 
down  on  the  desk,  and  then  the  guys  on  the  stretcher  went  out.  White  

3    Narrating the Absurd   79
walked around a little, and then the door opened and a matron came in 
with Cora. Then White and the matron went out, and the door closed, and 
we  were  alone.  I  tried  to  think  of  something  to  say,  and  couldn’t.  
(Cain  2005 , 69)
Again, the sentences are short, and the wording simple. Our narrator 
is isolated, watching the world move around him inexplicably, temporal 
conjunctions illustrating the passage of time, moment by moment. Both 
protagonists  are  passive  observers  of  a  world  that  moves  around  them  
without any grand logic, unable to intervene vocally.
Readers who are more familiar with the style of  L’Etranger  have prob -
ably noticed that not all the sentences in the novel are constructed like 
this; there are instances in the novel of longer, more complex grammatical 
structures and more complicated vocabulary, and also repetitions of cer -
tain themes or details. These exceptions are not simply oversights; rather, 
they demonstrate differences in the patterns of Meursault’s thought. Way 
back in 1957, Renaud commented on this effect:
In fact, Meursault recounts the events which lead him to be where he is, 
and, along the way he lingers awhile, inevitably, over certain aspects of his 
precious life as a free man that he didn’t appreciate at the time. Such flash -
backs  evoke  nothing  but  the  liveliest  impressions,  which  for  Meursault  
were above all physical. From which, isolated facts and a repetition of the 
same  themes:  the  sun,  heat,  light,  gestures  of  people  and  above  all  their  
manners,  shining  objects,  meals,  the  beach  and  Marie.  And  finally,  that  
which is simple like life was before the trial, is expressed simply. Of course, 
those that wish to talk of God, the soul or justice use ‘long sentences’ ... 
but   for   Meursault   life   offered   nothing   very   complicated.   (Renaud   
5 1957 , 295)
Meursault is a sensual character, and in his incarceration, he is prone 
to dwelling on those things which are more salient in his memories. But 
here  Renaud  also  points  out  an  important  and  illuminating  contrast—
not only are Meursault’s reflections more detailed when he is recounting 
events which are particularly valuable to him, the language used by his 
interlocutors  when  speaking  of  profound  topics  such  as  spirituality  is  
more  complex  and  ‘literary’.  I  would  add  that  in  those  episodes  of  

80   G. Whistler
Meursault’s own soul-searching, the sentence length and complexity are 
greatly  increased,  for  example,  ‘Comme  si  cette  grande  colère  m’avait  
purgé du mal, vidé d’espoir, devant cette nuit chargée de signes et d’étoiles, 
je  m’ouvrais  pour  la  première  fois  à  la  tendre  indifférence  du  monde’  
6  This, yet again, makes it apparent that the narra - (Camus  2006 , I: 213).
tive of this novel not only represents the  content  of Meursault’s thoughts, 
but  also  the   form   of  them.  Like  that  of  the  American  Novels  it  draws  
upon, the style of  L’Etranger  attempts to communicate the phenomenol -
ogy  of  the  narrator’s  thought  itself.  The  complex  passages  of  the  novel  
which represent a departure from the simplicity of style championed by 
Camus’ American forefathers represents exactly what is missing in novels 
like  The Sun Also Rises  and  The Postman Always Rings Twice —a clear phil -
osophical aim. Through this shift in style and its correspondence to the 
novel’s philosophical content, we as readers are brought from the prob -
lem  of  the  absurd  to  the  solution  of  creating  our  own  meaning.  This  
claim I shall return to later (in Sect.  4). For now, let us turn to a feature 
of  L’Etranger   that  cannot  be  compared  to  anything  found  in  the  
American Novel.
3    The Phenomenology of  Passé Composé
Whilst it is possible to discuss many aspects of the style of  L’Etranger  via 
the use of English translations, it is impossible to examine Camus’ use of 
grammatical  tenses  without  referring  to  the  original  French.  Tenses  
should be considered extremely important in any stylistic analysis of this 
novel, because the simplicity of the sentences means that often there is 
little happening on the surface except a recounting of actions. This heavy 
reliance on action verbs is linked to the preoccupation with authenticity 
discussed in the previous section; as Richard Lehan put it, ‘The twentieth 
century novel employs a prose heavy in verbs. The predominance of verbs 
suggests a distrust of intellectualization and an awareness of man’s tragic 
destiny as a creature subordinated to time and death’ (Lehan  1960 , 44). 
These novels are about human life, which often consists in the everyday 
actions we perform. An analysis of the tenses used in an English language 
novel would bear little fruit, however, compared to the rich and diverse 

3    Narrating the Absurd   81
conjugations  available  in  French.  Thus,  this  section  will  examine  the  
implications of Camus’ innovative use of the  passé composé  tense.
There are two main past tenses in French: the perfect and the imper -
fect.  The  perfect  tense  is  used  when  an  action  is  complete  at  the  time  
spoken of, for example, ‘She ate breakfast this morning’. The imperfect 
tense  indicates  that  the  action  was  ongoing  at  the  time  spoken  of,  for  
example, ‘She was eating breakfast when the telephone rang’. In French, 
the  perfect  tense  can  be  communicated  in  two  ways,  one  informal  and  
spoken,  the   passé  composé   (roughly  ‘composite  past’),  the  other  formal,  
literary and never used in speech, the  passé simple  (‘simple past’).  L’Etranger  
7 , the vernacular, oral construc - is written almost entirely in  passé composé
tion. Camus’ use of this tense sets this novel apart from traditional  romans 
français : the  passé composé  tense is sometimes used in contemporary writ -
ten French, but at the time, Camus’ employment of it is highly innova -
tive as classical French novels are all written in the  passé simple . Several 
French critics have speculated on the reasoning behind this decision, but 
the language barrier entailed in the problem means that it has rarely been 
acknowledged in English language scholarship. As the two different con -
structions differ predominantly in written form, rather than in meaning, 
this may appear to be a superficial choice. In fact, there are several areas 
in which this move gains some palpable significance: rhythm, temporal -
ity, and prestige. This section will explain Camus’ choice in more detail, 
and, drawing on the French scholarship, offer some suggestions as to the 
purpose of such a move.
The  passé composé  tense is formed in French by combining a past parti -
ciple of a verb with the verb ‘ avoir ’ (‘to have’), or the verb ‘ être ’ (‘to be’); 
take,  for  example,  the  construction  ‘Elle   a  mangé ’.  While  this  would  
appear to correspond to constructions in English such as ‘She has eaten’, 
the meaning of  passé composé  constructions is closer to the simpler form, 
‘She ate’. In standard literary French ( passé simple ), one would use ‘Elle  
mangea’.  Notice how the  passé composé  construction means that the verb 
is comprised of two halves—one derived from  avoir  (the auxiliary verb) 
and another from the main verb (the past participle, in this case ‘ man-
ger ’). Of course, this gives the language of the novel a particular aesthetic 
rhythm. As the novel is composed almost entirely in this tense, nigh on 
every  verb  has  an  added  short  syllable,  the  language  gaining  a   staccato  

82   G. Whistler
quality.  This  once  again  mirrors  the  inner  language  of  Meursault,  the  
disjointed quality of his reflections and observations, aiding an authentic 
experience of his world. Sartre too commented on how the construction 
seems to reflect the detached atmosphere of the novel:
It is to accentuate solitude of each phrase that Camus has chosen to write 
his novel in  passé composé  ... the verb is shattered, broken in two: on one 
side we find a past participle that has lost all transcendence, inert as a thing, 
on the other side the verb ‘to be’ that has nothing but the copular sense, 
that  meets  the  substantive  participle  as  the  attribute  of  the  subject;  the  
transitive character of the verb is unconscious, the sentence is fixed, its real -
ity at present is as a noun. (Sartre  2007 , 94)
The auxiliary verb ( avoir  or  être ) thus represents little but a grammati -
cal placeholder, while the main verb in its preterite form is deprived of its 
usual  flowing  conjugative  action.  The  meaning  of  the  verb  therefore  
seems somehow inert, isolated, and objective, and the rhythm of it dis -
jointed—just like Meursault himself.
Camus’ choice of tense also makes the temporality of  L’Etranger  ambig -
uous. While I have said that there is very little semantic difference aside 
from orthography between the two constructions, it is also true that on 
the rare occasion that  passé composé  is used in formal writing, it is to sig -
nify  that  an  action  occurred  in  the  immediate  past,  whereas  the   passé 
simple ’s traditional use is more historical. This distinction is roughly equal 
to the difference between ‘Elle  a mangé  son petit déjeuner  ce matin ’ (‘She 
ate  her breakfast  this morning ’) versus ‘Elle  mangea  son petit déjeuner  ce 
jour-là ’ (‘She  ate  her breakfast  that day ’). Combined with Camus’ occa -
sional  use  of  the  future  tense  in  the  novel  (e.g.  ‘Je   prendrai   l’autobus  à  
deux heures et j’ arriverai  dans l’après-midi’) (Camus  2006 , I: 141), and 
words  indicating  the  present  moment  (such  as  ‘ Aujourd’hui   maman  est  
morte’) (Camus  2006 , I: 141), this effect means that the narrative is situ -
ated in a point in time which is not severed from the present—as though 
we  are  being  informed  of  the  events  as  they  happen  (Adam  and  Noël  
1995 , 68). The reader is given an impossible vantage point on the world 
of Meursault—he is alone, but we are with him. Not only is the reader 

3    Narrating the Absurd   83
able to engage with an authentic portrayal of the mind of the protagonist, 
we are also able to experience events as they unfold, style offering a phe -
nomenological  window  into  his  very  being,  as  well  as  seeing  the  world  
through his eyes.
Meanwhile,  Étienne  Balibar  comments  on  the  social  implications  
of   Camus’   use   of    passé   composé ,   making   connections   between   
Meursault’s simple language and the educational and linguistic devel -
opment of French children. French children learn  passé composé  long 
before they are taught how to use  passé simple , meaning that naturally 
any literary text written in  passé composé  betrays a certain modesty—if 
not naïveté. This certain child-like familiarity also comes across in the 
way  that  Meursault,  throughout  the  novel,  refers  to  his  mother  as  
‘Maman’,  roughly  equivalent  to  ‘Mum’  or  ‘Mummy’.  But  given  the  
elevated and prestigious nature of  passé simple , the ability to write in 
this tense at all indicates a certain degree of privilege, literary French 
being far less use to the working classes. Balibar writes, ‘The discourse 
of  Meursault  apparently  reflects  reality  laid  bare,  because  this  dis -
course  reproduces  elementary  French  whilst  distorting  it,  indepen -
dently  of  literary  French’  (Balibar   1972 ,  117).  Meursault’s  language  
has  an  authenticity  twinned  with  the  straightforward  aim  of  basic  
communication,  and  indeed  it  is  communication  which  Meursault  
struggles with most. When Meursault faces trial, he is unable to speak 
the  language  of  the  court.  He  is  without  artifice,  both  socially  and  
linguistically, and is therefore at a disadvantage by his inability to use 
the  highfaluting  language  of  legal  and  social  prestige.  But  I  suggest  
that, instead of Meursault’s modest use of language acting as the barb 
of a social critique (as Balibar indicates), the unpretentious simplicity 
of the novel’s style suspends the kind of aesthetic judgement that ele -
vated,  literary  language  invites,  instead  allowing  the  philosophical  
aspects of the novel to become more salient. The resulting effect is a 
phenomenological experience of Meursault’s life, and an understand -
ing,  as  it  were,  ‘from  the  inside’,  of  the  ethical  problems  he  faces.  
Thus, the following section will look into the philosophy present both 
behind  and  within  the style itself.

84   G. Whistler
4    Doing Philosophy in Style
Now  we  have  examined  some  of  the  techniques  utilised  by  Camus  to  
communicate the experience of Meursault, it is time to turn to the philo -
sophical  project  of  the  novel.  Camus,  on  the  first  page  of   Le  Mythe  de  
Sisyphe , tells us that the absurd should be considered merely as a starting 
8  It is not until the publication of  L’Homme  point (Camus  2006 , I: 219).
revolté  that Camus fully develops a moral philosophy, but I suggest that 
L’Etranger  illustrates a philosophical journey which is key to the genesis 
of  Camus’  ethics.  This  section  will  therefore  look  not  only  at  how  the  
philosophy of the absurd is illustrated within the novel, but also how we 
might  learn  morally  from  the  absurd  as  a  starting  point.  Unlike  many  
philosophical  novels,  this  one  doesn’t  address  its  philosophical  content  
directly;  instead  it  is  established  through  descriptions  of  the  sensations  
and experiences of Meursault. George Orwell writes:
When you think of a concrete object, you think wordlessly, and then if you 
want to describe the thing you have been visualising, you probably hunt 
about till you find the exact words that seem to fit it. When you think of 
something  abstract  you  are  more  inclined  to  use  words  from  the  start...  
Probably it is better to put off using words as long as possible and get one’s 
meanings  as  clear  as  one  can  through  pictures  or  sensations.  (Orwell  
2004 , 118–119)
While  the  descriptions  in   L’Etranger   do  of  course  consist  of  words,  
instead of being told abstract statements about philosophy, we are given 
a sense of Meursault as a person through the way that he perceives the 
world  around  him,  and  the  sensations  he  experiences.  As  Sartre  put  it,  
‘We could say that the aim of  The Myth of Sisyphus  is to convey the  idea  
of the absurd. And that of  The Stranger  to convey the  feeling ’ (Sartre  2007 , 
9  He continues, ‘In  The Stranger , [Camus] has attempted to be silent.  85).
But how can one be silent with words? How can one convey the unthink -
able  and  disorderly  succession  of  presents  through  concepts?  This  chal -
lenge  involves  resorting  to  a  new  technique’  (Sartre   2007 ,  87–88).  
Descriptions  of  images  and  sensations  in  the  novel  therefore  point  
towards the more abstract things we could say about Meursault (such as 

3    Narrating the Absurd   85
that he is indifferent or that he struggles to communicate effectively), but 
we remain in the phenomenological realm of sensation, which is where 
Meursault himself truly resides.
If we consider that the philosophical concept of the absurd rests on the 
premise  that  the  universe  is  indifferent  to  our  projects  as  humans,  it  is  
easy to see how the story of Meursault illustrates it. Meursault is a human 
animal, and his pleasure in the sensual side of life; the sun, the sea, and 
sex dominate his character and actions. But the world outside Meursault 
can  be  as  incomprehensible  and  hostile  as  it  is  gratifying;  after  all,  the  
senseless crime Meursault commits which leads to his eventual death is all 
because  of  a  day  out  at  the  beach.  Meursault’s  responses  to  the  world  
around  him  are  incidental,  a  kind  of  cause  and  effect  that  mirrors  the  
universe’s own indifference: he is hungry, he eats; he is asked a question, 
he  answers  plainly;  he  finds  a  woman  attractive,  he  approaches  her.  
Meursault  even  commits  murder  in  unthinking  response  to  physi -
cal stimulus.
Of course, Camus himself has received enormous amounts of criticism 
on account of his authorial decision to have Meursault kill off a nameless 
‘Arab’.  Amash  notes,  ‘Regardless  of  how  he  personally  might  have  felt  
about the matter, Camus had to choose a character whose killing did not 
arouse a great deal of sympathy’ (Amash  1967 , 7), suggesting that French 
attitudes at the time made killing ‘the Arab’ an easy plot device as readers 
might easily dismiss it as a detail of the more important story of Meursault. 
Of course, this does not exactly excuse Camus; as Vincent argues, ‘Camus 
should have known that, even if well-intentioned, the end did not justify 
the  means...  It  was  only  a  matter  of  time  before  the  retreated  Arabian  
death  re-emerged  and  took  a  prominent  place  in  interpretations  of  the  
10   In  Chap.   7,  we  will  examine  Meursault’s   novel’  (Grégoire   2012 ,  93).
culpability in the context of postcolonial theory in greater detail, but the 
purpose of this chapter is to understand Meursault’s world  as he sees it —
blind-spots,  manques morales , and all. We already know Meursault to be 
unreflective, impulsive easily overcome by his senses; King puts it rather 
more bluntly—‘Meursault is essentially self-centred... The Arab doesn’t 
exist  for  him,  not  because  he  is  an  Arab,  but  simply  because  he  is  an  
unknown man. Meursault does not think about the fact that he caused 
someone’s death’ (King  1980 , 39). Meursault’s experience is simpler and 

86   G. Whistler
more causal still: the heat of the day is an assault on his senses, and he 
loses  control,  this  domino  effect  continuing  from  Meursault’s  senses,  
through the trigger and hammer of the gun, to the bullet, and out into 
the world. As Lehan put it:
The point is that the murder of the Arab is as accidental and gratuitous as 
Camus’s world itself. Meursault does not mean to kill the Arab. He goes to 
the spot by accident. He meets the Arab by chance. The sun happens to be 
unpleasantly  hot,  and  Meursault  happens  to  feel  terribly  uncomfortable.  
When the Arab draws a knife, the blade by chance catches the sun and the 
reflection  flashes  into  Meursault’s  eyes  whereupon  he  responds  mechani -
cally—like a coiled spring—and the gun goes off. (Lehan  1964 , 234)
So  L’Etranger , in plot and protagonist, contributes to the reader’s expe -
rience of the absurd. What is also of interest to this chapter, however, is 
the relation between the style of the novel and its philosophical content. 
We have already seen examples of the intricacy of the novel’s style; so now 
it  is  time  to  turn  to  the  relationship  between  these  techniques  and  the  
philosophical message that Camus wants to get across.
In Sect.  2, we saw how elements of the style of this novel (and those of 
Hemingway and Cain) embody the pattern of the protagonist’s thoughts. 
There is indeed ‘an intricate relationship [in  L’Etranger ] between the style, 
the object of description, the world order, and the mood of the character-  
narrator’  (Lehan   1959 ,  259).  The  absurd  itself  is  also  illustrated  by  the  
short sentence length so prevalent in the novel. These sentences not only 
authentically portray the mind of Meursault, but they also illustrate an 
absurd life as just a meaningless sequence of events, following on from 
each other without any transcendent logic. As Sartre writes:
On the one hand there is the amorphous, everyday flow of reality as it is 
experienced, and, on the other, the edifying reconstruction of this reality 
by  human  reasoning  and  speech.  When  first  brought  face-to-face  with  
simple reality, the reader confronts it without being able to recognise it in 
its rational transposition. This is the source of the absurd—that is, or our 
inability to conceive, using our concepts and our words, what occurs in the 
world. (Sartre  2007 , 86)

3    Narrating the Absurd   87
In other words, there is a direct link between the style of the novel and 
the  reader’s  experience  of  the  absurd.  Renaud  remarks  at  the  feeling  of  
monotony that suffuses Meursault’s account, saying, ‘From start to finish, 
the sentences in the narrative are uniformly short, or divided by a studied 
punctuation that maintains the same rhythm’, suggesting that it is these 
short  sentences  which  are  ‘so  effective  ...  at  marking  the  monotonous  
11  Sartre goes as far as to suggest  course of existence’ (Renaud  1957 , 290).
that  this  alienating  grammar  and  disjointed  style  means  that   L’Etranger  
isn’t  in  fact  a  narrative  work  at  all,  because  narrative  implies  cause  and  
effect, whereas this novel does not possess the same kind of internal logic 
(Sartre  2007 , 98)—thus, the very syntax of the novel is a manifestation 
of the absurd. And so, we see that the philosophy of the absurd permeates 
every phrase of Meursault’s, every detail of his life, and the way he views 
every object.
As was discussed in §2, the noun/adjective structure used frequently in 
the  novel  illustrates  Meursault’s  perception  of  the  world  temporally.  
Meursault notices objects and people in the world around him, followed 
by an awareness of their attributes, just as he notices, passively, his own 
physical sensations. Meursault is at the mercy of his physical being, even -
tually leading him to kill a man ‘because of the sun’ (Camus  2000 , 99), 
and Lehan too connects these unreflective responses to the physical world 
and the crime that Meursault’s commits:
The noun-adjective order, the mind working in a moment of time, the nar -
rator  trying  to  impose  order  on  the  jumble  of  reality  and  sense  impres -
sions—all  reveal  a  mind  that  never  gets  beyond  the  realm  of  physical  
existence.  These  two  things—an  accidental  and  gratuitous  world  and  a  
mind  that  responds  to  physical  stimuli—are  the  motives  for  the  Arab’s  
murder. (Lehan  1964 , 237)
So not only do we get a sense of Meursault’s thoughts as though they 
are happening in real-time, we also get a sense of how indifference affects 
his actions. Meursault is thus a vessel for absurdity, simply responding to 
cues  from  the  outside  world  as  they  present  themselves  to  him.  Lehan  
observes how the clipped, matter-of-fact style of the narrative reflects this 

88   G. Whistler
perfectly,   the   sentences   embodying   the   latent   philosophy   of   our   
protagonist:
Each  passage  reveals  a  mind  at  work  upon  immediate  experience;  each  
sentence is the statement of an empirical fact; the style here is in perfect 
dramatic consistency with the personality and character of the narrator. 
The swift movement from noun to noun, strung loosely together as the 
narrator  concentrates  on  an  object  of  immediate  concern,  indicates  an  
existentialist  and  empirical  mind  at  work,  immersed  in  a  moment  of  
time. (Lehan  1960 , 44)
The world around Meursault is absurd, but so is he. His thoughtless, 
gratuitous  violence  is  almost  akin  to  a  natural  disaster—harrowingly  
destructive but without conscious intent. He lives in the present moment, 
embracing the things that give him pleasure, not giving a second thought 
to those that don’t. As readers we can’t help but resist this perspective, just 
as we might be challenged and appalled by the absurd in our own lives. 
In  our  engagement  with  this  text,  we  gain  an  experience  of  the  absurd  
which is inseparable from the mind being portrayed.
But  as  Camus  writes  in   Le  Mythe  de  Sisyphe ,  the  absurd  is  only  the  
foundation for a philosophy, not the conclusion. What is so often over -
looked  about   L’Etranger   is  the  moral  and  philosophical  ground  that  
Meursault  traverses  over  the  course  of  the  novel.  If  Meursault’s  abrupt,  
causal relation with the world was all there was to learn from this book, 
it  would  be  a  depressing  tale  indeed—and  worthy  of  its  reputation  as  
angsty ‘teen lit’. As Lehan put it, Meursault is ‘an avatar, an incarnation, 
a  personification  of  the  absurd  world  ...  [but]  Meursault  is  more  than  
just an abstract symbol of gratuity and indifference, primarily because the 
novel is also a kind of moral progress toward self-realization and cosmic 
understanding’  (Lehan   1964 ,  234).  The  reason  that  is  so  often  missed  
from analyses of the novel is that a great deal of the philosophical devel -
opment that Meursault undergoes is represented primarily through style. 
Let  us  take  two  examples  from  the  novel  to  illustrate  the  transition  
between the style and philosophy of  L’Etranger , one passage from before 
Meursault’s conviction and one from after. Before the trial, Meursault is 
characterised  by  an  unreflective,  sensual  engagement  with  the  world.  

3    Narrating the Absurd   89
Recounting a conversation with Marie, with whom he is in an intimate 
relationship, we are told:
Le soir, Marie est venue me chercher et m’a demandé si je voulais me marier 
avec elle. J’ai dis que cela m’était égal et que nous pourrions le faire si elle 
le voulait. Elle a voulu savoir si je l’aimais. J’ai répondu comme je l’avais 
déjà  fait  une  fois,  que  cela  ne  signifiait  rien  mais  que  sans  doute  je  ne  
l’aimais pas. ‘Pourquoi m’épouser alors?’ a-t-elle dit. Je lui ai expliqué que 
cela n’avait aucune importance et que si elle désirait, nous pouvons nous 
marier. D’ailleurs, c’était elle qui le demandait et moi je me contentais de 
dire  oui.  Elle  a  observé  alors  que  le  mariage  était  une  chose  grave.  J’ai  
répondu:  ‘Non.’  Elle  s’est  tue  un  moment  et  elle  m’a  regardé  en  silence.  
Puis elle a parlé. Elle voulait simplement savoir si j’aurais accepté la même 
proposition venant d’une autre femme, à qui je serais attaché de la même 
12 façon. J’ai dit: ‘Naturellement’. (Camus  2006 , I: 165)
As usual, the sentences in the passage are either short, or cut in half by 
punctuation.  Meursault’s  sentences  are  abrupt,  not  only  in  recounting  
the episode to us, but also in responding to a proclamation of love from 
Marie.  His  sentiments  betray  nothing  but  indifference,  and  the  entire  
interaction portrays a man as absurd as the reasonless universe he inhabits.
But this is only the Meursault preceding the crime. While the crime 
itself is meaningless, the reflection we encounter after his arrest (and even 
more so following sentencing) demonstrates a level of reflection hitherto 
unseen.  Consider  the  following  extract  from  the  very  end  of  the  novel  
(which we have already looked at in terms of ‘secular epiphany’ in Chap.  2):
Je  me  suis  réveillé  avec  des  étoile  sur  le  visage.  Des  bruits  de  campagne  
montaient  jusqu’à  moi.  Des  odeurs  de  nuit,  de  terre  et  de  sel  rafraîchis -
saient mes tempes. La merveilleuse paix de cet été endormi entrait en moi 
comme une marée. A ce moment, et à la limite de la nuit, des sirènes ont 
hurlé.  Elles  annonçaient  des  départs  pour  un  monde  qui  maintenant  
m’était  à  jamais  indifférent.  Pour  la  première  fois  depuis  longtemps,  j’ai  
pensé à maman. Il m’a semblé que je comprenais pourquoi à la fin d’une 
vie  elle  avait  pris  un  ‘fiancé’,  pourquoi  elle  avait  joué  à  recommencer.  
Là-bas, là-bas aussi, autour de cet asile où des vies s’éteignaient, le soir était 
comme une trêve mélancolique. Si près de la mort, maman devait s’y sentir 

90   G. Whistler
libérée et prête à tout revivre. Personne, personne n’avait le droit de pleurer 
sur elle. Et moi, je me suis senti prêt à tout revivre. Comme si cette grande 
colère  m’avait  purgé  du  mal,  vidé  d’espoir,  devant  cette  nuit  chargée  de  
signes et d’étoiles, je m’ouvrais pour la première fois à la tendre indifférence 
13 du monde. (Camus  2006 , I: 212–213)
Meursault  the  sensualist  is  still  here,  and  in  describing  his  physical  
sensations,  so  too  are  the  short  sentences,  so  similar  to  those  found  in  
Hemingway and Cain—sentences that describe the world of sensation so 
clearly and authentically. But Meursault has undergone a sea change. Not 
only is he able to reflect on and empathise with the feelings of his mother 
(so unlike his encounter with Marie’s emotions), he is also rid of indiffer -
ence. Meursault’s thirst for life banishes apathy, allows him to reflect on 
the needs of others, and gives meaning to his world. This philosophical 
and moral development is embodied in the style of the passage. Unlike 
when Meursault describes his physical sensations in the passage, when he 
reflects philosophically, the sentences are far longer, for example, ‘Comme 
si  cette  grande  colère  m’avait  purgé  du  mal,  vidé  d’espoir,  devant  cette  
nuit chargée de signes et d’étoiles, je m’ouvrais pour la première fois à la 
tendre indifférence du monde.’ The language is also more metaphorical 
(e.g. ‘cette nuit chargée de signes et d’étoiles’, ‘La merveilleuse paix de cet 
été  endormi’).  Lehan  put  it,  ‘After  the  murder  scene,  Meursault  grows  
away from his initial character—illustrating Camus’s interest at this time 
in the difference between man and his absurd condition, the difference 
between  humanity  and  nature’  (Lehan   1964 ,  237).  In  other  words,  
Meursault  grows  both  morally  and  philosophically,  no  longer  a  passive  
extension  of  the  absurd;  and  as  always,  this  is  present  in  the  style  of  
the novel.
5    Chapter  Conclusion
In this chapter, I have endeavoured to give a detailed account of Camus’ 
stylistic venture in  L’Etranger , as the simple prose of this novel has more 
complex aims than immediately meets the eye. I am by no means the first 
critic  to  cite  the  similarities  between  the  style  of  Camus  and  novelists  

3    Narrating the Absurd   91
such  as  Hemingway  and  Cain.  Camus,  like  the  American  Novelists,  
strives for an authenticity of style that truly represents the human experi -
ence, and in such novels we are given a real sense of the fact that life is 
made up of everyday actions and sensations; the language used—with its 
short sentences and simple wording—reflects the mundane yet poignant 
nature of our existence. Features such as prevalent use of temporal con -
junctions, or piece-by-piece adjectival descriptions, represent the form of 
the  thoughts  of  Meursault,  Jake  Barnes,  and  Frank  Chambers,  and  we  
experience   these   characters’   minds   and   the   worlds   they   inhabit   
phenomenologically.
While   there   are   certain   stylistic   similarities   between   Camus,   
Hemingway, and Cain, there are also differences. Camus, unlike the oth -
ers wrote in French, a language with perhaps even more room for stylistic 
innovation.  Camus’  use  of  the   passé  composé   tense  in  the  narration  of  
L’Etranger  gives the novel a certain immediacy—Meursault speaks directly 
to  us.  This  choice  of  tense  also  gives  the  reader  an  impossible  vantage  
point on Meursault’s world; the  passé composé  situates the actions of the 
novel in the immediate past, allowing us an even closer connection with 
the mind of the protagonist.
But as we saw in the previous section, there is much more than stylistic 
innovation or a search for authenticity going on in  L’Etranger . The sim -
plicity and clarity championed by the American Novel gives us an oppor -
tunity to experience the world of the Other phenomenologically, as does 
Camus’,  but  Camus  also  underpins  this  world  with  a  philosophy;  as  
Roland  Barthes  somewhat  poetically  put  it,  ‘This  transparent  speech  
[which  was]  inaugurated  by  Camus’   L’Etranger   accomplishes  a  style  of  
14   absence which is almost an ideal absence of style’ (Barthes  1972 , 56–57).
While many read  L’Etranger  as a nihilistic text, for Camus the absurd is 
actually a foundation for morality; thus, Meursault’s story is more than 
just the representation of an absurd man in an absurd world. Following 
his conviction, Meursault finally realises that, despite its incomprehensi -
bility,  he  has  the  ability  to  find  meaning  in  his  life.  This  philosophical  
epiphany  provokes  Meursault  to  reflect,  empathise,  and  grow  morally.  
This  realisation  is  manifested  in  a  stylistic  shift,  a  departure  from  the  
American  Novel  which  represents  Camus’  true  aim:  to  communicate  a  
moral  philosophy  via  textual  engagement.  The  following  chapter  will  

92   G. Whistler
now explore a further creative dimension to Camus’ philosophical inno -
vation, one less focused on the minutiae of the text, but rather its imagi -
native ambiguity—that is, his use of myth, fable, parable, and allegory in 
communicating ethical ideas.
Notes
1.  In  English,  ‘a  small  trawler  boat  which  advanced  imperceptibly  in  the  
dazzling sea’.
2.  In  English,  ‘Mother  died  today.  Or  maybe  yesterday,  I  don’t  know’  
(translation in Camus  2000 , 9).
3.  In English, ‘They’d stop talking as we went by. And behind us, the con -
versations would start up again’.
4.  In French: ‘Pourquoi Camus tient-il à ces phrases courtes? D’abord elles 
reflètent  la  vie  de  Meursault  en  rappelant  de  petits  faits  qui  se  suivent  
sans grande logique, ou qui brusquement se détachent, au lieu de couler 
les uns dans les autres—ce qui donnerait à la vie une unité que Meursault 
n’éprouve  pas.  On  trouve  donc  beaucoup  de  simples  conjonctifs  et  
notamment des conjonctions temporelles, comme aussi un grand nom -
bre d’adverbes de temps. Par contre dans les subordonnées il y a peu de 
rapports affectifs ou volontés. Ce style haché se justifie aussi sur le plan 
de  la  vraisemblance.  Peut-être  le  lecteur  ne  le  comprend-il  pas  tout  de  
suite, mais bientôt il s’aperçoit que le narrateur est en train to retracer 
une période de sa vie’.
5.  In French: ‘En effet Meursault repasse les évènements qui l’ont conduit 
où  il  est,  et,  chemin  faisant,  il  s’attarde  un  peu,  inévitablement,  sur  
certains autres aspects de cette précieuse vie d’homme libre que naguère 
il gaspillait. Un tel retour dans le passé n’évoque que les impressions les 
plus vives, qui pour Meursault avaient été surtout physiques. D’où des 
faits  isolés  et  la  répétition  des  mêmes  thèmes:  le  soleil,  la  chaleur,  la  
lumière, les gestes des gens et surtout leurs manies, les objets qui relu -
isent, les repas, la plage, et Marie. Et enfin, ce qui est simple comme la 
vie avant le procès, s’énonce simplement. Evidemment ceux qui veu -
lent  parler  de  Dieu,  de  l’âme  et  de  la  justice  emploient  de  ‘longues  
phrases’  ...  mais  pour  Meursault  la  vie  n’avait  rien  offert  de  très  
compliqué’.

3    Narrating the Absurd   93
6.  In English, ‘As if the great outburst of anger had purged all my ills, killed 
all my hopes, I looked up at the mass of signs and stars in the night sky 
and I laid myself open for the first time to the benign indifference of the 
world’ (translation in Camus  2000 , 117).
7.  In fact, as Balibar points out ( 1972 , 104), there are several uses of the 
passé  simple   which  are  often  overlooked,  for  example,  Sunday  on  the  
balcony (‘ Ceux qui revenaient des cinémas de la ville   arrivèrent   un peu plus 
tard. ’), M. Perez at the wake (‘ la couleur rouge sang dans ce visage blafard 
me   frappa . L’ordonnateur nous   donna   nos places. ’), and during Meursault’s 
incarceration (‘ Mais cela   dura   quelques mois .’)
8.  In  French:  ‘l’absurde,  pris  jusqu’ici  comme  conclusion,  est  considéré  
dans cet essai comme un point de départ’.
9.  John Foley suggests that what first gave Camus the feeling of the absurd 
was ‘the sudden and visceral awareness of his own mortality’ brought on 
by his first attack of tuberculosis. Most of Camus’ readers will know that 
he was not simply a cerebral man—his youth in Algeria was spent swim -
ming in the Mediterranean Sea, playing football and chasing girls—so 
finding himself bed-bound in mortal suffering so suddenly seems to have 
been quite a shock to the system (Foley  2008 , 6).
10.   In French: ‘Camus aurait dû savoir que, même bien intentionnée, la fin 
ne justifiait pas les moyens ... Ce n’était qu’une question de temps avant 
que  la  mort  escamotée  de  l’Arabe  ne  resurgisse  et  prenne  une  place  de  
premier plan dans le sens accordé au roman.’
11.   In French: ‘D’un bout à l’autre du récit les phrases sont régulièrement 
courtes, ou coupées par une ponctuation étudiée qui maintient le même 
rythme ... si efficaces soient-elles pour marquer le cours monotone de 
l’existence’.
12.   In English, That evening, Marie came round for me and asked me if I 
wanted to marry her. I said I didn’t mind and we could if she wanted to. 
She  then  wanted  to  know  if  I  loved  her.  I  replied  as  I  had  done  once  
already,  that  it  didn’t  mean  anything  but  that  I  probably  didn’t.  ‘Why  
marry me then?’ she said. I explained to her that it really didn’t matter 
and that if she wanted to, we could get married. Anyway, she was the one 
who was asking me and I was simply saying yes. She then remarked that 
marriage was a serious matter. I said, ‘No’. She didn’t say anything for a 
moment and looked at me in silence. Then she spoke. She just wanted to 
know if I’d have accepted the same proposal if it had come from another 
woman, with whom I had had a similar relationship. I said, ‘Naturally’ 
(translation in Camus  2000 , 44–45).

94   G. Whistler
13.   In English, ‘I woke up with the stars shining on my face. Sounds of the 
countryside wafting in. The night air was cooling my temples with the 
smell  of  earth  and  salt.  The  wondrous  peace  of  this  sleeping  summer  
flooded  into  me.  At  that  point,  on  the  verge  of  daybreak,  there  was  a  
scream of sirens. They were announcing a departure to a world towards 
which  I  would  now  be  forever  indifferent.  For  the  first  time  in  a  very  
long time I thought of mother. I felt that I understood why at the end of 
her  life  she’d  taken  a  ‘fiancé’  and  why  she’d  pretended  to  start  again.  
There at the home, where lives faded away, there too the evenings were a 
kind of melancholy truce. So close to death, mother must have felt liber -
ated and ready to live her life again. No one, no one at all had any right 
to cry over her. And I too felt ready to live my life again. As if the great 
outburst of anger had purged all my ills, killed all my hopes, I looked up 
at the mass of signs and stars in the night sky and I laid myself open for 
the  first  time  to  the  benign  indifference  of  the  world’  (translation  in  
Camus  2000 , 117).
14.   In  French:  ‘Cette  parole  transparente,  inaugurée  par   L’Etranger   de  
Camus, accomplit un style de l’absence qui est presque une absence idé -
ale du style’ (although, as we will see in the next chapter, Barthes didn’t 
always quite grasp the complexity of Camus’ stylistic venture).
References
Adam, Jean-Michel, and Mireille Noël. 1995. Variations énonciatives. Aspects 
de la genèse du style de  l’Étranger .  Langages  29 (118): 64–84.
Amash, Paul. 1967. The Choice of the Arab in  The Stranger .  Romance Notes  9: 6–7.
Balibar, Étienne. 1972. Le passé composé fictif dans  l’Étranger  d’Albert Camus. 
Littérature  7: 102–119.
Barthes, Roland. 1972.  Le Degré zéro de l’écriture . Paris: Points-Seuil.
Cain, James M. 2005.  The Postman Always Rings Twice . London: Orion.
Camus, Albert. 2006.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi 
et al. Paris: Gallimard.
———. 2000.  The Outsider . Translated by Joseph Laredo. London: Penguin.
Foley, John. 2008.  Albert Camus: From the Absurd to Revolt . Stocksfield: Acumen.
Golomb,  Jacob.  1994.  Camus’s  Ideal  of  Authentic  Life.   Philosophy  Today   38  
(3): 268–277.

3    Narrating the Absurd   95
Grégoire, Vincent. 2012. Lorsque la fin justifie les moyens dans  L’Etranger . In 
Albert Camus Aujourd’hui: De L’Etranger au Premier Homme , ed. Alek Baylee 
Toumi, 85–96. New York: Peter Lang.
Hemingway, Ernest. 2004.  Fiesta: The Sun Also Rises . London: Arrow Books.
King,  Adèle.  1980.   Albert  Camus:  L’Etranger,  The  Stranger  or  The  Outsider . 
Beirut/London: York Press-Longman.
Lehan, Richard. 1959. Camus’ American Affinities.  Symposium  13 (2): 255–270.
———.  1960.  Camus  and  Hemingway.   Wisconsin  Studies  in  Contemporary  
Literature  1 (2): 37–48.
———. 1964. Camus’s  L’Etranger  and American Neo-Realism.  Books Abroad  38 
(3): 233–238.
Orwell,  George.  2004.  Politics  and  the  English  Language.  In   Why  I  Write . 
London: Penguin.
Renaud,  Armand.  1957.  Quelques  remarques  sur  le  style  de  l’Etranger.   The 
French Review  30 (4): 290–296.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 2007. A Commentary on  The Stranger . In  Existentialism is 
a   Humanism .   Translated   by   Carol   Macomber.   New   Haven:   Yale   
University Press.

4
Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories
1    Chapter  Introduction
Any reader who has encountered more than one of the works of Albert 
Camus will have noticed that the styles and techniques he employs vary 
from piece to piece, in both his literary and philosophical texts. Inspired 
1  Camus’  as he was by the unusual writings of Nietzsche and Kierkegaard,
philosophical texts often contain curious devices such as Greek myths to 
illustrate  his  philosophical  theses.  Meanwhile,  his  literary  texts  them -
selves reveal layers of moral and metaphysical meaning, leading them in 
themselves to be categorised variously as fables, parables, and allegories 
(among  other  things)—the  distinctions  between  these  interpretations  
often  being  less  than  clear-cut.  Back  in  1957,  John  Cruickshank  com -
mented on this effect:
The terms ‘myth’, ‘fable’ and ‘symbol’ are loosely and somewhat indiscrimi -
nately used... All three terms, together with those of ‘allegory and parable’, 
are treated as being virtually synonymous, particularly by European writ -
ers. In the French critical vocabulary a myth has long ceased to hold only 
its  original  meaning  of  a  fiction  embodying  the  actions  of  legendary  or  
97 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_4

98   G. Whistler
supernatural beings. It now means anything from a widely accepted ideol -
ogy  to  a  cheap  catchword,  and  from  a  fable  or  parable  to  an  allegory  or  
symbol.  Even  the  term   roman-mythe   is  ambiguous  in  meaning  and  has  
been  indiscriminately  applied.  In  the  case  of  Camus,  for  example,  it  has  
been  used  to  describe  both   L’Etranger   and   La  Peste ,  yet  these  two  novels  
differ greatly in their form and method. (Cruickshank  1957 , 62)
While Cruickshank sets out our predicament nicely, it is interesting to 
note  that  even  in  this  passage,  his  interpretation  of  the  word  ‘myth’  is  
divergent  from  its  traditional  Greek  use:  as  Plato  specialist  Catalin  
Partenie explains, ‘For them a  muthos  was a true story, a story that unveils 
the  true  origin  of  the  world  and  human  beings’  (Partenie   2014 )—not 
something fictional, as Cruickshank says. The task of the following chap -
2  within his  ter is to examine Camus’ use of such metaphorical techniques
own writing, and I will begin by setting out my own definitions of terms 
such as ‘myth’, ‘parable’, ‘fable’, ‘allegory’, and ‘symbol’, not only because 
a certain ambiguity is manifested with general use, but also because (as 
we  will  see)  some  of  the  most  cutting  critiques  of  Camus’  work  have  
rested on a lack of distinction between these terms.
As  has  already  become  clear,  the  term  ‘myth’  can  even  be  somewhat  
problematic. While the Greeks used it to refer to stories often involving 
spiritual  or  miraculous  happenings,  these  tales  were  accepted  as  truth -
ful—even the basis for metaphysical claims. Nowadays, the term myth is 
often  used  as  loosely  as  to  mean  ‘common  misconception’,  that  is,  the  
kind of myth that can be ‘busted’. As for the distinction between ‘parable’ 
and  ‘fable’,  these  two  terms  are  closely  related;  both  can  be  defined  as  
short stories containing some sort of moral lesson, and both may leave an 
element of ambiguity so as to engage the reader’s/listener’s imagination. 
Where they differ, however, is in their characters: the action which can 
lead  to  moral  or  spiritual  understanding  in  parables  occurs  between  
humans in realistic situations, whereas fables contain forces of nature or 
even  animals  as  key  players  in  the  didactic  narrative.  Allegory,  on  the  
other hand, often has a more direct representational relation between the 
elements of the narrative itself and the enclosed moral message. Where 
parables and fables rely on the imaginary as a didactic tool, allegories are 
more  like  extended  metaphors  with  almost  a  relationship  of  identity  

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   99
(where X is to Y as A is to B), such as in Plato’s famous ‘Ship of State’ 
(Plato  2011 , 488a–e), wherein the relation between a ruler and a society 
is taken as comparable to that of a captain to his ship. Theories of symbol -
ism in philosophy are too numerous and contradictory to do justice to 
here, so I shall adopt a fairly simplistic interpretation of the word ‘sym -
bol’ in this chapter—that is, an individual object or element used to rep -
resent something more profound and conceptual, such as wedding band 
used  to  represent  commitment.  As  will  be  seen  over  the  course  of  the  
following chapter, each of these terms has a place in Camus scholarship, 
but  regrettably  their  distinctions  and  implications  are  yet  to  be  fully  
delineated. This is what I hope to rectify here.
Accordingly, Sect.  2 will lay out a theoretical framework for the chap -
ter.  Here  I  draw  on  Lacoue-Labarthe’s  conception  of  ‘fable’,  proposing  
that the enclosed analysis of philosophical method is similar to the one 
which I suggest informs Camus’ own. Following on from this (in Sect.  3), 
I examine the difference between the aims of political allegories (such as 
those  of  George  Orwell)  and  Camus’  own  endeavours  in   La  Peste , 
responding to Roland Barthes’ famous critique of the novel by drawing 
on the aforementioned distinctions between fable and allegory. The sub -
sequent section (Sect.  4) consists in an analysis of the relationship between 
Le Mythe de Sisyphe  and  L’Etranger  which goes beyond the stylistic analy -
sis from the previous chapter; here I suggest that we read  L’Etranger  as a 
parable for the absurd and that his deployment of myth in  Le Mythe de 
Sisyphe  aims towards a metaphysical truth worthy of the Greeks’ original 
conception of the term. In Sect.  5 I look at Harry Slochower’s  1948  essay, 
‘The Function of Myth in Existentialism’, bringing it into dialogue with 
Camus’  own  critique  of  existentialism  as  manifested  in  the  short  story,  
Le Renégat.
2    Philosophy (and the World) as Fable
As I have claimed previously, philosophy is about truth. Whether or not 
the questions we are asking address the problem of truth explicitly, phi -
losophy  in  all  its  forms  strives  towards  knowledge  and  understanding.  
This quest becomes particularly difficult when we take into account the 

100   G. Whistler
fact that as humans, our perception of reality may be partial or flawed. 
The task of philosophy is more difficult yet when we consider language as 
a medium for expressing truth. Even if we have settled on the content of 
our claims, as I argued in Chap.  1, the way in which they are best com -
municated  is  entirely  up  for  debate,  as  is  apparent  to  anyone  reading  
historical philosophical texts. It is in the context of these difficulties that 
Lacoue-Labarthe’s conception of ‘fable’ is situated. In  Le Sujet de la phi -
losophie , he questions whether philosophy could ever represent absolute 
truths, as it is necessarily communicated by the contingent medium that 
is language. He asks,
whether  the  dream,  the  desire  that  philosophy  has  entertained  since  its  
‘beginning’ for a pure saying [ dire pur ] (a speech, a discourse purely trans -
parent  to  what  it  should  immediately  signify:  truth,  being,  the  absolute,  
etc.), has not always been compromised by the necessity of going through 
a text, through a process of writing, and whether, for this reason, philoso -
phy has not always been obliged to use modes of exposition (dialogue or 
narrative, for example) that are not exclusively its own and that it is most 
often powerless to control or even reflect upon. (Lacoue-Labarthe  1993 , 1)
Echoing the arguments we have already seen (in Chap.  1) from Lang, 
Danto,  and  Stewart,  Lacoue-Labarthe  suggests  that,  in  aiming  towards  
‘pure  saying’  (i.e.  an  unmediated  communication,  not  dissimilar  to  
Barthes’ concept of ‘transparent writing’) (Barthes  1972 , 7), philosophy 
fails to recognise its dependency on language as a medium—a medium it 
can  neither  control  nor  sufficiently  reflect  upon.  In  other  words,  ‘one  
cannot ask philosophy about literature as though it were a question raised 
‘from the outside’’ (Lacoue-Labarthe  1993 , 2). In choosing a particular 
philosophical style then, we accept a whole new handicap—we adopt a 
mode of expression which necessarily brings with it its own assumptions 
and  implications,  besides  those  that  are  entailed  in  language  itself.  As  
Camus himself put it in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe , ‘Methods imply metaphys -
ics; unconsciously they disclose conclusions that they often claim not to 
know yet’ (Camus  2005 , 10).
Lacoue-Labarthe  thus  takes  a  strong  stance,  suggesting  that  this  dis -
tinction between philosophy and literature should be recognised as false, 

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   101
as neither is able to appeal to an absolute outside of its particular mode of 
expression. While I do not suggest that Camus’ own view is as extreme, 
Lacoue-Labarthe  sets  out  a  fruitful  area  of  discussion  which  frames  
Camus’ own endeavours nicely. The philosophy/literature distinction in 
question quite naturally maps on to the classical  muthos/logos  distinction, 
which is in turn thrown into uncertainty; Lacoue-Labarthe writes, ‘The 
discourse of truth,  logos , is nothing other than  muthos , that is, the very 
thing  against  which  it  has  always  claimed  to  constitute  itself ’  (Lacoue-   
Labarthe  1993 , 6). If we consider again that the Greeks conceived myths 
to be as true as reality, the lack of distinction between the two goes a long 
way  back.  As  Lacoue-Labarthe  puts  it,  ‘ Muthos   and   logos   are  the  same  
thing, but neither is more true (or more false, deceptive, fictional, etc.) 
than the other; they are neither true nor false; both are the same fable’ 
(Lacoue-Labarthe  1993 ,  6).  Also  commenting  on  the   muthos / logos   dis -
tinction,  Michèle  Le  Dœuff  suggested  that  ‘Philosophical  discourse  is  
inscribed and declares its status as philosophy though a break with myth, 
fable, the poetic, the domain of the image’ (Le Dœuff  1989 , 1), but in 
Lacoue-Labarthe’s  work  we  see  philosophy’s  identity  as  distinct  from  
myth (as  logos ) begin to break down. Philosophy is  muthos , fable, and:
Fable  is  the  language  with  respect  to  which  (and  in  which)  these  differ -
ences—-which are not differences—no longer obtain: literal and figurative, 
transparency and transfer, reality and simulacrum, presence and represen -
tation,  muthos  and  logos , logic and poetry, philosophy and literature, etc. 
3 (Lacoue-Labarthe  1993 , 9)
I suggest that from this vantage point, we are better equipped to anal -
yse Camus’ own use of such techniques. As Le Dœuff says, ‘The images 
that  appear  in  theoretical  texts  are  normally  viewed  as  extrinsic  to  the  
theoretical work, so that to interest oneself in them seems like a merely 
anecdotal  approach  to  philosophy’  (Le  Dœuff   1989 ,  2)—this  is  what  
Camus endeavours to break away from, the imagistic and metaphorical 
being indispensable to his philosophical aims.
While I would not suggest that Camus follows Lacoue-Labarthe and 
Le Dœuff in this desire to collapse the boundary between philosophy and 
literature  entirely,  I  would  suggest  that  it  is  evident  from  his  stylistic  

102   G. Whistler
experimentation  that  he  wishes  to  test  this  boundary,  and  question  the  
efficacy of established modes of philosophical representation. An example 
of Camus’ blurring of philosophical genres is evident in his use of ‘cycles’ 
of  writing,  each  addressing  a  particular  aspect  of  his  philosophy,  and  
encompassing a play, a novel, and an essay. He described his absurd cycle 
( L’Etranger,   Le Mythe de Sisyphe ,  Le Malentendu , and  Caligula ) as having 
‘several parts with each section embodied with different techniques, and 
4   their results illustrate the consequences of an absurd grappling with life’.
5  Camus plays  In his belief that ‘Certain works can illustrate one another’,
with  the  traps  of  genre  in  a  way  that  suits  his  philosophical  aims.  As  a  
philosopher concerned with the absurd, the ambiguities that reside at the 
borders between genres only serve to supplement his picture of the human 
condition. Thus, the conceptual understanding of the absurd which can 
be gained from reading  Le Mythe de Sisyphe  is supplemented and enriched 
by  its  coinciding  with   L’Etranger ,  the  imaginative  engagement  elicited  
from encountering the creative text thereby fleshing out the abstract phil -
osophical claims of his essay. The following sections will therefore look in 
more detail at Camus’ use of metaphorical devices, and how they corre -
spond to his philosophical theses.
3    Political Allegory and Abstraction 
as a Force of Nature
Let us now move on from this theoretical groundwork, to an analysis of 
perhaps the most controversial of Camus’ metaphorical works, that is,  La 
Peste.  This novel was of course written in a time dominated by an atmo -
sphere of censorship (due to the Nazi Occupation), in which the use of 
allegory became somewhat of a natural reflex, a historically conditioned 
6  This novel suffered numerous damning critiques from ‘the French  habit.
Left’,  the  most  famous  of  which  comes  from  Roland  Barthes.  Barthes’  
critique  rests  on  an  objection  to  Camus’  use  of  a  mysterious,  inhuman  
force of nature to represent the very real, very human evil of Nazism. As 
Barthes put it, ‘Evil sometimes has a human face, and it is this which  La 
7  This seems to be a reasonable  Peste  does not tell us’ (Barthes  1993 , 455).

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   103
observation—surely the ethical dilemmas we face are more difficult when 
the  perpetrators  of  crimes  are  humans  too,  with  emotions,  desires,  and  
pain of their own? While this critique may, upon first reading, seem both 
justified and persuasive, I suggest that it is far less so if we consider the 
distinction between allegory and fable, and particularly if we emphasise 
the  difference  in  aims  of  political  allegory  and  metaphysical  fable  (as  I  
shall expand upon presently). Meanwhile, other critics pointed out that a 
plague  could  have  been  used  equally  to  represent  French  colonialism,  
attesting to Camus’ ignorance of his own position as a child of this con -
quest. Connor Cruise O’Brien writes:
There were Arabs for whom ‘French Algeria’ was a fiction quite as repug -
nant as the fiction of Hitler’s new European order was for Camus and his 
friends. For such Arabs, the French were in Algeria by virtue of the same 
right by which the Germans were in France: the right of conquest... From 
this point of view, Rieux, Tarrou, and Grand were not devoted fighters of 
the plague: they were the plague itself. (Cruise O’Brien  1970 , 55)
Again, I suggest that this critique falls short of the mark, as it is not 
only in need of a more careful analysis of  what kind  of representation we 
are dealing with in  La Peste , but also  what exactly  it is that is being repre -
8  In order to make my claim that  La Peste  should not be read  only   sented.
as political allegory more robust, it would be prudent to examine a con -
crete example of political allegory—both to define this category, and set 
out what it endeavours to achieve.
There are many ways one can compare the work of George Orwell to 
that of Albert Camus; both artists are highly political, metaphorical, and 
linguistic perfectionists. Where they differ is that George Orwell is, in the 
purest  sense,  a  political  allegorist.  In  his  1946  essay,   Why  I  Write ,  he  
describes the political purpose which inspires his writing as ‘[the] desire 
to push the world in a certain direction, to alter other people’s idea of the 
kind of society that they should strive after’ (Orwell  2004 , 5). But Orwell 
was sceptical of political rhetoric; in a critique whose lineage can be traced 
all the way back to Plato, he tells us, ‘Political language ... is designed to 
make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appear -
ance of solidity to pure wind’ (Orwell  2004 , 120). It is for this reason that 

104   G. Whistler
he chooses alternative, artistic methods to put forward his own political 
doctrine. And so we see that political purpose spurred Orwell on more 
than a desire to create. He admits, ‘When I sit down to write a book, I do 
not say to myself, ‘I am going to produce a work of art’. I write because 
there is some lie that I want to expose, some fact to which I want to draw 
attention, and my initial concern is to get a hearing’ (Orwell  2004 , 8). As 
such,  his  allegories  leave  a  lot  less  to  the  imagination—the  links  to  be  
made are definite, and the overarching metaphors map neatly onto the 
political  content.  One  critic  even  went  as  far  as  to  call   Animal  Farm  
‘Totalitarianism for Beginners’ (Dickstein  2007 , 134).
Orwell was always explicit about the aims of his writing. The poli -
tics  behind  his  literature  is  very  much  a  motivating  factor  for  him.  
He tells us:
Every  line  of  serious  work  I  have  written  since  1936  has  been  written,  
directly or indirectly,  against  totalitarianism and  for  democratic Socialism... 
It seems to me nonsense, in a period like our own, to think that one can 
avoid  writing  of  such  subjects.  Everyone  writes  of  them  in  one  guise  or  
another. (Orwell  2004 , 8)
Of course, Camus’ work is certainly political, and the political values 
to be found in  La Peste  are much the same as Camus is without a doubt 
against totalitarianism; as Orwell pointed out, ‘No book is genuinely free 
from  political  bias’  (Orwell   2004 ,  5).  But  what  differentiates   La  Peste  
from  pure  political  allegory  is  Camus’  desire  to  represent  something  
which  he  believes  to  be  universal,  innately  human,  and  outside  of  the  
contingencies of changing political climates: that is, ethical rebellion—or 
‘revolt’, as is defined in  L’Homme révolté  (and in Chap.  1 of this book). In 
the  isolated  setting  of  Oran,  Camus  demonstrates  the  ways  in  which  
humans must unite in the face of  un huis-clos— this response, he suggests, 
should be the same in all contexts, whether it be contagion, totalitarian -
ism, or even mortality itself.
If not merely a political allegory for totalitarianism, what is the func -
tion of ‘la peste’ in  La Peste ? Even characters in the novel itself interpret 
the significance of the sickness differently; in his first sermon, Paneloux, 
clutching  a  crucifix,  even  suggests  (parabolically)  that  it  is  God’s  will  

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   105
manifest, a punishment for the sins of the citizens of Oran. I would argue 
however that the answer to this question lies in Camus’ choice of subject 
matter and setting. As Barthes pointed out, plagues are forces of nature, 
very unlike the kind of cruelty and malice humans are capable of. But as 
the  epigraph  of   La  Peste   suggests  (borrowed  from  Defoe’s   Robinson 
Crusoe ),  ‘It  is  as  reasonable  to  represent  one  kind  of  imprisonment  by  
another  as  it  is  to  represent  anything  which  really  exists  by  that  which  
exists  not’  (Camus   2002 ,  3).  This  statement  is  at  the  root  of  all  fables;  
morality is sometimes best understood through the ambiguous actions of 
impossible  characters,  be  it  the  talking  animals  of  Aesop,  or  the  malig -
nant microbes of  La Peste .  Nazism gained so much power by the spread 
of an ideology—an ideology which relied on the ability to dehumanise 
whole ethnic groups, turning people into an abstract threat. As Camus 
put  it,  ‘Irrational  terror  transforms  men  into  matter’  (Camus   2000b , 
152). What better way could there be of illustrating the spread of an ide -
ology of abstraction than with an opaque and terrible contagion? As one 
critic writes:
For Camus the abstractions in the name of which totalitarian governments 
held sway were far more dangerous and far more lethal than armies of men. 
Abstractions, as their survival after the Nazi defeat proved, were harder to 
destroy than human lives. This was one of the reasons why Camus chose 
the plague to represent the Nazi forces of oppression. A disease, he thought, 
more closely symbolized the abstractions in the name of which the Nazis 
had waged war. (Parker  1966 , 112–113)
Unlike the Nazis, however, the plague does not single out a particular 
demographic—everyone  is  equal,  and  equally  vulnerable.  This  curious  
levelling effect is not politically ignorant, but metaphysically evaluative—
once again insisting on an ethics of solidarity in which all human lives are 
equally valuable, and all of us responsible in the fight against the rancor -
ous evil of suffering and death.
But the aptness of a lethal scourge in representing Nazism is not the only 
level on which this fable operates. Certainly, it does work on this political 
level, and indeed on the interpersonal level between the characters. While 
the  usual  problems  in  categorisation  are  present  in  the   following  quote     

106   G. Whistler
from Cruickshank (he too chooses ‘allegory’ over ‘fable’), he does illustrate 
the three levels that the novel encompasses when he writes:
The plague ... is an image which expands to universal significance through 
two metaphorical stages. It speaks directly of private life and indirectly of 
politics and metaphysics. These are the three possible levels of all human 
thought and experience—the personal, the social, the speculative—and in 
the allegory of the plague they are unified. In this way the allegory used by 
Camus  attempts  to  make  contact  with  the  whole  man,  with  the  triple  
thinking and living of the reader. (Cruickshank  1957 , 66)
While the political and personal layers of this text contribute to what 
makes this a great novel, and ‘each level of presentation gains something 
by its simultaneous meaning at a different level’ (Cruickshank  1957 , 72), 
it  is  the  ethical  message  at  the  heart  of  the  text  which  is  of  the  highest  
importance  to  Camus—we  must  band  together  and  revolt  against  the  
abstractions which claim human lives.
Like the microbe itself, the confined space that Oran inhabits during 
the epidemic also plays an important role in bringing about the condi -
tions for rebellion. As Camus himself put it, ‘All thoughts of revolt mani -
9 —by this  fest themselves in a closed universe’ (Camus  2006b , III: 280)
he means that the conditions of revolt are necessarily confided. Just like 
Meursault, it is only when we are imprisoned that we truly understand 
our innate need for freedom. Cruickshank again writes that,
[The plague’s] spatially concentrated and temporally undifferentiated char -
acter  makes  it  a  singularly  appropriate  vehicle  for  Camus’s  metaphysical  
ideas... The plague is given a confined setting which, through its very con -
centration and apparent narrowness, takes on a universal significance. In 
this way the metaphysical appropriateness of the allegory is confirmed and 
strengthened. (Cruickshank  1957 , 71–72)
The  isolated  citizens  of  Oran  are  trapped  in  a  pocket  of  time—the  
usual  flow  of  history  is  at  a  standstill,  giving  their  actions  an  air  of  the  
infinite. It is in this setting that the characters are able to access the truth 
that  they,  alone  in  the  face  of  mortality,  yet  together  as  humans,  must  
fight against this abstraction. The citizens of Oran are physically trapped, 

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   107
but this only serves to illustrate the fact that we, as humans, are always 
metaphysically  trapped.  We  inhabit  a  finite  pocket  in  time  and  space,  
bookended by the unknown, and all we have is each other.
4    Myth and the Metaphysics of  L’Etranger
At the centre of each of Camus’ works lies a metaphysical problem. As we 
have already seen in the previous section, in  La Peste , the problem is the 
necessity for morality in the face of death itself—not simply the dead-end 
of  living  in  quarantine  or  the  confinement  of  subsisting  under  the  
Occupation.  But  the  ‘Prometheus  cycle’  (encompassing  both   L’Homme  
révolté  and  La Peste ) rests on a foundation already laid in the ‘Sisyphus 
cycle’—that is, the absurd. While too many careless readers take the mes -
sage at the heart of  Le Mythe de Sisyphe  and  L’Etranger  to be a nihilistic 
one, as we saw in the previous chapter, this is entirely too simplistic. Yes, 
Le Mythe  opens with a contemplation of suicide, and the protagonist of 
L’Etranger  takes a human life on a whim, not even displaying any remorse 
for his actions—but too often overlooked is the very real sense of  amour 
de la vie  in both of these works. Evidence of this feeling can be found in 
both the texts, but the implications of Camus’ use of the myth of Sisyphus 
as  an  answer  to  the  absurd,  and  the  parabolic  denouement  in  the  final  
scene of  L’Etranger , are rarely given proper recognition, leaving these pro -
found  works  to  be  relegated  to  the  bookshelves  of  angsty  teens  rather  
than to be taken seriously by contemporary philosophy .  In this section, 
then, I will endeavour to elucidate the real significance of the use of myth 
and parable as tools for illustrating the absurd.
Alongside Orwell, another metaphorical writer to whom Camus is regu -
larly  compared  is  Franz  Kafka,  as  was  mentioned  in  the  previous  chapter.  
Kafka had a great influence on the young Camus, and it is easy to make con -
nections between their works. To risk stating the obvious, we might note that 
both wrote dreamlike, metaphorical tales which illustrate the absurdity of the 
human condition. As Kafka himself said of his own works, ‘All these parables 
really set out to say merely that the incomprehensible is incomprehensible, 
and this we knew already’ (Kafka  1946 , 258). Kafka himself also referred to 
Sisyphus in his diaries several times, but his portrayal was one of impotence 

108   G. Whistler
and pessimism, rather than obstinate joy, as was Camus’ (Politzer  1960 , 51). 
Camus also greatly admired Kafka’s decision to approach the mysteries of the 
human condition through imaginative, creative texts, as opposed to the tra -
ditional philosophical form. As Camus writes in  Le Mythe   de Sisyphe :
The preference that [Kafka has] shown for writing in images rather than in 
reasoned arguments is revelatory of a certain thought ... convinced of the 
uselessness of any principle of explanation and sure of the educative mes -
sage of perceptible appearance. [Kafka] consider[s] the work of art both as 
an end and as a beginning. It is the outcome of an often unexpressed phi -
losophy, its illustration and its consummation. (Camus  2005 , 98)
Here Camus makes implicit his own rejection of the singular use of 
traditional philosophical methods in favour of more imagistic, meta -
phorical  ones,  thereby  aligning  himself  with  Kafka,  an  alignment  
which  is  of  course  also  manifested  in  his  use  of  myth  in   Le  Mythe  
de Sisyphe .
This obvious comparison has been made by many, and of course there 
are differences between the two writers, as well as the similarities already 
mentioned.  While  their  parables  both  illustrate  the  incomprehensible,  
Camus’ have a moral message over and above the absurdity of our encoun -
ter with the universe: we must revolt, for the sake of the Other. In other 
words,  Kafka’s  Sisyphus  is  one  of  hopeless  struggle,  whereas  Camus’  is  
defiant, finding meaning in the very struggle itself. One might also point 
out that Kafka’s choice of subject matter is often more surreal—patently 
‘fabulous’—but this fact is more superficial than some critics argue. Alice 
Kaplan suggests that in fact, ‘The characters and episodes of  L’Etranger  are 
too  individualised,  too  everyday  to  risk  being  associated  with  Kafka’s  
symbols’ (Kaplan  2016 , 116). She suggests that metaphorical works must 
contain fantastic symbols, and that those of  L’Etranger  couldn’t possibly 
refer to profound metaphysical claims outside of the plot:
The Stranger , in other words, was not an allegory like  The Trial . It was 
set  in  the  most  recognizable,  ordinary  streets  of  Algiers.  Meursault,  
heading  home  from  work  to  boiled  potatoes,  has  little  connection  to  
Kafka’s realm of the symbolic, only to the banal, and the bizarre. (Kaplan 
2016 , 116)

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   109
While her use of the word ‘allegory’ is as imprecise as that of so many 
others, her implication is clear: the world of  L’Etranger  is simply our own, 
with no transcendent metaphysical message.
I  (and  no  doubt  Camus)  would  beg  to  differ,  however.  As  Camus  
writes in his notebooks, ‘ La Peste  has a social meaning and a metaphysical 
meaning. It’s exactly the same. This ambiguity is also that of  L’Etranger ’ 
10  In other words, Meursault’s actions do have  (Camus  2006b , II: 965).
social implications—his refusal to feign remorse in court though his life 
depends  on  it  certainly  does  illustrate  the  absurd  way  in  which  society  
conducts itself. But they also have metaphysical implications. As we have 
already  seen,  in  the  final  scene  of  this  parable,  whilst  awaiting  death,  
Meursault experiences something of a communion with the universe—
an  absurd  epiphany  of  the  joy  of  his  own  existence  (Camus   2006b ,  I:  
212–213).  In  this  moment,  Meursault  learns  something  about  himself  
and the universe that is entirely separate from the social implications of 
the novel—that this life is as precious as it is meaningless. This ‘invincible 
summer’  (Camus   1970 ,  169)  he  finds  within  himself  is  one  he  shares  
with Sisyphus, and thus we must imagine them both happy.
5    The Existentialist and the City of Salt
Le Renégat , the second in the collection of short stories entitled,  L’Exil et 
le Royaume , is among the most divisive and striking of Camus’ works. On 
the surface, it is the story of a French Catholic missionary whose attempt 
to bring Christianity to a savage tribe in Mali results in not only physical, 
psychological, and even sexual violence, but also his own conversion to 
the  beliefs  of  the  tribe  (Camus   2006a ,  17–30).  As  baffling  as  the  text  
appears  on  first  reading,  it  is  generally  accepted  to  be  allegorical,  but  
exactly what it is an allegory for is rarely agreed upon. One critic takes it 
to  be  simply  allegorical  of  the  process  of  writing  (Hutcheon   1973 , 
67–87), while another psychoanalytic interpretation suggests that it is the 
tale  of  a  ‘masochist  fanatic’  (Costes   1973 ,  194);  other  postcolonialist  
readings have also suggested that it should be assessed for its ‘Occidental 
bias’ (McGregor  1993 , 743). Of all the interpretations, arguably the most 
persuasive  comes  from  R.  R.  McGregor,  who  makes  the  link  between  

110   G. Whistler
Camus’  critique  of  existentialism  (as  developed  in   Le  Mythe  de  Sisyphe ) 
and  the  self-destructive  trajectory  of  the  protagonist  (McGregor   1993 , 
743). Following McGregor, this section will therefore analyse  Le Renégat  
as an allegory (unlike those misclassified texts previously examined) and 
analyse its use and efficacy as a means of critiquing existentialist philoso -
phy.   Harry   Slochower’s    1948    essay,   ‘The   Function   of   Myth   in   
Existentialism’, offers a different, yet relevant criticism of existentialism; 
this section will therefore begin by setting out the conceptual work at the 
heart of Slochower’s essay, before bringing it into dialogue with Camus’ 
own analysis.
Up until this point we have only made brief reference to the philoso -
phy of existentialism without going into any real depth on the topic, but 
as the current section will be investigating critiques of this philosophical 
movement, it would now be pertinent to take a closer look. Existentialism 
is a term which is often bandied about in common parlance whenever we 
find ourselves talking about the human experience, finitude, or authen -
ticity. Frustrating as it can be for anyone looking to investigate this move -
ment,  this  looseness  in  definition  becomes  understandable  when  we  
consider the number of diverse thinkers which are sometimes included in 
this bracket (such as Beauvoir, Nietzsche, Kierkegaard, and even Marcel). 
One  of  the  most  influential  existentialist  thinkers  (and  the  one  with  
which Camus no doubt most deeply engaged) was Jean-Paul Sartre, and 
indeed  his  conception  of  existentialism  means  something  rather  more  
precise than is often given credit for. At the heart of Sartre’s formulation 
lies the principle known as ‘existence before essence’, which refers to the 
idea  that  we  can  say  nothing  formal  about  human  nature  (essence),  
because  our  values  and  identity  are  formulated  through  our  conscious  
experience  of  being  (existence)  (Sartre   2007 ,  23–24).  Having  cleared  
away  the  wreckage  of  what  earlier  philosophers  might  have  thought  it  
mean  to  be  human,  existentialism  leaves  it  to  the  individual  to  decide  
11 what to do with their newly found freedom.
While Camus does not accept the principle of ‘existence before essence’ 
(according to his belief in human nature, as discussed in Chap.  2), area of 
existentialism  which  Camus’  own  philosophy  does  intersect  with  is  his  
use of the concept of the absurd. While most of us will immediately think 
of Camus in connection with this concept, he was by no means the first 

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   111
thinker to focus on it. A century earlier, Kierkegaard used the concept to 
describe a way of responding to existential despair, in which the believer’s 
trust in God is manifested in a defiant struggle against this anguish. He 
writes, ‘The absurd, or to act by virtue of the absurd, is to act upon faith, 
trusting in God’ (Kierkegaard  1993 , 291). It is already clear that Camus’ 
approach  to  the  absurd  is  somewhat  different  from  this,  but  Camus’  
absurd is nevertheless characterised by a defiant struggle to give life mean -
ing. Sartre also picked up the term, explaining, ‘Man’s existence is absurd 
because  his  contingency  finds  no  external  justification’  (Sartre   1956 , 
628). Here he illuminates a key idea that he shares with Camus, that is, 
the absurd stems from our lack of transcendence in a godless universe.
As  Ronald  Srigley  writes,  ‘The  common,  orthodox  interpretation  of  
The Myth of Sisyphus  is that it endorses a type of existentialism similar to 
that  developed  by  Jean-Paul  Sartre’  (Srigley   2011 ,  17),  but  despite  the  
common  ground  that  Camus  shares  with  existentialism  in  terms  of  his  
use of the absurd, Camus was deeply critical of the movement. He writes 
of ‘existentialist philosophies’ that, ‘All of them without exception suggest 
escape’  (Camus   2005 ,  30).  For  Camus,  the  existentialists  idealise  the  
absurd  to  a  deifying  degree.  While  their  recognition  of  the  absurd  and  
rejection of religion is a step in the right direction for Camus, the radical 
freedom they venerate is just another appeal to transcendence—they sim -
ply  accept  a  new  doctrine.  Slochower’s  critique,  on  the  other  hand,  is  
illustrated by a comparison to the narrative arc found in classical mythol -
ogy. He explains:
Existentialism has seized on one aspect of the literary myth and raised it to 
an absolute. It centers on the second stage of the myth, that which is con -
cerned with the revolt of the individual against the mythical collective... In 
these literary myths, the individual challenges his authoritative communal -
ity and exercises freedom in making his personal choice. In this process of 
loosening, the mythical hero experiences alienation, fear, and guilt. Yet, he 
continues on his journey away from ‘home’, accepting the responsibility of 
his free action or his crime. (Slochower  1948 , 42)
The movement in existentialist thought which Slochower here refers to 
is the rejection of religion. After leaving the comfort of the spiritual home 

112   G. Whistler
that Christianity represents in Western thought, the existentialist hero is 
overcome by a sense of his aloneness in the world—this is the same radi -
cal and unlimited freedom that Camus is so wary of.
Where  the  existentialists  go  wrong,  Slochower  suggests,  is  by  never  
‘returning home’. In classical mythology, the hero returns from his epic 
adventure, taking with him the new experiences and wisdom which allow 
him to reconcile himself with the place he set out from, but with some -
thing of his own to contribute this time:
This  reconciliation  becomes  possible  because  the  individual  grows  to  
awareness of the hybris in his revolt, of the dangers in an unqualified repu -
diation of the old. This leads to his limiting and restraining his own demon. 
His choice can thereby become critical and self-critical, and his responsibil -
ity ethical. Moreover, the last stage is possible only because there has been 
recognition of the first stage. The hero can be redeemed only because he 
can  return  ‘home’.  To  be  sure,  reconciliation  retains,  as  a  dialectical  
moment, the element of revolt through which the mythical hero has passed. 
The hero does not submit or surrender. He is not redeemed by returning as 
a  child  to  a  collective  nursery.  In  the  third  stage,  the  authoritative  code  
itself has been modified by virtue of the individual challenge. That is, the 
hero is saved because of his revolt. (Slochower  1948 , 43)
In  returning  home,  the  hero  acknowledges  the  limits  within  himself  
and  is  humbled  not  only  by  his  adventure  but  also  by  the  wisdom  of  
those that came before him. The existentialists, however, do not recognise 
‘the dangers in an unqualified repudiation of the old’ and fail to gain an 
ethical  responsibility.  If  the  existentialists  were  to  return  ‘home’,  this  
would  not  signify  a  return  to  Christianity,  but  instead  the  ability  to  
appreciate the worth of at least certain elements, such as a sense of moral -
ity that should restrict freedom.
For readers familiar with Camus’  L’Homme révolté , no doubt this is all 
sounding somewhat familiar. At the centre of this text is his concept of 
moderation (‘ la mesure ’), which refers to ethics as a boundary to radical 
freedom (Camus  2000b , 258–260). Even Camus’ conception of revolt is 
specifically  aimed  against  the  idea  that  ‘nothing  is  forbidden’  (Camus  
2000b ,  62).  But  Slochower  lumps  Camus  in  with  the  existentialists,  

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   113
  saying simply that he ‘may be considered as at least related to the move -
ment’  (Slochower   1948 ,  42),  without  further  examination.  Of  course,  
Slochower’s essay preceded  L’Homme révolté  by several years, so Slochower 
cannot be blamed for not knowing the intricacies of this text, but there 
are clues in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe  which he (like many others) fail to pick 
up on—perhaps the most obvious of these on the very first page, where 
Camus writes, ‘the absurd, taken until now as a conclusion, is considered 
12  These clues  in this essay as a point of departure’ (Camus  2006b , I: 219).
should be enough to set Camus well apart from the existentialists, as this 
indicates his desire to move on from an awareness of the absurd towards 
a ‘third stage’, comparable with the hero’s return home. Slochower, how-
ever, suggests that Sisyphus himself is a suitable symbol of existentialism, 
his eternal damnation depriving the myth of a conclusion:
The characteristic mythical hero of Existentialism is not Prometheus, cre -
ated by his mother Terra, and finally coming to terms with Zeus, the Father, 
but Sisyphus. Not Prometheus who would free mankind both from fear of 
nature and man as well as for control of physical and human nature, but 
Sisyphus, forever condemned to roll a rock to the top of a mountain, with 
the rock always falling back of its own weight. (Slochower  1948 , 44)
This suggestion could only be based on a misunderstanding of Camus’ 
‘happy’  Sisyphus;  if  we  take  the  absurd  as  only  a  foundation,  and  we  
derive meaning from our struggles, there is no reason  not  to build upon 
it,  to  enter  the  final  stage  of  the  myth—of  Prometheus,  Revolt,  of  
la mesure .
But how does this apply to  Le Renégat ? Well, as we see in  Le Mythe de 
Sisyphe , Camus suggests that the existentialists commit philosophical sui -
cide by accepting a new doctrine, instead of living like ‘The Absurd Man’, 
who inhabits a state of authentic confrontation with the absurd. Instead 
of a religion, they have a philosophy, but as far as Camus is concerned, 
this is simply another way of escaping the absurd. The missionary in  Le 
Renégat  too abandons his religion, instead adopting the cruel and fetish -
istic one of Taghâsa, which permits all manner of violence. The existen -
tialists  thus  make  a  doctrine  out  of  meaninglessness,  whilst  refusing  to  
reconcile  themselves  with  their  point  of  departure,  that  is,  Christianity  

114   G. Whistler
(as we saw Camus did to a certain degree in Chap.  2).  Le Renégat  is cer -
tainly  a  cautionary  tale  of  indoctrination,  but  what  is  the  alternative?  
Slochower says that the radical freedom of existentialism,
spells the mutilation of the myth into a process which is open at both ends. 
It converts the steady continuity of the myth into a disconnected series of 
leaps leading to death or shipwreck. Existentialism has emptied the mythi -
cal collective and transformed it into a primeval abyss. In it man begins and 
ends with nothing. Between the two voids lies the realm of existence whose 
emergence remains a mystery. In sum, it deprives the myth of its commu -
nal status and dignity. (Slochower  1948 , 52)
While the existentialist, left without closure, ruins the neat arc of clas -
sical myth, Camus’ myth mirrors it, with its own emphasis on reconcili -
ation and limitation. While he does not suggest that, after confronting 
the absurd, one should return to the doctrinal ‘home’ of Christianity, he 
does suggest that our freedom is (and indeed should be) limited. We are 
not bound by an absolute God, but by a commitment to humanity in the 
face  of  absurdity.  Thus  Camus’  absurd  man  ‘returns  home’  from  the  
absurd wasteland, bringing with him a new and authentic understanding 
which must be reconciled with the old, rather than overwriting it as the 
existentialists (and ‘le renégat’) do.
6    Chapter  Conclusion
As we have seen once again, the methods Camus uses to approach philo -
sophical  problems  are  far  from  ‘analytic’.  As  I  have  cited  previously,  
Camus claimed that ‘A novel is never anything but a philosophy put into 
13  and his novels clearly demonstrate this  images’ (Camus  2006b , I: 794),
belief—often  through  the  use  of  fable,  parable,  or  other  metaphorical  
devices.  His  essays  also  rely  on  imagistic  narrative  and  myth.  It  might  
seem  strange  to  an  academic  philosopher  that  Camus  chooses  to  use  a  
myth  (traditionally  inseparable  from  religious  belief )  to  illustrate  an  
argument  against  religion,  and  the  absurdity  of  the  human  encounter  
with a godless universe (as Camus does in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe ). As we saw 

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   115
in Sect.  2 (and indeed Chap.  1), however, the  muthos / logos  dichotomy is 
not as cut and dry as we might hope. If we accept that the line between 
philosophy  and  literature  is  often  more  blurred  than  we  might  have  
thought, then the relationship between truth and classical mythology is 
no longer so far from our own. Indeed, Camus uses fable and other meta -
phorical devices with an aim to uncover philosophical truths—one might 
even go as far as to say that myth is as metaphysically true for Camus as 
it was for the Greeks.
Camus’  literature  (despite  numerous  vehement  critics)  is  widely  
acclaimed these days—winning a Nobel Prize is testimony to that. But 
the world of philosophy has long since ceased to give Camus’ works much 
serious consideration. The things which underpin a great novel, however, 
are precisely the concerns of philosophy—both art and thought aim to 
reveal and explore the human condition, with all its ambiguities. With no 
such thing as  dire pur , the idea that philosophy might be able to attain an 
unambiguous and unmediated understanding of life and its mysteries is 
more  than  ambitious,  it  may  simply  be  misguided;  it  is  for  this  reason  
that  Camus  embraces  these  ambiguities,  and  uses  them  as  a  means  of  
illustrating  the  ambiguities  of  our  own  existence.  Philosophical  style  is  
subject to the contingencies of fashion, but we will always turn towards 
writings which somehow tap into our experience of life and speak to our 
moral intuitions. As one critic put it:
During those seasons when it becomes too embarrassing academically or 
too social-scientifically ‘soft’ to enter deeply into the issues of the heart, we 
can still turn to those odd stories with double meanings that speak to us in 
ways not entirely subject to management by our greater and greater herme -
neutical competency (Champion  1989 , 37)
and among the oldest texts we rely on as are a plethora of metaphorical 
works, not only in religious contexts, but also in the stories we tell our 
children, such as Aesop’s fables or the fairy tales of Hans Andersen and 
the Brothers Grimm.
Whether  or  not  we  deign  to  call  his  writings  ‘philosophy’,  Camus’  
numerous  styles  situate  him  within  an  ancient  tradition  of  these  meta -
phorical  works—be  it  his  use  of  fables  and  parables  to  communicate  

116   G. Whistler
moral concerns (as discussed in Sects.  3 and  4), or his myths and allego -
ries  which  illustrate  metaphysical  theories  (Sect.   5).  As  we  have  seen  
already, the dialogue between the different genres Camus uses facilitate 
his philosophical aims: in accepting the ambiguity which inheres in met -
aphorical narrative, we come closer to accepting the ambiguity and absur -
dity of life itself. In other words, ‘The allegory will always have a fringe of 
uncertainty  and  an  aura  of  imprecision.  In  the  work  of  art  this  uncer -
tainty adds an extra dimension’ (Cruickshank  1957 , 65). Each of Camus’ 
works embraces this uncertainty, thereby attempting to engage the imagi -
nation of the reader on a deeper level than logical consideration. The next 
chapter will examine yet another of Camus’ approaches to the complexity 
of moral reasoning—that is, moral dialogue.
Notes
1.  See  Le Mythe de Sisyphe  (Camus  2006b , I: 215–315) for evidence of such 
inspiration (in which he makes almost continual reference to both phi -
losophers).   See   also   Kierkegaard   ( 1993 ,   167–169,   174–176)   and   
Nietzsche ( 1979 , 79) for examples of their own philosophical fables.
2.  By ‘metaphorical’ I mean to refer to works encompassing allegory, myth, 
parable, or fable more broadly.
3.  Lacoue-Labarthe  formulates  this  in  terms  of  fable,  which  makes  his  
argument particularly pertinent to the subject of this chapter, but it is 
worth noting that Rorty in fact argues something similar in  Contingency, 
Irony and Solidarity  (Rorty  1989 ) which it isn’t within the scope of the 
current volume to examine fully here.
4.  Letter to his friend Claude de Fréminville, undated (translation in Todd 
1998 , 105).
5.  Letter to André Malraux, 15th November 1941 (translation Todd  1998 , 
134.)
6.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  many  names  in   La  Peste   are  based  on  the  
names of people and places Camus encountered during one of his own 
periods  of  confinement  and  suffering,  in  a  sanatorium  in  the  French  
Alpes. Dr Rieux was named after a local doctor named ‘Rioux’; Paneloux 
is  adapted  from  the  name  of  area,  ‘Le  Panelier’;  even  Rambert  is  the  
name  of  a  neighbourhood  in  nearby  Saint-Etienne  (Todd   1996 ,  321–
322, translation in Todd  1998 , 160).

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   117
7.  In French, ‘le mal a quelquefois un visage humain, et ceci, la Peste ne le 
dit pas’.
8.  However, I will return to the issue of French colonialism in Chap.  7.
9.  In  French,  ‘Toutes  les  pensées  révoltées  ...  s’illustrent  dans  une  rhéto -
rique ou un univers clos’.
10.   In  French,  ‘ La  Peste   a  un  sens  social  et  un  sens  métaphysique.  C’est  
exactement le même. Cette ambiguïté est aussi celle de  L’Étranger ’.
11.   This  is  not  to  be  confused  with  philosophy  of  existence,  on  the  other  
hand, which (despite sometimes being categorised as a form of existen -
tialism) is a theory of raising levels of consciousness via subjective-exis -
tential questioning, developed by Karl Jaspers (Jaspers  1995 ).
12.   In  French,  ‘l’absurde,  pris  jusqu’ici  comme  conclusion,  est  considéré  
dans cet essai comme un point de départ’.
13.   In French, ‘Un roman n’est jamais qu’une philosophie mise en images.
References
Barthes, Roland. 1972.  Le Degré zéro de l’écriture . Paris: Points-Seuil.
———.  1993.   Œuvres  Complètes  vol.  1:  1942–1965 .  Edited  by  Éric  Marty.  
Paris: Seuil.
Camus,  Albert.  1970.   Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays .  Edited  by  Philip  Thody.  
Translated by Ellen Conroy Kennedy. New York: Vintage.
———. 2000a.  The Outsider . Translated by Joseph Laredo. London: Penguin.
———. 2000b.  The Rebel . Translated by Anthony Bower. London: Penguin.
———. 2002.  The Plague . Translated Robin Buss. London: Penguin.
———.   2005.    The   Myth   of   Sisyphus .   Translated   by   Justin   O’Brien.   
London: Penguin.
———.   2006a.    Exile   and   the   Kingdom .   Translated   by   Carol   Cosman.   
London: Penguin.
———. 2006b.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi et al. 
Paris: Gallimard.
Champion, James. 1989. The Parable as an Ancient and a Modern Form.  Journal 
of Literature & Theology  3 (1): 16–39.
Costes, Alain. 1973.  Albert Camus ou la parole manquante: étude psychanalytique . 
Paris: Payot.
Cruickshank,  John.  1957.  The  Art  of  Allegory  in   La  Peste .  Symposium   11  
(1): 61–74.

118   G. Whistler
Cruise O’Brien, Connor. 1970.  Albert Camus: Of Europe and Africa . New York: 
Viking Press.
Dickstein,  Morris.  2007.  Animal  Farm:  History  as  Fable.  In   The  Cambridge  
Companion to George Orwell , ed. John Rodden, 133–145. Cambridge: CUP.
Hutcheon,  Linda.  1973.  ‘ Le  Renégat  ou  un  esprit  confus ’  comme  un  nouveau  
récit.  La Revue des Lettres Modernes, Albert Camus  6: 67–87.
Jaspers,  Karl.  1995.   Philosophy  of  Existence .  Translated  by  Richard  F.  Grabau.  
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Kafka,  Franz.  1946.   The  Great  Wall  of  China .  Translated  by  Willa  and  Edwin  
Muir. New York: Schocken.
Kaplan,  Alice.  2016.   Looking  for  the  Stranger:  Albert  Camus  and  the  Life  of  a  
Literary Classic . Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Kierkegaard, Søren. 1993.  Upbuilding Discourses in Various Spirits . Edited and 
Translated  by  Howard  V.  Hong  and  Edna  H.  Hong.  Princeton:  Princeton  
University Press.
Lacoue-Labarthe,  Phillipe.  1993.   The  Subject  of  Philosophy .  Translated  by  
Thomas Trezise et al. Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press.
Le  Dœuff,  Michèle.  1989.   The  Philosophical  Imaginary .  Translated  by  Colin  
Gordon. London: Continuum.
McGregor,  Rob  Roy.  1993.  “Camus’s  ‘Le  Renégat”:  An  Allegory  of  the  
Existentialist Pilgrimage.  The French Review  66 (5): 742–751.
Nietzsche,  Friedrich.  1979.  On  Truth  and  Lies  in  a  Nonmoral  Sense.  In  
Philosophy and Truth, Selections from Nietzsche’s Notebooks of the Early 1870’s . 
Edited   and   Translated   by   Daniel   Breazeale.   Atlantic   Highlands,   NJ:   
Humanities Press.
Orwell, George. 1980.  Animal Farm . London: Penguin.
———. 2004.  Why I Write . London: Penguin.
Parker, Emmett. 1966.  Albert Camus: Artist in the Arena . Madison: Wisconsin 
University Press.
Partenie, Catalin. 2014. Plato’s Myths. In  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 
Edited by Edward N. Zalta. Accessed 14 February 2018.  https://plato.stan-
ford.edu/archives/sum2014/entries/plato-myths/ .
Plato. 2011.  The Republic . Edited by Giovanni R. F. Ferrari. Translated by Tom 
Griffith. Cambridge: CUP.
Politzer, Heinz. 1960. Franz Kafka and Albert Camus: Parables for Our Time. 
Chicago Review  14 (1, Spring): 47–67.
Rorty, Richard. 1989.  Contingency, Irony and Solidarity . Cambridge: CUP.
Sartre,  Jean-Paul.  1956.   Being  and  Nothingness .  Translated  by  H.  E.  Barnes.  
New York: Philosophical Library.

4    Myths, Fables, Parables, Allegories   119
———. 2007. A Commentary on  The Stranger . In  Existentialism is a Humanism . 
Translated by Carol Macomber. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Slochower,  Harry.  1948.  The  Function  of  Myth  in  Existentialism.   Yale  French  
Studies  1: 42–52.
Srigley,  Ronald  D.  2011.   Albert  Camus’  Critique  of  Modernity .  Columbia:  
University of Missouri Press.
Todd, Olivier. 1996.  Albert Camus: Une Vie . Paris: Gallimard.
———.   1998.    Albert   Camus:   A   Life .   Translated   by   Benjamin   Ivry.   
London: Vintage.

5
Dialogic Ethics
1    Chapter  Introduction
By now we have seen numerous examples of Camus’ innovations in the 
genre(s) of moral philosophy. In this chapter, we will turn to a particular 
method that, following Mikhail Bakhtin, I suggest he inherited from one 
of his greatest idols—Fyodor Dostoevsky. The works of both authors are 
replete with moral and philosophical dialogues; in this chapter I suggest 
that these dialogues are yet another innovative method of tackling ethical 
problems. In  Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics , Bakhtin identifies a quality 
in  the  writings  of  Dostoevsky  which  he  called  ‘polyphony’  (Bakhtin  
1984 , 6)—that is, the expression of many voices. These voices take the 
form of dialogue, not only between characters, but also in what he calls 
‘micro-dialogue’, inner disputes waged by characters in and against them -
selves. The themes of such arguments, in Dostoevsky, are philosophical 
and  moral  (such  as  personal  identity,  guilt,  suffering,  death,  transcen -
dence, and the existence of God), and the resulting disputes are in many 
ways left unsettled, because for Dostoevsky, truth about important issues 
such as these is not a static thing. Identity and moral truth are borne out 
of the meeting of minds and perspectives: we find out who we are and 
121 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_5

122   G. Whistler
what we believe through complex encounters with others. Dostoevsky’s 
choice  of  philosophical  material  has  led  him  to  be  considered  among  
many as an important precursor to existentialism, which, according to 
Walter  Kaufmann,  is  also  characterised  by  a  ‘marked  dissatisfaction  
with traditional philosophy [considering it] superficial, academic, and 
remote from life’ (Kaufmann  1975 , 12)—a dissatisfaction which Albert 
Camus no doubt shared. While careful readers of Camus wouldn’t con -
sider  him  among  the  existentialists,  he  was  certainly  a  descendent  of  
Dostoevsky’s, not only in his subject matter, but also (as I hope to show 
in this chapter), in his methods. According to biographer Olivier Todd, 
Camus was often,
more  about  morality  than  philosophy.  And  more  about  morality  than  
about ethics, if morality aims at establishing rules for living, whereas ethics 
strives to analyse the concepts of morality, perhaps eventually a morality to 
be founded outside the one imposed by moral judgements ... he did not 
want to propose any universal morality. It was difficult enough to construct 
1 one’s own moral code. (Todd  1996 , 293)
Despite his desire to ‘establish rules for living’, Camus ‘did not want to 
propose  any  universal  morality’  as  it  was  ‘difficult  enough  to  construct  
one’s own moral code’. If we accept Todd’s account, we can already see 
similarities between the approaches of Dostoevsky and Camus. This ten -
sion between the need for moral guidance and the indeterminacy of right, 
wrong, and the self gives birth to what I will call ‘dialogic ethics’. Dialogic 
ethics does not attempt to formulate a morality ‘founded outside the one 
imposed  by  moral  judgements’.  Instead,  it  puts  these  judgements  into  
dialogue with others, thereby embracing this indeterminacy.
The  following  chapter  is  in  some  ways  a  study  of  Camus’  debt  to  
Dostoevsky, but it will not attempt to identify all the points of agreement 
2  Instead, I will use Bakhtin’s  and divergence between these two thinkers.
notion  of  polyphony  as  a  tool  to  elucidate  Camus’  attempts  at  finding  
3  For Camus, like Dostoevsky, dialogue functions as a way of  moral truth.
approaching theoretical tensions and moral problems. I suggest that what 
both Dostoevsky and Camus want us to learn from these dialogues is a 
new  awareness  of  the  uncertainty  of  our  position.  They  want  to  

5    Dialogic Ethics   123
   demonstrate  that  only  through  reflection  upon  encounters  with  the  
beliefs of others (either in dialogue or ‘inner dialogue’) can we reach truly 
moral conclusions. Their brand of ethics is heterocentric—they prescribe 
active engagement with others as the only effective method of resolving 
the  problems  we  face  as  humans.  Naturally,  the  literary  works  of  
Dostoevsky and Camus offer examples of both successful and unsuccess -
ful  dialogues—instances  in  which  polyphony  effectively  unearths  and  
sculpts  opposing  moral  concerns,  and  times  when  it  doesn’t.  Bakhtin  
himself  went  a  long  way  in  demonstrating  Dostoevsky’s  use  of  polyph -
ony,  so  the  present  task  is  more  to  emphasise  how  this  relates  to  my  
notion of dialogic ethics and to forge links with the work of Camus, both 
theoretically and textually. In the light of this aim, I will give particular 
attention  to  Dostoevsky’s   The  Devils   and   The  Brothers  Karamazov ,  and  
Camus’  L’Etranger  and  La Peste . From this, I hope to show that in some 
cases,  this  kind  of  ethics  can  indeed  provide  fruitful  contributions  to  
moral theory and practice.
Section  2 will deal with the distinction between monology and dialogy 
(which we have already touched upon in this short introduction). As a 
means of demonstrating this distinction, I will focus on points of diver -
gence between the narrational strategies of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky, and 
how this can be seen to relate to the concept of transcendence, a central 
issue for both Dostoevsky and Camus. Section  3 will examine the  func-
tion  of dialogue in polyphonic fiction and attempt to elucidate my notion 
of dialogic ethics. Section  4 is where we take a more thorough look at the 
texts themselves, drawing on examples of didactic dialogues in  La Peste , 
The  Brothers  Karamazov ,  and   The  Devils .  Section   5  covers  Dostoevsky’s  
and  Camus’  explorations  of  what  happens  when  dialogue  breaks  down  
and  how  this  effects  ethical  understanding,  taking  examples  from  the  
work of both of this chapter’s key writers.
2    Monology  and Dialogy
Albert Camus had only two portraits of writers hung-up in his office—
Dostoevsky’s and Tolstoy’s (Wasiolek  1977 , 131). Both of these authors 
made  an  enormous  impression  on  Camus,  indeed  ‘he  suffer[ed]  from  

124   G. Whistler
juxtapositions  with  the  two  great  Russian  novelists’  (Kaufmann   1961 , 
40), as will become clear in this section. One critic who recognises Camus’ 
particular  ‘debt  to  Tolstoy’  (Kaufmann   1961 ,  40)  is  Walter  Kaufmann.  
He  declares  Camus  ‘Tolstoy’s  heir’  (Kaufmann   1961 ,  40)  due  to  their  
dealing with convergent philosophical themes, such as the confrontation 
with death central to both Tolstoy’s  The Death of Ivan Ilyich  and Camus’ 
La Peste  (Kaufmann  1961 , 40). Though I would suggest that this argu -
ment somewhat misses the mark (for reasons which will become clear), 
he  does  identify  a  key  conceptual  difference  between  Tolstoy  and  
Dostoevsky that points towards Camus’ true philosophical allegiances—
‘While Tolstoy wants to prepare the kingdom of God on earth, Dostoevsky 
seeks the kingdom only in the hearts of men’ (Kaufmann  1961 , 11). In 
the world inhabited by Dostoevsky (and thereafter Camus), the human is 
alone  in  her  struggles  and  cannot  appeal  to  vertical  transcendence.  
Transcendence in Tolstoy figures not only in his religious worldview, but 
also  in  his  literary  composition.  His  narrators  are  omniscient,  with  the  
ability to look into the minds of the characters and judge their motives. 
In Bakhtin’s terms, this form of narration robs Tolstoy’s characters of their 
voices and their ability to represent intact moral persons—Tolstoy’s texts 
are monologic. Both the author and the reader are in a position of know -
ing  the  characters  more  intimately  than  they  do  themselves.  From  this  
point de vue divin , we are spectators to the ignorance and self-deception 
of the characters which, more often than not, result in fatal pitfalls.
Truth, in Tolstoy’s narratives, is something objective, outside the mind 
and facticity of the individual. Thus he transcends his creations in a god -
like manner. Also following Bakhtin, Emerson argued that:
Tolstoyan discourse strives to rise above specific times and places, it inevi -
tably  dehistoricizes  language—that  is,  makes  it  possible  to  value  a  word  
regardless of when it was spoken and by whom ... Either Tolstoy allows a 
speaker to assume directly the didactic role of teacher, judge or preacher, or 
he presents discourse itself as something more solid and impersonal than it 
is—as a direct impression from life, or as something untainted by ideologi -
cal preconceptions. (Emerson  1989 , 158)

5    Dialogic Ethics   125
The literary work therefore becomes a monologic didactic text, teach -
ing  a  singular  moral  truth  which  is  stable  and  above  the  temporal  
   contingencies  of  human  lives.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  of  Tolstoy’s  
judgements of this kind falls on Anna Karenina (whose tragic story hardly 
needs  to  be  synopsised  here).  Powerless  as  she  is  to  resist  extramarital  
temptation, she is also unable and unwilling to realise the consequences 
of her actions before it is too late, while the author-God knows all along: 
‘Now for the first time Anna turned that glaring light in which she was 
seeing everything on to her relations with him [her lover, Vronsky], which 
she had hitherto avoided thinking about’ (Tolstoy  1977 , 732); the phrase 
‘hindsight is 20/20’ is all too fitting in Anna’s case. Bakhtin elaborates:
The author’s field of vision nowhere intersects or collides dialogically with 
the characters’ fields of vision or attitudes, nowhere does the word of the 
author  encounter  resistance  from  the  hero’s  potential  word,  a  word  that  
might illuminate the same object differently, in its own way—that is, from 
the vantage point of its own truth. (Bakhtin  1984 , 7)
No character has their own truth to offer, and thus their fates are at the 
mercy of the author’s design, and thus, monologic texts can only depict 
the character’s world as something which can be transcended.
Of  the  many  literary  figures  who  deal  with  philosophical  ideas,  
Dostoevsky has perhaps received the most scholarly attention of all. What 
is of interest to this chapter, however, is less the ideas themselves, or even 
what Dostoevsky’s own beliefs may be, but instead his literary methods of 
approaching these ideas. As an opening to  Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics , 
Mikhail Bakhtin describes:
The  impression  that  one  is  dealing  not  with  a  single  author-artist  who  
wrote novels and stories, but with a number of philosophical statements by 
several author-thinkers ... Dostoevsky’s work has been broken down into a 
series of disparate, contradictory philosophical stances, each defended by 
one or another character. (Bakhtin  1984 , 5)
This  experience  that  Bakhtin  alludes  to  is  a  product  of  Dostoevsky’s  
polyphonic  method.  His  characters  adopt  and  reflect  upon  various  

126   G. Whistler
   philosophical  stances,  none  of  which  intended  to  simply  represent  the  
author’s own beliefs, or a ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ way of thinking, ‘the author 
speaks not  about  a character, but  with  him’ (Bakhtin  1984 , 63). And so, 
the  plurality  of  voices  in  Dostoevsky’s  fiction  gives  the  characters  their  
own  moral  agency,  imbuing  their  actions  and  ideas  with  the  weight  of  
real  life.  Unlike  Tolstoy’s,  Dostoevsky’s  narrators  are  characters  them -
selves, and often comparatively minor ones. The story is never told ‘from 
the  point  of  view  of  a  nonparticipating  ‘third  person’’  (Bakhtin   1984 , 
18).  By  grounding  all  philosophical  positions  within  characters  on  an  
equal  footing,  ‘a  new  authorial  position  is  won  and  conquered,  one  
located above the monologic position’ (Bakhtin  1984 , 18).
If, as Dostoevsky would seem to suggest, we (as readers) are to leave 
our own moral convictions at the door, then how exactly are philosophi -
cal  positions  to  be  introduced  to  our  dialogues?  The  key  lies  in  ‘voice’.  
Nealon explains how this works in polyphonic fiction:
‘Voice’  can  ‘de-essentialize’  ethics  precisely  because  it  also  highlights  an  
emphasis on ‘response’: ‘voicing’ an opinion, for example, is not the same 
as ‘holding’ an opinion. ‘Voice’ becomes such an attractive concept because 
it is not tied essentially to one point of view; rather, one must learn to  find  
one’s own voice and to  hear  the voice of the other within a common social 
context. (Nealon  1997 , 131)
Arguments  can  then  become  separate  from  their  advocates,  just  as  
Dostoevsky’s characters are independent from their creator. The indepen -
dence  of  these  voices  means  we  are  willing  to  engage  with  them  and  
contemplate  their  worth,  as  opposed  to  accepting  or  rejecting  a  lesson.  
The  resulting  ‘ongoing  conversation  of  ideas  ...  will  reveal  various  ten -
sions  and  are  basically  unresolvable’,  but  amongst  these  voices  we  can  
‘cocreate an understanding of reality’ (Sleasman  2011 , 79), and a more 
dynamic understanding of morality.
Bakhtin writes that ‘Dostoevsky was capable of representing someone 
else’s idea, preserving its full capacity to signify as an idea, while at the 
same  time  also  preserving  a  distance,  neither  confirming  the  idea  nor  
merging it with his own expressed ideology’ (Bakhtin  1984 , 85). Indeed, 
in  this  respect,  Dostoevsky  was  perhaps  sometimes  too  persuasive—his  

5    Dialogic Ethics   127
portrayal  of  characters  was  often  so  credible  and  authentic  that  many  
readers  believed  them  to  be  expressing  the  author’s  own  beliefs  ( The 
Devils , when published without Stavrogin’s confession, is one example of 
a  worldview  contrary  to  Dostoevsky’s  own  apparently  having  the  last  
word, as is the advocation of suicide in  Diary of a Writer ). Similarly, Sartre 
appears  to  have  misunderstood   L’Etranger ,  thinking  that  Meursault’s  
ambivalence was Camus’ own, writing: ‘Where is Meursault, Camus?’, as 
if betrayed, having thought Meursault voiced Camus’ own philosophical 
views  (in  Lottman,   1997 ,  533).  Wasiolek  is  an  example  of  a  reader  of  
Dostoevsky who appears to have become lost in this plurality of voices, 
telling us that ‘Dostoevsky the man remained convinced that beauty and 
dignity were possible through faith and humility, but Dostoevsky the art -
ist watched with a certain helplessness, as the world he created mangled 
and made grotesque what he proposed’, suggesting that ‘There are finally 
no  redemptive  traits  in  Dostoevsky’s  world,  and  he  had  to  seek  them  
desperately  elsewhere’  (Wasiolek   1977 ,  144),  that  is,  in  a  world  which  
transcends our own. Dostoevsky writes, ‘They have grown used to seeing 
in everything the author’s mug; I didn’t show mine. And it doesn’t even 
occur to them that Devushkin is speaking and not I, and that Devushkin 
4 —here Dostoevsky  cannot speak in any other way’ (Dostoevsky  1883 , 86)
himself testifies to the idea that his characters are subjects separate from 
him,  proving  Wasiolek  wrong  in  his  assumption  that  Dostoevsky’s  cre -
ations   left   him   helpless.   Dostoevsky   intended   for   characters   like   
Devushkin  and  Stavrogin  to  be  able  to  hold  their  own  in  his  dialogue,  
without the implication that one character or another was ‘right’ all along.
3    Dialogic  Ethics
Camus writes that, ‘There are two kinds of reason, the one ethical and the 
5   and  indeed  his  dialogic  use  of   other  aesthetic’  (Camus   2006a ,  II:  861),
genre itself puts this idea into practice. As we have already seen, Camus 
wrote in cycles, investigating how different stylistic approaches could bring 
different and new understandings to a problem, and how ‘certain works 
6  Camus searched for truth  can illustrate one another’ (in Todd  1998 , 134).
in  between  different  ways  of  writing,  creating,  and  thinking.  Camus’  

128   G. Whistler
ideas and works were ‘invigorated by this internal dialogue’ (in Todd  1998 , 
7 ;  for  Camus,  discrepancies  we  find  in  our  moral  schemes  fuel  the   134)
debate  necessary  for  reflective,  dialogic,  and  moral  engagement.  He  also  
8  and,  claimed that, ‘Art cannot be a monologue’ (Camus  2006a , IV: 254)
in  his  Nobel  Prize  Acceptance  Speech,  that  ‘True  artists  scorn  nothing:  
they  are  obliged  to  understand  rather  than  judge’  (Camus   2006a ,  IV:  
9  Accordingly, the narrators of dialogic texts never ‘judge absolutely’,  240).
and  do  not  ‘arbitrarily  divide  reality  into  good  and  evil’  (Camus   2006a , 
10  and so the characters in such works are left unfinished: uncon - IV: 261),
demned. Thus, ‘the independence, internal freedom, unfinalizability, and 
indeterminacy  of  the  hero’  (Bakhtin   1984 ,  63)  take  precedence—it  is  
never  too  late,  and  each  character  is  allowed  its  contrasting  facets,  both  
vices and virtues. As Bakhtin put it:
The consciousnesses of other people cannot be perceived, analyzed, defined 
as objects or as things—one can only  relate to them dialogically . To think 
about them means to  talk with them ;  otherwise they immediately turn to us 
their objectivized side : they fall silent, close up, and congeal into finished, 
objectivized images. (Bakhtin  1984 , 63)
Characters  must  therefore  become  subjects,  deserving  understanding  
and respect. Thus, ‘ The author can juxtapose only a single objective world—
a world of other consciousnesses with rights equal to those of the hero ’ (Bakhtin 
11  and we are encouraged to take a leaf from their book. 1984 , 49–50),
This brings us to the problem of the pedagogic value of literature—if, 
as Dostoevsky appears to suggest, we cannot rely on our own convictions, 
is it not problematic to produce didactic texts? Does Dostoevsky contra -
dict himself by simply promoting his own conviction that morality has 
no transcendent value? Bakhtin too was wary of texts with pedagogical 
functions:
In an environment of philosophical monologism the genuine interaction 
of consciousnesses is impossible, and thus genuine dialogue is impossible as 
well  ...  Someone  who  knows  and  possesses  the  truth  instructs  someone  
who is ignorant of it and in error; that is, it is the interaction of a teacher 

5    Dialogic Ethics   129
and  a  pupil,  which,  it  follows,  can  be  only  a  pedagogical  dialogue.  
(Bakhtin  1984 , 81)
The issue at stake is how learning can be encouraged without the adop -
tion of a monologic position of authority. This problem is only fixed by 
dialogic  praxis.  We  are  not  attempting  to  reach  a  conclusion  through  
discourse  (as  in  Plato’s  dialogues),  but  we  are  attempting  to  discover  a  
truth that is in its essence dialogic, up for debate. Camus himself was well 
aware of this tension, telling us, ‘I don’t claim to teach anybody’ (Camus 
1970 ,  352),  whilst,  as  John  Krapp,  author  of   An  Aesthetics  of  Morality , 
writes,  he  would  ‘admit  to  broadcasting  common  human  experiences,  
judging them according to his standards, and then challenging his readers 
to develop a critical moral consciousness in response to their own social 
conditions’  (Krapp   2002 ,  76).  Once  again,  the  distinction  lies  in  the  
mode of delivery—the difference between right and wrong is not taught 
but developed collectively; the only wisdom that is to be imparted is that 
other voices can offer wisdom too. Krapp explains that, ‘Voices have the 
potential to be pedagogic, but they need not be entirely unreceptive to 
the  morally  instructive  influence  of  other  voices  with  whom  they  are  
drawn into tension; they necessarily represent an ethical position, but the 
position they represent cannot always be dismissed as monologic’ (Krapp 
2002 , 28). In Bakhtinian terms, it is these ‘dialogic overtones’ which give 
voices the potential to be both pedagogic and dialogic.
In essence then, dialogic ethics is methodological—it is less a question 
of ‘ what  morality’ than ‘ how  morality’. We are left with a firm notion of 
the author’s beliefs about morality, and we are even given the impression 
that their texts are meant to be didactic. What is being proposed to us is 
not, however, any suggestion of objective right or wrong—it is a sugges -
tion of how readers should think about and engage with moral problems. 
Bakhtin  writes,  ‘To  affirm  someone  else’s  ‘I’  not  as  an  object  but  as  
another subject—this is the principle governing Dostoevsky’s worldview’ 
(Bakhtin  1984 ,  10),  and  this  focus  on  the  Other  makes  his  dialogues  
inherently   ethical,  as  the  two  sides  of  a  dialogue  must  be  moulded  in  
response to the Other. In a sense, there is a  moral of the story , but the les -
son here is not how to behave morally, but how to approach morality—
we are impelled to reflect dialogically upon ethical problems. Coincidental 

130   G. Whistler
conflicting and contrasting philosophical standpoints mean that the nature 
of  the  problem  in  question  becomes  fluid  and  relative,  not  tied  to  any  
transcendent meaning; dialogue is therefore ‘a source of   non-   propositional 
knowledge  characteristic  of  moral  understanding’  (Gosling   1995 ,  308).  
By changing our understanding of the nature of philosophical and ethical 
problems to one more focused on the Other, dialogue can provide moral 
guidance despite the absence of moral certainty in life.
4    Didactic  Dialogues
Dostoevsky’s  literary  compositions  are  about  ideas—but  these  ideas  are  
not treated in isolation, nor are they dissected through sterile argumenta -
tion: instead these texts depict ideas  in  and  in between  the human minds 
that grapple with them—they depict ‘the interaction of consciousnesses 
in  the  sphere  of  ideas’  (Bakhtin   1984 ,  32).  The  following  section  will  
therefore examine the way that these ideas are grappled with, not only in 
Dostoevsky’s  work,  but  also  in  Camus’.  To  begin  with,  let  us  take,  for  
example, Ivan Karamazov’s famous dialogue with Alyosha on the prob -
lem  of  suffering—‘Nowhere  does  Ivan  hint  at  anything  resembling  a  
philosophical  argument  from suffering to a conclusion that Christianity is 
false  or  highly  improbable’,  as  one  critic  points  out  (O’Connor   2009 , 
176).  Instead,  through  internal  and  external  dialogue,  we  are  flung  
between  Ivan’s  (and  Alyosha’s)  emotions  and  ideas,  from  his  abstract  
rejection of transcendence—‘I personally still do not accept this world’ 
(Dostoevsky  1970 , 283)—to his heart-rending image of a ‘martyred little 
girl who beat her breast with her tiny fist, shedding her innocent tears’ 
(Dostoevsky  1970 , 295). Ivan does not reject the idea of salvation because 
of a lack of belief; concepts are inseparably fused with human emotions 
and experiences, and instead we are told, ‘No, I want no part of any har -
mony; I don’t want it, out of love for mankind. I prefer to remain with 
my unavenged suffering and my unappeased anger— even if I happen to be 
wrong ’ (Dostoevsky  1970 , 295). Ivan’s rejection of a world of suffering is 
not motivated by strict reason, but love’s interference with reason. Ivan’s 
protest is a product of his encounter with Alyosha’s ideas, as well as his 
inner warring voices, both logical and emotive.

5    Dialogic Ethics   131
Camus too ‘saw the saving principle as a descent from the elevations of 
reason and idealization to a real world of contingency and flux’ (Wasiolek 
1977 ,  132).  Following  the  horrific  events  of  the  Second  World  War,  
Camus  wrote,  ‘If  everything  is  logical  then  everything  is  justified  ...  If  
one cannot accept the suffering of others, then something in the world 
cannot be justified, and history, at one point at least, no longer coincides 
with  reason’  (Camus   2000b ,  152).  Here  and  elsewhere  (as  we  saw  in  
Chaps.  1 and  2) he demonstrates his belief that ethical matters such as 
human suffering cannot be addressed with reason alone. Rieux in  La   Peste  
carries Ivan’s mantle and ‘rejects the world as it is’ (Camus  2000b , 260), 
refusing to believe that ‘the love of God ... can reconcile us to suffering 
and the deaths of children’ (Camus  2002 , 228). Just as Ivan’s ideas take 
shape  in  dialogue  with  Alyosha,  Rieux’s  thoughts  are  bounced  off  
Paneloux, both in direct dialogue with him and internally. Dunwoodie 
points  out  that  Rieux  is  dedicated  to  modesty  as  opposed  to  absolutes  
(Dunwoodie  1996 ,  101),  and  here  he  has  touched  upon  this  issue  of  
transcendence.  Without  appealing  to  something  outside  of  itself,  life  is  
left  unfinished,  even  at  its  end.  There  is  no  all  or  nothing  for  ‘modest’  
Rieux,  as  there  is  for  his  absolutist  interlocutor,  Paneloux.  But  despite  
being believers themselves, neither Alyosha nor Paneloux can accept the 
suffering of children, and Alyosha’s ‘No, I would not’ (Dostoevsky  1970 , 
296)  is  echoed  in  Paneloux’s  ‘My  God,  save  this  child!’  (Camus   2002 , 
168). These are ethical conclusions drawn from dialogues between oppos -
ing philosophical stances, reflecting truths borne out of a communion of 
consciousnesses, and demonstrating that ‘moral dialogue provides an aes -
thetic paradigm for the way moral consciousness may be developed and 
nourished in the competition among ethical positions’ (Krapp  2002 , 33).
Along with the inadequacy of pure reason, the dangers of abstraction 
in  ethical  matters  are  also  dealt  with  by  these  writers,  most  notably  
through  Rieux  in   La  Peste   and  Kirilov  in   The  Devils .  As  we  saw  in  the  
previous chapter, the allegorical side of  La Peste  does not simply represent 
the ‘Nazi forces of oppression’, but instead the ‘abstractions in the name 
of which the Nazis had waged their war’ (Parker  1966 , 112–113), and in 
Rieux’s fight against ‘the plague of abstraction’ (Wasiolek  1977 , 134), he 
realises that to overcome it, ‘one must come to resemble it a little’ (Camus 
2002 ,  71).  But  just  as  Kirilov’s  willingness  to  take  the  blame  for  the  

132   G. Whistler
   murder  of  Shatov  turns  him  into  the  ambivalent  God  he  hates  (Allan  
2014 , 10), we can take our abstract ideas too far. Kirilov was once able to 
‘feel’ his ideas (Dostoevsky  2004 , 242), but he loses sight of this visceral 
type of contemplation. Rieux must therefore keep in mind that ‘only a 
constant and acute attentiveness and consciousness to one’s fellow man’s 
fate  can  dissipate  the  plague’  (Wasiolek   1977 ,  134).  Elsewhere  in   The 
Devils , Dostoevsky gives a somewhat satirical nod towards the obscuring 
effect of the application of abstract principles to human happiness, in this 
case the tension between happiness and free will. He does this through 
the voice of Shigalyov, who proposes,
to  divide  humanity  into  two  unequal  parts.  One-tenth  is  to  be  granted  
absolute freedom and unrestricted powers over the remaining nine-tenths. 
Those who give up their individuality and be turned into something like a 
herd,  and  by  their  boundless  obedience  will  by  a  series  of  regenerations  
attain a state of primeval innocence, something like the original paradise. 
(Dostoevsky  2004 , 405)
This  reductio ad absurdum  is testimony to Dostoevsky’s views on deal -
ing  with  ethical  matters.  Each  individual’s  needs  must  be  respected—
human  beings  are  subjects  that  should  never  be  treated  as  a  herd,  and  
morality cannot function on abstract principles alone.
Even the tension between Camus’ concepts of the absurd and revolt is 
put  into  focus  through  dialogue.  Tarrou  represents  the  voice  of  the  
absurd, even suggesting that the plague ‘has a good side; it opens men’s 
eyes  and  forces  them  to  take  thought’  (Camus   2002 ,  125).  Whilst  this  
nihilistic stab at the unreflective nature of society carries its own weight, 
it  is  not  left  without  a  rejoinder.  Rieux  voices  revolt  in  the  face  of  this  
sickness, and whilst his doggedness is worthy of Sisyphus himself, know -
ing  that  his  ‘victories  will  always  be  temporary’,  as  Tarrou  tells  him  
(Camus  2002 , 98), his struggle is an ethical one. Rieux responds plainly, 
‘For the moment I know this, there are sick people and they need curing. 
Later  on,  perhaps,  they’ll  think  things  over;  and  so  shall  I.  But  what’s  
wanted now is to make them well. I defend them the best I can, that’s all’ 
(Camus  2002 , 127). Instead of giving up the fight, Rieux hopes to give 
people the chance to live another day and perhaps then to reflect. Rieux’s 

5    Dialogic Ethics   133
struggle affirms the rights of the Other, despite the absurdity of our con -
dition, exemplifying the spirit of Camus’ own  cogito —‘I revolt, therefore 
12  Similarly, Rambert, who initially wants  we are’ (Camus  2006a , III: 79).
to escape the quarantine to be with his lover, despite the risk of contagion 
and the selfishness entailed in abandoning so many to suffering, is per -
suaded in dialogue with Rieux and Tarrou of the value of solidarity—and 
he  too  decides  to  fight  the  plague  in  the  name  of  the  Other  (Camus  
2006a , II: 148).
Certainly, these works are about ideas, and they do indeed contain a 
moral message, but as we have seen, that message is a proposed method 
of  dealing  with  ethical  issues.  Also  appropriating  Bakhtin’s  notion  of  
‘voice’, John Krapp says that ‘ The Plague  illustrates less a thematic moral 
lesson  than  a  paradigm  for  the  way  moral  consciousness  may  be  devel -
oped  and  nourished  aesthetically  in  the  conflict  between  ethical  voices’  
(Krapp  2002 , 98), and this is exactly right. In this respect, I think that 
Krapp  himself  has  hit  upon  the  basis  of  dialogic  ethics.  Even  though  
some of the characters have been accused of simply representing Camus’ 
13   La Peste  nevertheless ‘illustrates  own beliefs (such as Rieux and Tarrou),
the way even characters with the same basic sense of human responsibil -
ity express their commitment in different and evolving ways as a result of 
the  idiosyncratic  material  and  ideological  pressures  by  which  they  are  
informed’  (Krapp   2002 ,  33),  and  the  novel  revolves  around  numerous  
dialogues on moral responses to separation, freedom, and transcendence, 
among  other  themes.  The  real  purpose  of  dialogue  in   La  Peste   is  to  lay  
emphasis on its power to bring about intersubjective comprehension, and 
to criticise it for espousing Camus’ beliefs ‘would be to risk condemning 
it for moralizing, which is exactly where it is strongest’ (Spender  1948 , 1). 
But  Camus  is  not  preaching  any  moral  code,  any  objective  right  and  
wrong, except the idea that ideological tensions ‘may be assimilated and 
refined into a methodological principle for producing contingent ethical 
truth claims in the material world’ (Krapp  2002 , 33).

134   G. Whistler
5    Failures  of Dialogue
Dialogue ‘requires the flourishing of many voices’ (Isaac  1992 , 123–124), 
and  up  until  now  we  have  only  looked  at  how  this  can  be  an  effective  
means of approaching moral problems. In the examples of dialogic ethics 
that  we  have  examined,  ‘The  consciousness  of  a  character  is  given  as  
someone else’s consciousness, another consciousness, yet at the same time 
it is not turned into an object, is not closed, does not become a simple 
object of the author’s consciousness’ (Bakhtin  1984 , 7), that is to say, in 
cases such as these, characters are in themselves subjects. But of course, as 
humans,  we  encounter  failures  of  communication  every  day,  and  if  we  
accept  the  testimony  of  these  authors,  only  through  understanding  the  
Other  can  we  make  truly  ethical  decisions.  This  section  will  therefore  
look  at  how  these  writers  represent  ineffective  communication  and  the  
breakdown  of  dialogue—instances  in  which  characters  become  objects  
both  to  each  other  and  to  the  reader.  Specifically,  I  will  focus  on  
Dostoevsky’s  Myshkin  from   The  Idiot   and  Mitya  from   The  Brothers  
Karamazov , as well as Camus’ Meursault from  L’Etranger , Jean-Baptiste 
Clamence from  La Chute , and Jan from  Le   Malentendu .
A fundamental theme of  The Idiot  is ‘the impossibility of expressing an 
idea directly into words’ (Feuer Miller  1981 , 205), and this comes across 
nowhere more clearly than in the character Myshkin, who often frets that 
his ‘words are incongruous, not befitting the subject, and [that] that’s a 
degradation for those ideas’ (Dostoevsky  1981 , 332). Myshkin’s mistake 
which makes the expression of his ideas impossible is that his communi -
cation is monologic. Indeed the prince admits, ‘Perhaps I have a notion 
of  instructing’  (Dostoevsky   1981 ,  56)—a  sentiment  that  doesn’t  bode  
well for dialogic equality. Myshkin refuses to interpret the meaning of his 
parables, because of his belief that ‘in order adequately and responsibly to 
judge another individual, we should understand that person from within, 
know everything about them, in order to respond to them as lived actu -
alities’ (Cascardi  1986 , 131–132)—this is something he is unable to do 
even of the fictional characters in his parables. Myshkin’s moral standards 
are admirable, but sadly inconsequential, as he fails to enter into dialogue 
with other characters, characters of different moral standpoints. Despite 

5    Dialogic Ethics   135
his belief in the unfinalisability of the human, Myshkin’s moral message 
does not anticipate a dialogic ‘rejoinder’ and is consequently not heard.
It was Sartre who first pointed out the similarities between Myshkin 
and Meursault, noting that both are ‘innocent’, causing scandal through 
not  playing  by  the  rules  of  the  game.  According  to  him,  this  is  what  
makes them both ‘ étranger ’ (Sartre  1947 , 104). Though Meursault would 
never profess to morally instruct, there are many points of resemblance 
between him and Myshkin. They are both thwarted by their ‘basic inabil -
ity to acclimate [themselves] to the text’s unstable social relations’ (Krapp 
2002 , 138). Just as Meursault is unable to resort to insincere sentimental -
ism in court (indeed, it doesn’t even seem to occur to him that inauthen -
tic  communication  is  an  option),  ‘Myshkin  appreciates  the  separation  
between his and others’ modes of expression, he does nothing to modify 
the referential expectations of his voice to accommodate circumstantial 
pressures’  (Krapp   2002 ,  146).  Camus  knew  the  value  of  true  dialogue,  
the  kind  ‘between  people  who  remain  what  they  are  and  speak  their  
14   and  although  Myshkin  and   minds  honestly’  (Camus   2006a ,  II:  471),
Meursault are too honest for their own good, their interlocutors are not 
so  candid—they  know  the  rules  of  society’s  games.  Meursault’s  voice  
becomes impotent—he tells us, ‘Mixing up my words a bit and realizing 
that I sounded ridiculous, I said quickly that it was because of the sun. 
Some people laughed’ (Camus  2000a , 99). Unlike him, his accusers are 
skilled in the art of deceptive language and are able monopolise on lin -
guistic devices to shield themselves from participating in honest dialogue, 
and consequently Meursault is told ‘in bizarre language that I am to have 
my  head  cut  off  in  a  public  square  in  the  name  of  the  French  people’  
(Camus  2000a , 107). Myshkin and Meursault are moral centres that pro -
voke reflection through their inability to communicate effectively; both 
15 are martyrs for their principles.
Dostoevsky’s  belief  in  the  unfinalisability  of  the  human  found  its  
expression  in  many  places,  and  as  we  have  just  seen,  it  is  espoused  by  
Myshkin.  It  is  also  present  in  the  teachings  of  Elder  Zosima,  in   The 
Brothers Karamazov , who advises, ‘Above all, remember that you cannot 
be anyone’s judge. No man on earth can judge a criminal until he under -
stands  that  he  himself  is  just  as  guilty  as  the  man  standing  before  him’  
(Dostoevsky  1970 , 387), paraphrasing the moral message of the parable 

136   G. Whistler
in John 8:3–11, ‘The Adulterous Woman’ (as mentioned in Chap.  2 in rela -
tion to Camus’ short story of the same title ). Those who judge others fail to 
recognise the dialogic nature of the human being, and it is not just Myshkin 
and Meursault who fall victim to eager judges. Mitya (Dmitry) Karamazov 
suffered a similar fate—he is considered by most to be guilty because he fits 
the profile of a murderer, and in the eyes of his judges, his previous deeds 
define him—much like Meursault’s being judged for ‘burying his mother 
like a heartless criminal’ (Camus  2000a , 93). As Bakhtin put it:
All who judge Dmitry are devoid of a genuinely dialogic approach to him, 
a dialogic penetration into the unfinalized core of his personality. They seek 
and see in him only the factual,  palpable definitiveness  of experiences and 
actions,  and  subordinate  them  to  already  defined  concepts  and  schemes.  
16 The authentic Dmitry remains outside their judgment. (Bakhtin  1984 , 62)
Thus,  through  their  failures  to  engage  others  in  dialogue,  Mitya,  
Myshkin, and Meursault lose their voices, becoming objectified.
Camus too offered cautionary tales for those who feel it in their power 
to judge others, owing to his belief that ‘guilt and condemnation imply 
judges  and  a  height  from  which  man  can  be  judged.  But,  for  Camus,  
there  is,  and  can  be,  no  height  above  man’  (Wasiolek   1977 ,  136).   La 
Chute   is  an  exploration  of  the  connection  between  transcendence  and  
judgement.  The  story  of  the  protagonist,  Jean-Baptiste  Clamence,  is  a  
demonstration of monologic dominance, and he is unafraid to admit to 
his own feeling of superiority. He confesses: ‘I have never felt comfortable 
except  in  lofty  places.  Even  in  the  details  of  daily  life,  I  needed  to  feel  
above’  (Camus   2006b ,  23).  Clamence  assumes  for  himself  an  almighty  
position,  having  ‘recognized  no  equals’  (Camus   2006b ,  48).  Before  his  
own  personal  ‘fall’,  Clamence  ‘held  a  transcendent  view  of  himself ’  
(Wasiolek  1977 ,  135),  due  to  his  supposed  moral  superiority.  After  he  
has recognised his own guilt, he embraces selfishness, rather than perceiv -
ing  these  conflicting  aspects  of  himself  in  dialogic  relation.  His  earlier  
professed moral superiority dissolves into the narcissism at its core, and 
in assuming the role of ‘judge-penitent’, he continues ‘to love [him]self 
and to make use of others ... Once more [having] found a height’ (Camus 
2006b , 141–142).

5    Dialogic Ethics   137
Whilst  La Chute  is, in an important respect, monologic (we do indeed 
only encounter the voice of Clamence), the issue of polyphony is some -
what complicated in this work. Formally,  La Chute  is really quite differ -
ent  from  Camus’  other  novels;  it  consists  of  a  series  of  long,  rambling  
monologues by a stranger in a bar in Amsterdam. In this novel, however, 
there is what we might call ‘implicit dialogue’—Clamence addresses the 
reader as ‘you’, and we are forced into the position of a silent interlocutor. 
He thus proceeds to divulge his sins and misdeeds (which are of course 
many  and  various).  In  his  sinful  revelations,  Jean-Baptiste  Clamence  is  
reminiscent  in  many  ways  of  the  unnamed  narrator  of   Notes  from  
Underground  (Dostoevsky  2009 ), and as one critic writes:
The soliloquy with a silent interlocutor was not invented by Camus. This 
one was first found in  Notes from Underground  ... There is however a dif -
ference:  Clamence  addresses  a  single  interlocutor,  the  ‘speaker’  of  the  
Underground addresses a crowd to the public. So we do not find there the 
silent and definite interlocutor that is the originality of  La Chute . (Bloch-  
17 Michel  1962 , 14–23)
But Clamence is entirely more charismatic and theatrical, and another 
critic notes, ‘Camus will have taken care to transform the monologue of 
his great predecessor into a theatrical text, and to subject the moods of 
Dostoevsky  to  the  requirements  of  a  controlled  narrative,  even  to  his  
artifice.  We  are  far  from  soliloquy  with  a  mute  interlocutor’  (Abbou  
18  Clamence, a self-appointed ‘judge-penitent’ is a captivating  2009 , 61).
narrator—he is witty, conspiratorial, and domineering—even the activity 
of reading the novel gives the reader a feeling of submission to a stronger 
will.  The  narrator  addresses  us  directly,  putting  words  in  our  mouths  
(‘You must be in business? More or less? Excellent reply’) (Camus  2006b , 
6),  and  responding  to  questions  we  are  not  sure  we  have  asked  (‘I  do  
appreciate  your  curiosity.  Yet  there’s  nothing  extraordinary  about  my  
story. I’ll tell you, since you want to know’) (Camus  2006b , 27). While 
the purpose of soliloquy in the theatre is traditionally to let the audience 
in  on  the  speaker’s  conceit,  Clamence’s  soliloquy  is  precisely  the  oppo -
site—mock  sincerity  usurping  true  dialogue.  As  Sleasman  pointed  out,  
‘The writing style chosen by Camus to tell this story greatly emphasizes 

138   G. Whistler
the necessity of dialogue through the very absence of dialogue’ (Sleasman 
2011 , 20). This effect is a powerful one—the reader is swept along effort -
lessly, and beguiled into commiserating with this supposedly frank and 
unflinching confession.
Camus also explores the problem of monologism in the play  Caligula , 
which ‘provides insight into the implications of excessive power exercised 
in a monologic fashion’ (Sleasman  2011 , 91). Caligula takes his reason -
ing to its extremes, resulting in tyranny. Through his negative example, 
Camus’  own  suspicion  of  the  dogma  of  reason  comes  across.  With  his  
determination ‘to be logical, right through, at all costs’ (Camus  1984 , 8), 
Caligula is reminiscent of a utilitarian thought experiment gone wrong. 
His soliloquies reveal his own preoccupation with judgement, when he 
asks, ‘Who can condemn me in this world where there is no judge, where 
nobody is innocent’ (Camus  1984 , 103). Whilst Camus’ dialogic ethics 
suggests that we should not judge others, he does not follow it through to 
the conclusion (as Caligula does) that everything is permitted. Only in 
discussion with Cherea is he at all able to enter into true dialogue (e.g. 
Camus  2006a , I: 33)—but Caligula’s nihilism means that even this dia -
logue is often less than sincere. It transpires that Caligula’s own reflection 
is  his  only  true  confidant—in  what  might  be  taken  to  be  internal  dia -
logues  in  front  of  a  mirror,  the  emperor  engages  in  at  least  a  degree  of  
introspective discourse—even if he is unable to take this dialogism and 
apply it to his rule.
Thus Camus’ tragic characters all come to ruin through failures of dia -
logue. Jan, the unfortunate hero of  Le Malentendu , is perhaps the most 
tragically monologic of all—the entire action of the play revolves around 
Jan’s plot to withhold dialogue, and this spells his ultimate ruin. Camus 
contemplated the message that comes across from this failure of dialogue 
in his notebooks:
If the hero of  Le Malentendu  had said: ‘There you go. It’s me and I am your 
son,’ the dialogue would have been possible and there wouldn’t be crossed 
wires as there are in the play. There would not have been tragedy because 
the height of all tragedies is the deafness of the heroes ... What balances the 
absurd is the community of men fighting against it. And if we choose to 
serve  that  community,  we  choose  to  serve  the  dialogue  brought  to  the  

5    Dialogic Ethics   139
absurd  against  any  politics  of  falsity  or  silence.  (Camus   2006a ,  II:  
19 1039–1040)
We can see here the role he pictured dialogue to play in ethical con -
templation—only in dialogic relationships can we look out for ourselves 
and others. In this section we have looked at the results of breakdowns of 
dialogue  and  seen  what  happens  if  we  ‘fail  ...  to  realize  that  a  primary  
goal  of  ethical  communication  is  to  be  understood’  (Sleasman   2011 , 
127). But like successful dialogues, failures of dialogue have a role to play 
in dialogic ethics, they ‘nonetheless provide a formidable structural model 
of how  not  to investigate, develop, or pronounce upon moral concepts. In 
short,  such  voices  teach  through  what  is  characteristically  their  failure’  
(Krapp  2002 , 31).
6    Chapter  Conclusion
This chapter has endeavoured to illuminate the ethical core of Bakhtin’s 
notion of polyphony, and in this light, demonstrate that Camus (at least 
in part) adopted this kind of dialogue as a means of doing philosophy. 
We have seen the stark difference between monologic narrative (in this 
case  Tolstoy’s),  and  more  dialogic  approaches.  Dostoevsky  ‘thrived  on  
turbulent ambiguities and contradictions’ (Davison  1997 , 7), because of 
this fact, no transcendent authorial position would suit the aims of his 
fiction:  Dostoevsky  wanted  to  make  a  kind  of  sense  of  ethical  matters  
that truthfully represented the contradictions of the human experience—
that  is,  dialogic  sense.  As  Sutherland  put  it,  ‘The  exploration  of  major  
ideological  and  metaphysical  situations  was  for  Dostoevsky  inevitably  
dialogical: the issues at stake could not be resolved within a single con -
scious and consistent outlook’ (Sutherland  1977 , 137). We then launched 
into my own notion of dialogic ethics, something which perhaps several 
critics (Bakhtin, Krapp, and Sleasman) have come close to hitting upon. 
Whilst  Dostoevsky  does  not  preach  a  strict  moral  code,  he  does  try  to  
promote  a  firm  ethical  belief  of  his  own—that  morality  should  be  
approached dialogically, giving an equal footing to those that participate. 
This  move  away  from  the  abstractions  of  philosophical  methods  thus  

140   G. Whistler
enables us to consider ethical problems as they present themselves to us, 
amidst the myriad voices and possibilities of humanity. Dostoevsky tells 
us that there is no firm ground in morality, and so our approach to the 
decisions we must make must be dialogic.
I have also tried to show how important Dostoevsky’s polyphonic fic -
tion was in the development of Camus’ own philosophical venture. It is 
no big secret that Camus was a great admirer of Dostoevsky, but often 
this is attributed to their joint preoccupation with certain philosophical 
ideas,  such  as  death,  faith,  suffering,  and  so  on  (which  has  of  course  
resulted in them both being associated with the existentialist movement). 
The influence that I have endeavoured to uncover in this chapter, how -
ever, lies more in method than content—just like Dostoevsky’s, Camus’ 
use of dialogue ‘makes us understand that the plot and the characters give 
off a philosophy which has nothing to do ... with the superimposed dis -
20  Also borrowing Bakhtin’s terms,  course of the author’ (Rey  2000 , 72).
Davison touched upon the fact that ‘Camus’s work is informed by a spirit 
of  debate  and  dialogue  engendered  by  his  crucial  encounter  with  the  
challenging world of Dostoevsky’ (Davison  1997 , 8), and indeed this is 
true. It is also true that both Dostoevsky’s and Camus’ works contain the 
‘bold assertion’ of the necessity of a ‘commitment to others’ (Jones  1975 , 
112)—they are, in a sense, ethical projects. But these claims still fail to 
shed  light  on  the  implicit  claim  of  dialogic  ethics—that  moral  matters  
should be approached dialogically, as moral truth can only be understood 
intersubjectively. We have seen by now that Camus did indeed adopt this 
approach, and in these texts, just like in Dostoevsky’s, ‘the characters are 
responsible for their actions. They are moral agents’ (Palmer  1992 , 110).
Camus was a moralist. The values at the core of his morality are hardly 
controversial—compassion,  tolerance,  and  so  on—but  the  methods  he  
employs to promote them are what redeems them from being just another 
‘moral of the story’. Certainly, Camus believes in the value of such con -
cepts,  but  he  shows  that  there  is  no  one  true  way  of  upholding  them  
when there is no firm agreement amongst the plurality of voices. Camus 
follows  Dostoevsky  in  the  belief  that  methods  which  include  a  more  
holistic picture of the intersubjective state of play are more fitting to the 
complex  nature  of  morality.  Literary  dialogue  is  one  such  method.  
Dialogue functions in these works not as an end in itself, but as a means 

5    Dialogic Ethics   141
of doing philosophy. The arguments that characters engage in are philo -
sophical arguments; they do not endeavour to uncover a single, rational 
truth,  but  instead  an  intersubjective  experience  of  an  ethical  problem.  
After all, moral dilemmas would not arise if we could all agree on a solu -
tion, so the dynamic state of ‘un-resolution’ that a problem inhabits dur -
ing  such  arguments  and  dialogues  gives  a  more  accurate  picture  of  
morality. The paradoxical nature of morality, when approached through 
such a framework, does justice to every voice that is willing to take part 
in the dialogue. And just like the unresolvable conflict which lies between 
Dostoevsky’s own voice and those of his characters, this ‘is a paradox ... 
which   doubtless   Dostoevsky   would   have   been   happy   to   accept’   
(Sutherland  1977 , 138). Thus, these authors frame ethical problems in a 
way  that  encourages  multiple  approaches  to  be  evaluated  and  reflected  
upon.  Their  logic  of  morality  is  a  dialogic  one,  where  ethical  truth  is  
dynamic, nuanced, and contingent.
Notes
1.  Translation in Todd ( 1998 , 142–143).
2.  Two  informed  and  comprehensive  examples  are  already  offered  by  
Davison ( 1997 ) and Dunwoodie ( 1996 ), both of which I will make brief 
reference to later.
3.  Benoît Dufau also applies Bakhtin’s concept of dialogue to the work of 
Camus, but he only applies it to  La Chute , and while he offers an inter -
esting study of the illusion of dialogue in the novella, he fails to address 
the philosophical implications of Camus’ use of dialogue (Dufau  2013 , 
101–116).
4.  Translation Bakhtin ( 1984 , 204).
5.  In French, ‘C’est que deux raisons: l’une éthique, l’autre esthétique.’
6.  Letter from Camus to André Malraux, 15th November 1941.
7.  Same letter to Malraux, 15th November 1941.
8.  In French, ‘L’art ne peut pas être un monologue’.
9.  In French, ‘les vrais artistes ne méprisent rien; ils s’obligent à compren -
dre au lieu de juger’.
10.   In French, ‘S’il jugeait absolument, il partagerait sans nuances la réalité 
entre le bien et le mal’.

142   G. Whistler
11.   His emphasis.
12.   In French, ‘Je me révolte, donc nous sommes’.
13.   Olivier  Todd  suggested  that  Camus  was  ‘present,  barely  disguised’  in  
both of these characters (Todd  1996 , 330).
14.   In  French,  ‘le  monde  a  besoin  de  vrai  dialogue  ...  entre  des  gens  qui  
restent ce qu’ils sont et qui parlent vrai.
15.   An  example  of  fruitful  dialogue  in   L’Etranger   in  fact  occurs  between  
Meursault and the priest who visits his cell. While the priest fails to give 
an inch in his own contributions to the dialogue, for Meusault, the very 
fact of encountering his contrasting perspective is enough to help cryst -
allise his own (Camus  2006a , I: 208–213).
16.   His emphasis.
17.   In French, ‘Le soliloque avec un interlocuteur muet n’a pas été inventé 
par Camus. Celui-ci l’a d’abord trouvé dans  Ecrit dans un souterrain  ... 
Il y a cependant une différence: Clamence s’adresse à un seul interlocu -
teur, le ‘parleur’ du  Souterrain  s’adresse à une foule vague, au public. On 
ne trouve donc pas là l’interlocuteur muet et défini qui fait l’originalité 
de  La   Chute’.
18.   In French, ‘Camus aura pris soin de transformer le discours monologué 
de  son  grand  devancier  en  un  texte  théâtralisé,  et  de  soumettre  les  
humeurs dostoïevskien aux exigences d’une narration contrôlée, jusqu’en 
ses artifice. Nous sommes bien loin du soliloque avec un interlocuteur 
muet.’
19.   In French, ‘Si le héros du Malentendu avait dit: ‘Voila. C’est moi et je 
suis  votre  fils’,  le  dialogue  était  possible  et  non  plus  en  porte  à  faux  
comme dans la pièce. Il n’y avait plus de tragédie puisque le sommet de 
toutes  les  tragédies  est  dans  la  surdité  des  héros  ...  Ce  qui  équilibre  
l’absurde c’est la communauté des hommes en lutte contre lui. Et si nous 
choisissons  de  servir  cette  communauté,  nous  choisissons  de  servir  le  
dialogue  jusqu’à  l’absurde  contre  toute  politique  du  mensonge  ou  du  
silence’.
20.   In French, ‘il nous fait comprendre que l’intrigue et les personnage déga -
gent une philosophie qui n’avait que faire, dès lors, d’un discours surim -
posé de l’auteur’.

5    Dialogic Ethics   143
References
Abbou, André. 2009.  Albert Camus entre les lignes: Adieu à la littérature ou fausse 
sortie?  Biarritz: Atlantica-Séguier.
Allan,  Derek.  2014.  A  Logical  Redeemer:  Kirillov  in  Dostoievskii’s   Demons . 
Journal of European Studies  44 (2): 1–15.
Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1984.  Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics . Edited and Translated 
by Caryl Emerson. Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press.
Bloch-Michel, J. 1962. Une littérature de l’ennui.  Preuves  131 (January): 14–23.
Camus,  Albert.  1970.   Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays .  Edited  by  Philip  Thody.  
New York: Vintage.
———.   1984.    Caligula   and   Other   Plays .   Translated   by   Stuart   Gilbert.   
London: Penguin.
———. 2000a.  The Outsider . Translated by Joseph Laredo. London: Penguin.
———. 2000b.  The Rebel . Translated by Anthony Bower. London: Penguin.
———. 2002.  The Plague . Translated by Robin Buss. London: Penguin.
———. 2006a.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi et al. 
Paris: Gallimard.
———. 2006b.  The Fall . Translated by Justin O’Brien. London: Penguin.
Cascardi, Anthony J. 1986.  The Bounds of Reason: Cervantes, Dostoevsky, Flaubert . 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Davison,  Ray.  1997.   Camus:  The  Challenge  of  Dostoevsky .  Exeter:  Exeter  
University Press.
Dostoevsky, Fyodor. 1883.  Biografiia, pis’ma i zametki iz zapisnoi knizhki F. M. 
Dostoevskogo    [Biography,   Letters   and   Notes   from   F.   M.   Dostoevsky’s   
Notebook]. St Petersburg.
———. 1970.  The Brothers Karamazov . Translated by Andrew R. MacAndrew. 
New York: Bantam.
———. 1981.  The Idiot . Translated by Constance Garnett. New York: Bantam.
———. 2004.  The Devils . Translated by David Magarshack. London: Penguin.
———. 2009.  Notes from Underground and the Double . Translated by Ronald 
Wilkes. London: Penguin.
Dufau,  Benoît.  2013.  Le  dialogism  dans   La  Chute .  In   Albert  Camus,  l’histoire  
d’un    style ,    ed.    Anne-Marie    Paillet,    101–116.    Louvain-la-Neuve:    
Academia-L’Harmattan.
Dunwoodie,   Peter.   1996.    Une   Histoire   ambivalente:   le   dialogue   Camus-    
Dostoïevski . Paris: Nizet.

144   G. Whistler
Emerson,  Caryl.  1989.  The  Tolstoy  Connection  in  Bakhtin.  In   Rethinking 
Bakhtin: Extensions and Challenges , ed. Gary Saul Morson and Caryl Emerson. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Feuer  Miller,  Robin.  1981.   Dostoevsky  and  the  Idiot:  Author,  Narrator,  and  
Reader . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gosling,  Justin.  1995.  Literature  and  Moral  Understanding:  A  Philosophical  
Essay on Ethics, Aesthetics, Education, and Culture.  Review of English Studies  
46 (182): 308–310.
Isaac,  Jeffrey  C.  1992.   Arendt,  Camus,  and  Modern  Rebellion .  London:  Yale  
University Press.
Jones, Peter. 1975.  Philosophy and the Novel . London: Oxford University Press.
Kaufmann, Walter. 1961.  Religion:  From  Tolstoy  to  Camus .  New  York:  Harper  
and Brothers.
———. 1975.  Existentialism: From Dostoevsky to Sartre . New York: Meridian.
Krapp, John. 2002.  An Aesthetics of Morality: Pedagogic Voice and Moral Dialogue 
in   Mann,   Camus,   Conrad   and   Dostoevsky .   Columbia:   South   Carolina   
University Press.
Lottman,   Herbert   R.   1997.    Albert   Camus:   A   Biography .   Corte   Madera:   
Ginko Press.
Nealon, J.T. 1997. The Ethics of Dialogue: Bakhtin and Levinas.  College English  
59 (2): 129–148.
O’Connor,  Timothy.  2009.  Theodicies  in  Human  Nature:  Dostoevsky  on  the  
Saint as Witness. In  Metaphysics and God: Essays in Honor of Eleonore Stump , 
ed. Kevin Timpe, 175–187. London: Routledge.
Palmer, Frank. 1992.  Literature and Moral Understanding: A Philosophical Essay 
on Ethics, Aesthetics, Education, and Culture . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parker, Emmett. 1966.  Albert Camus: Artist in the Arena . Madison: Wisconsin 
University Press.
Rey, Pierre-Louis. 2000.  Camus: Une Morale de la Beauté . Paris: Sedes.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1947.  Situations . Paris: Gallimard.
Sleasman, Brent C. 2011.  Albert Camus’s Philosophy of Communication: Making 
Sense in an Age of Absurdity . Amherst: Cambria.
Spender, Stephen. 1948. Albert Camus, Citizen of the World.  New York Times 
Book Review , 1 August: 1, 20.
Sutherland, Stewart. 1977.  Atheism and the Rejection of God . Oxford: Blackwell.
Todd, Olivier. 1996.  Albert Camus: Une Vie . Paris: Gallimard.
———.   1998.    Albert   Camus:   A   Life .   Translated   by   Benjamin   Ivry.   
London: Vintage.

5    Dialogic Ethics   145
Tolstoy, Leo. 1977.  Anna Karenina . Translated by Constance Garnett. London: 
Heinemann.
Wasiolek, Edward. 1977. Dostoevsky, Camus, and Faulkner: Transcendence and 
Mutilation.  Philosophy and Literature  1 (2): 131–146.

6
Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond
1    Chapter  Introduction
At this late stage in the current volume, I hope by now to have demon -
strated  effectively  some  of  the  numerous  rhetorical  techniques  that  
Camus utilised in his ground-breaking moral philosophy. While I have 
suggested that these advances have largely gone unnoticed in the world of 
contemporary philosophy, there is of course evidence of his recognition 
and influence in the literary sphere. The following chapter will examine a 
strand  in  twentieth-century  literature  which  certainly  takes  up  Camus’  
mantle in terms of ‘doing moral philosophy’ by creative means—that is, 
the  movement  known  as  the  ‘Theatre  of  the  Absurd’.  This  term  was  
coined by Martin Esslin in his 1961 essay of the same name, and it is used 
to  refer  to  the  stylistic  innovations  of  a  number  of  artists  (including  
Beckett, Ionesco, Pinter, Adamov, and Genet) who, according to Esslin, 
have  ‘renounced  arguing   about   the  absurdity  of  the  human  condition;  
[their work] merely  presents  it in being—that is, in terms of concrete stage 
images’ (Esslin  2015 , 6). The innovativeness of the Theatre of the Absurd 
is thus motivated by the desire to break free from the clichés of language 
and art into something more authentic. As such, plays by these writers 
147 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_6

148   G. Whistler
that contain images which convey the  feeling  of the absurd—not just its 
theoretical understanding. He writes:
In the Theatre of the Absurd, the spectator is confronted with the madness 
of the human condition, is enabled to see his situation in all its grimness 
and despair. Stripped of illusions and vaguely felt fears and anxieties, he can 
face this situation consciously, rather than feeling it vaguely below the sur -
face of euphemisms and optimistic illusions. By seeing his anxieties formu -
lated he can liberate himself from them ... It is the unease caused by the 
presence of illusions that are obviously out of tune with reality that is dis -
solved and discharged through liberating laughter at the recognition of the 
fundamental absurdity of the universe. (Esslin  2015 , 350)
Tragedy and comedy are thus two sides of the same coin in this kind of 
theatre, and this confrontation between humans and our mortal condi -
tion  is  cathartic—watching  this  kind  of  play  allows  us  to  witness  the  
world in all its madness, and nevertheless see the hilarity of it.
Esslin credits Camus with having formulated the conceptual founda -
tion  for  this  kind  of  theatre,  citing  Camus’  own  remarkably  theatrical  
definition of the absurd: ‘This divorce between man and his life, the actor 
and his setting, is properly the feeling of absurdity’ (Camus  2005 , 4–5). 
This  lineage  has  rightly  been  observed  by  numerous  scholars,  such  as  
Sophie Bastien, who suggests that ‘the authors of the theatre of the Absurd 
are perhaps those who have benefited from Camus’ thought in the most 
1  Esslin points out that ‘the plays we are  positive way’ (Bastien  2007 , 89).
concerned with here pursue ends quite different from those of the con -
ventional  play  and  therefore  use  quite  different  methods’  (Esslin   2015 , 
4)—much like (as I have argued throughout this volume) Camus’ philo -
sophical venture. However, Esslin claims that Sartre and Camus,
differ from the dramatists of the Absurd in an important respect: they pres -
ent their sense of the irrationality of the human condition in the form of 
highly lucid and logically constructed reasoning, while the Theatre of the 
Absurd strives to express its sense of the senselessness of the human condi -
tion  and  the  inadequacy  of  the  rational  approach  by  the  open  abandon -
ment  of  rational  devices  and  discursive  thought.  While  Sartre  or  Camus  
express the new content in the old convention, the Theatre of the Absurd 

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   149
goes a step further in trying to achieve a unity between its basic assump -
tions and the form in which these are expressed. In some senses, the  theatre  
of Sartre and Camus is less adequate as an expression of the  philosophy  of 
Sartre and Camus—in artistic, as distinct from philosophic, terms—than 
the Theatre of the Absurd. (Esslin  2015 , 4)
And  Esslin  is  by  no  means  alone  in  this  respect.  Another  critic  who  
shares this belief is Geneviève Serreau, who writes, ‘Moralists before play -
wrights, [Sartre and Camus] only see the theatre as a means ... to signify 
their philosophical choices. At no time do they attempt to revolutionise 
their form and structures, carelessly pouring their new wine into the old 
2 bottles of traditional theatre’ (Serreau  1966 , 26).
Esslin might be convinced that ‘if Camus argued that in our disillu -
sioned age the world has ceased to make sense, he did so in the elegantly 
rationalistic  and  discursive  style  of  an  eighteenth-century  moralist,  in  
well-constructed and polished plays’ (Esslin  2015 , 6), but I suggest that 
this analysis doesn’t entirely do Camus justice, because, as we have already 
seen, throughout his career he concerned himself seriously with giving his 
diverse philosophical writings adequate stylistic expression. Furthermore, 
I also hope to show in this chapter that Camus’ theatre contains germinal 
elements of the methods that Esslin attributes to absurd theatre, despite 
the fact that he believes Camus’ theatre to simply follow ‘the old conven -
tion’. In an attempt to demonstrate Camus’ practical (as well as theoreti -
cal) ties to the Theatre of the Absurd, this chapter will therefore not only 
look to two of the playwrights who follow Camus’ lead in terms of ‘doing 
philosophy with literature’ (Beckett and Ionesco), it will also undertake 
the  slightly  more  audacious  task  of  examining  the  three  short  plays-   
within-   a-play  in  Caligula  as pieces of absurd theatre in their own right.
I will begin, therefore, by looking at what I see to be the three concep -
tual cornerstones of the Theatre of the Absurd, that is, a contemplation 
of mortality (Sect.  2), a break between language and meaning (Sect.  3), 
and an intertwined relationship between tragedy and comedy (Sect.  4). 
We  will  see  not  only  how  each  of  these  elements  is  manifested  in  the  
Theatre of the Absurd, but also how central they are to Camus’ own the -
atre (and the rest of his literature more generally). Analyses of the content 
of  Caligula  will (for the most part) be saved until the following section 

150   G. Whistler
(Sect.  5), where ‘les trois spectacles’ from this play will form the basis of 
a case study which points towards the rightful inclusion of Camus in the 
category of absurd theatre, due to his own generic innovations therein.
2    Time  and Mortality
There is a ‘tragic unfolding’ of events in the Theatre of the Absurd, one 
critic  tells  us  (Robbe-Grillet   1964 ,  135),  and  ‘time  is  tragic  precisely  
3   writes  another.  Why   because  nothing  happens  there’  (Rey   2011 ,  25),
should  the  passage  of  time—the  most  mundane  of  plot  devices—hold  
such  a  central  and  unstable  position  in  the  Theatre  of  the  Absurd?  
Precisely because it is something that more traditional theatre relies on, 
giving the impression that human perception of time is something that 
can be taken for granted too. But an awareness of the passage of time is 
also  something  which  provokes  reflection  on  the  human  condition,  so  
poignant in its tendency to stand still or slip away—at least in our subjec -
tive experiences of it. ‘The flow of time confronts us with the basic prob -
lem of being’ (Esslin  2015 , 30), as Esslin put it. The Theatre of the Absurd 
fully  embraces  this  instability,  however,  and  uses  it  as  one  of  its  most  
powerful  tools,  and  waiting,  patience,  and  repetition  often  shatter  the  
narrative illusion of temporal logic and progress (Bastien  2009a , 255).
Esslin begins his essay with an anecdote about a production of Beckett’s 
En attendant Godot  that was performed in San Quentin penitentiary five 
years  earlier.  He  observes  that  ‘what  had  bewildered  the  sophisticated  
audiences of Paris, London and New York was immediately grasped by an 
audience  of  convicts’  (Esslin   2015 ,  1–2).  While  this  incarcerated  audi -
ence were (for the most part) unlikely to be philosophically literate, they 
had undoubtedly encountered the feeling of the absurd for themselves. 
Waiting themselves, with little to do but contemplate the random chain 
of  events  that  led  to  their  imprisonment,  their  encounter  with  absurd  
theatre seems to have made sense on a level that those privileged viewers 
couldn’t grasp. Esslin writes:
The subject of the play is not Godot but waiting, the act of waiting as 
an   essential   and   characteristic   aspect   of   the   human   condition.   

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   151
Throughout our lives we always wait for something, and Godot simply 
represents  the  objective  of  our  waiting—an  event,  a  thing,  a  person,  
death. Moreover, it is in the act of waiting that we experience the flow 
of  time   in  its  purest,  most  evident  form.  If  we  are  active,  we  tend  to  
forget the passage of time, we pass the time, but if we are merely pas -
sively  waiting,  we  are  confronted  with  the  action  of  time  itself.  
(Esslin  2015 , 29)
We have already seen (in Chap.  4) how the setting of a quarantine cre -
ates such a vacuum in time in  La Peste , and this effect can be found else -
where in Camus’ work—‘killing time’ is of course a recurring theme in 
L’Etranger . Meursault not only kills time as a free man (waiting out his 
long Sunday, alienated from the rest of society) (Camus  2000a , 23–28), 
he  also  kills  time  waiting  for  death  (Camus   2000a ,  76–77).  This  same  
effect can also be noted in Ionesco’s  La Cantatrice Chauve , when the stage 
directions at the end of the play indicate that, as the curtains close, the 
play  should  begin  again  (Ionesco   1958b ,  42),  or  in   La  Leçon   (Ionesco  
1958b ,  78),  when,  after  the  professor  has  disposed  of  the  body  of  his  
pupil, a new student arrives at the door to set the whole macabre merry-  
go-   round in motion once more.
In  Beckett’s   En  attendant  Godot   (written  between  1948  and  1949),  
Vladimir and Estragon keenly feel the absurdity of time—they ‘are aware 
that  all  we  do  in  this  life  is  as  nothing  when  seen  against  the  senseless  
action of time, which is in itself an illusion. They are aware that suicide 
would be the best solution’ (Esslin  2015 , 44). As a result, they repeatedly 
ponder Camus’ ‘one truly serious philosophical problem’ (Camus  2005 , 
1), planning their suicides in each act (Beckett  1990 , 19, 87), and failing 
each time, so hopeless is Beckett’s picture of the absurd. Suicide to ‘Didi’ 
and ‘Gogo’ represents an escape from the monotony of being, a monot -
ony which is present throughout Beckett’s theatre. In  Embers , Henry and 
Ada’s empty days stretch on:
This evening ... Nothing this evening. Tomorrow ... tomorrow ... plumber 
at nine, then nothing. Plumber at nine? Ah yes, the waste. Words. Saturday 
...  nothing.  Sunday  ...  Sunday  ...  nothing  all  day  ...  Nothing,  all  day  
nothing. All day all night nothing ... not a sound. (Beckett  1990 , 264)

152   G. Whistler
This  echoing  nothingness  recalls  the  opening  scene  of   Caligula ,  the  
emptiness reverberating with every line:
FIRST PATRICIAN:   Still nothing.
OLD PATRICIAN:     Nothing this morning, nothing this evening.
SECOND PATRICIAN:   Nothing for three days.
OLD PATRICIAN:     The messengers leave, the messengers return. 
The just shake their heads and say, ‘Nothing.’ 
(Camus  2006 , I: 327) 
As Bastien put it, ‘Nothingness thus evoked is related to death, which 
occupies  a  central  place  in  both  Camusian  and  Beckettian  preoccupa -
4 tions’ (Bastien  2009a , 255).
The  repetition  of  ‘nothing’  throughout   Caligula   and   En  attendant  
Godot  (and the Theatre of the Absurd more generally) also represents a 
5   hopeless  prayer  to  an  existential  absent  God  (Sjursen   1992 ,  83–92).
Links can of course be made to the Balzac character in  Le Faiseur , ‘Godeau’ 
who is referred to but never appears onstage (Balzac  2012 ), and the title, 
‘ En  attendant  Godot ’,  clearly  alludes  to  Simone  Weil’s   Attente  de  Dieu  
(Weil  2016   (originally  published  in  1950)),  but  as  Bastien  points  out  
‘more  or  less  derisively,  these  few  examples  suggest  that  Camus  and  
Beckett summon the biblical intertext only to refute it’ (Bastien  2009a , 
6 —a  prime  example  being  in   Fin  de  Partie ,  when  Magg  begins  to   253)
pray, ‘Our Father which art in ...’, but Hamm instead curses the absent 
deity, ‘The bastard! He doesn’t exist!’ (Beckett  1990 , 119) Equally, Ionesco 
defines the absurd as ‘that which is devoid of purpose. [...] Cut off from 
his religious, metaphysical, and transcendental roots, man is lost; all his 
7  and naturally  actions become senseless, absurd, useless’ (Ionesco  1957 ),
this experience is at the heart of all of his theatre. Ignorant denial of the 
absurd  is  parodied  by  the  detective’s  commentary  on  the  theatre  in  
Victimes  du  Devoir :  ‘I  don’t  believe  in  the  absurd;  everything  hangs  
together,  everything  can  be  comprehended  in  time  ...  thanks  to  the  
achievements of human thought and science’ (Ionesco  1988 , 159). But 
for  Ionesco,  the  absurd  is  inescapable;  in   Tueur  Sans  Gages ,  ‘the   cité 
radieuse  ... is an image of a world in which all social problems have been 
solved, all irritation eliminated; and yet, even there, the presence of death 
makes life futile and absurd’ (Esslin  2015 , 142).

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   153
As we see in Beckett, monotony and existential anguish are inextrica -
bly linked—in  En attendant Godot , Vladimir tells us, ‘The air is full of our 
cries. ... But habit is a great deadener’ (Beckett  1990 , 84). The same goes 
for Ionesco. In  Amédée ou Comment s’en débarrasser , an old married cou -
ple bicker passive aggressively about a corpse which is in their bedroom, 
and is growing, taking over the entire house.
MADELEINE:   The dead grow faster than the living. Everyone knows 
that.
AMÉDÉE:   Oh! What big nails he’s got!
MADELEINE:   I can’t cut them every day. I’ve got other things to do! 
Last week I threw a whole handful into the dustbin ... 
It’s not easy to do either. I’m just a servant, I am, just a 
drudge, waiting on everyone.
AMÉDÉE:   His toenails have grown right through his shoes...
MADELEINE:    Then  buy  him  another  pair,  if  you’ve  got  money  to  
burn!  What  do  you  expect   me   to  do?  I’m  not  giving  
you any! We’re very poor! You don’t seem to realize!
AMÉDÉE:   Well, I can’t very well give him mine, can I? They’re my 
only pair. Besides, they’d never fit him ... Now his feet 
have got so large!
         ...
AMÉDÉE:   The shutters are fastened tight. Yet it’s not dark in his 
room.
MADELEINE:    The  light  comes  from  his  eyes.  You’ve  forgotten  to  
close the lids again.
AMÉDÉE:    His  eyes  haven’t  aged.  They’re  still  beautiful.  Great  
green  eyes.  Shining  like  beacons.  I’d  better  go  and  
close them for him.
         ...
MADELEINE:       ... He’s sowing mushrooms all over the place. If that 
isn’t wickedness! (Ionesco  1988 , 15–19)
Despite  the  macabre  and  unsettling  scenario,  the  couple  simply  nag  
each other, their bitter marriage representing the banality of life next to 
the backdrop of the absurd. Like all of us, waiting for inevitable death, 
Amédée and Madeleine wait for death to fill the room (growing limbs, 

154   G. Whistler
growing  fungus,  spreading  rancour,  the  eerie,  uncanny  light  from  the  
corpse’s  eyes  bathing  everything),  they  wait,  doing  nothing.  When  
Amédée tries to dispose of the body it floats away like a balloon, taking 
him   with   it—there   is   no   escaping   death,   not   even   in   Ionescian   
flights of fancy.
3    Disintegration  of Language 
(and Meaning)
So far, this volume has concerned itself predominantly with philosophi -
cal language, and the style of the written word. But here, the advent of 
the Theatre of the Absurd presents us with a challenge to the very fabric 
of language itself—in Beckett’s plays, language becomes its own undoing, 
it ‘serves to express the breakdown, the disintegration of language. Where 
there is no certainty, there can be no definite meanings’ (Esslin  2015 , 61). 
Gessner  notes  at  least  ten  different  ways  in  which  the  disintegration  of  
language is manifested in  En attendant Godot , including clichés, misun -
derstandings,  repetitions,  double-entendres,  monologues,  losses  of  syn -
tax,  and  numerous  other  forms  of  spoken  or  orthographical  nonsense  
(Gessner  1957 ). This is because, as Esslin writes:
The form, structure, and mood of an artistic statement cannot be sepa -
rated from its meaning, its conceptual content; simply because the work 
of art as a whole  is  its meaning,  what  is said in it is indissolubly linked 
with the  manner  in which it is said, and cannot be said in any other way. 
Libraries have been filled with attempts to reduce the meaning of a play 
like Hamlet to a few short and simple lines, yet the play itself remains the 
clearest and most concise statement of its meaning and message, precisely 
because its uncertainties and irreducible ambiguities are an essential ele -
ment of its total impact. These considerations apply, in varying degrees, 
to all works of creative literature, but they apply with particular force to 
works that are essentially concerned with conveying their author’s sense 
of mystery, bewilderment, and anxiety when confronted with the human 
condition, and his despair at being unable to find a meaning in existence. 
(Esslin  2015 , 61)

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   155
In  response  to  this  seemingly  endless  desire  on  the  part  of  critics  to  
explain  away  the  ambiguities  in  his  writing,  Beckett  himself  said,  ‘My  
work is a matter of fundamental sounds rendered as fully as possible, and 
I don’t accept responsibility for anything else. If people want to trouble 
themselves  with  the  harmonics,  that’s  their  business’  (in  Mélèse   1966 , 
8  This is echoed when Hamm timidly asks Clov at the  denouement  of  64).
Fin de partie : ‘We’re not beginning to ... to ... mean something?’ Clov 
responds,  laughing:  ‘Mean  something?  You  and  I  mean  something!  Ah  
that’s a good one!’ (Beckett  1990 , 108).
But  as  difficult  as  Beckett’s  readers  sometimes  find  his  prose,  in  his  
own  way,  he  was  concerned  with  clarity  and  economy  (much  like  the  
endeavours of Orwell and Camus we saw in Chap.  3). When Beckett was 
asked why he chose to write predominantly in French by a student writ -
ing a thesis on his work, he told them ‘ Parce qu’en français, c’est plus facile 
d’écrire sans style ’ (in Esslin  2015 , 18–19)—the difficulty entailed in writ -
ing  in  a  second  language  was  a  deterrent  from  the  temptation  of  using  
florid rhetorical embellishments. Beckett of course translated his works 
into English himself—but through the challenge that writing in French 
imposed  on  his  expression,  he  was  able  to  retain  the  directness  of  his  
prose written in French, rather than to adapt his writing into more fluent 
literary English. As Mauriac put it, to speak is to be ‘carried along by the 
logic of the language and its articulations’, and the writer ‘must use all his 
cunning so as not to say what the words make him say against his will, 
but to express instead what by their very nature they are designed to cover 
up:  the  uncertain,  the  contradictory,  the  unthinkable’  (Mauriac   1958 , 
83). And now, with the stage as our medium, we no longer rely so heavily 
on  spoken  or  written  language  to  communicate  this  sense  of  meaning -
lessness. As Chestier writes:
The use of the theatre stage, and later, broadcasting offers Beckett the pos -
sibility of an immediate presentation of his creations. During the reading 
of a novel, we are faced with printed characters that we must bring to life 
by lending them a silhouette, a face and an imaginary voice. In the theatre, 
we find ourselves in front of actors in flesh and bone who speak and who 
act in a portion of space perceivable our senses ... the theatre offers a reso -
nance,  a  temporality  and  a  clean  space  which  brings  hearing,  seeing  and  

156   G. Whistler
living to things which the novel could only describe or leave to the imagi -
9 nation. (Chestier  2003 , 115–116)
Thus, the Theatre of the absurd utilises this space to engage the senses, 
and the audience relies less and less upon linguistic narrative logic.
Unlike  Beckett,  Ionesco  took  some  persuading  of  the  virtues  of  the  
stage, and for a long time found the whole experience somewhat cringe-  
worthy. He tells us:
I read fiction, essays, I went to the cinema with pleasure. I listened to music 
from time to time, I visited art galleries, but I hardly ever went to the the -
atre ... Going to the theatre to me meant going to see people, apparently 
serious people, making a spectacle of themselves ... it was the presence on 
the  stage  of  flesh-and-blood  people  that  embarrassed  me.  Their  material  
10 presence destroyed the fiction. (Ionesco  1958a , 247–253)
There  was  in  fact  one  exception  to  his  dislike  for  theatre—from  a  
young  age  he  adored  Guignol  comic  marionettes,  equivalent  to  Punch  
and Judy in the anglophone world. He wrote, ‘My mother could not tear 
me away from the Guignol show at the Luxembourg Gardens. I stayed 
there,  I  could  stay  there,  enrapt,  for  whole  days.  The  spectacle  of  the  
Guignol show held me there, as if stupefied, through the sight of these 
puppets that talked, moved, clubbed each other’. The grotesque puppets, 
meaningless silliness and violence captivated him—‘It was the spectacle 
of  the  world  itself,  which,  unusual,  improbable,  but  truer  than  truth,  
presented itself to me in an infinitely simplified and caricatured form, as 
11   if  to  underline  its  grotesque  and  brutal  truth’  (Ionesco   1958a ,  253).
This  improbable  appreciation  for  children’s  entertainment  makes  a  lot  
more sense when considering his own compositions—we might even say 
that  this  violently  comic  puppetry  represented  (to  Ionesco)  a  kind  of  
proto-absurd-theatre.
As surprising as Ionesco’s history with the theatre was already, the event 
of him writing his first play was just was unlikely. While trying to learn 
English  with  the  book,   Assimil  Méthode,  L’Anglais  sans  peine ,  Ionesco  
stumbled  upon  the  inspiration  for  his  first  play.  While  he  was  copying  
out English phrases into a notebook, when something strange happened:

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   157
I set to work. Conscientiously I copied whole sentences from my primer 
with  the  purpose  of  memorizing  them.  Rereading  them  attentively,  I  
learned not English but some astonishing truths—that, for example, there 
are  seven  days  in  the  week,  something  I  already  knew;  that  the  floor  is  
down, the ceiling up, things I already knew as well, perhaps, but that I had 
never  seriously  thought  about  or  had  forgotten,  and  that  seemed  to  me,  
suddenly, as stupefying as they were indisputably true ... To my astonish -
ment,  Mrs  Smith  informed  her  husband  that  they  had  several  children,  
that they lived in the vicinity of London, that their name was Smith, that 
Mr Smith was a clerk, that they had a servant, Mary—English, like them -
selves. I should like to point out the irrefutable, perfectly axiomatic charac -
ter of Mrs Smith’s assertions, as well as the entirely Cartesian manner of the 
author of my English primer; for what was truly remarkable about it was 
its eminently methodical procedure in its quest for truth. In the fifth les -
son, the Smiths’ friends the Martins arrive; the four of them begin to chat 
and,  starting  from  basic  axioms,  they  build  more  complex  truths:  ‘The  
country is quieter than the big city’ ... a strange phenomenon took place. 
I don’t know how—the text began imperceptibly to change before my eyes, 
and  in  spite  of  me.  The  very  simple,  luminously  clear  statements  I  had  
copied diligently into my ... notebook, left to themselves, fermented after 
a  while,  lost  their  original  identity,  expanded  and  overflowed  ...  While  
writing the play (for it had become a kind of play or anti-play; that is, a 
parody of a play, a comedy of comedy) I felt sick, dizzy, nauseated. I had to 
interrupt my work from time to time and, wondering all the while what 
demon was prodding me on, lie down on my couch for fear of seeing my 
12 work sink into nothingness, and me with it. (Ionesco  1958c )
The  mundane  dialogue  and  clichés  that  he  was  copying  out  lost  all  
meaning, and sentiments that might seem perfectly normal became alien -
ating  and  bizarre.  Completely  by  accident  he’d  hit  on  something  that  
would be at the heart of all his work—the feeling that everyday life and 
normal  language  had  become  senseless  and  absurd.  In  Ionesco’s  plays,  
‘congealed language ... [is] relentlessly split apart in order to find the liv -
ing sap beneath’ (Ionesco  1958d ). Thus began his long career in the the -
atre, even after his initial distaste for it.
We have already seen (in Chap.  5) how breakdowns of communication 
and dialogue are used by Camus to represent the absurd, and to illustrate 

158   G. Whistler
how not  to do ethics. To return briefly to this topic in light of the Theatre 
of the Absurd, it is worth noting that silence in  Le Malentendu  functions 
in the same way as the breakdowns of language in Beckett (Bastien  2009a , 
259). Of course, this is an example of the effect Esslin draws attention to 
in claiming that Camus and Sartre’s theatre is unsuited to its own philo -
sophical content, in that  Le Malentendu  follows a fairly traditional struc -
ture, and following this critique Pierre-Louis Rey writes:
Le Malentendu  does not illustrate the situation of incommunicability rep -
resented  by  the  ‘theatre  of  the  absurd’  [...]  While  Camus’  play  tells  the  
story  of  a  circumstantial  misunderstanding,  the  misunderstanding  in  
Beckett and Ionesco is so consubstantial to the human race that their works 
are not even intended to tell stories. By hiding his identity, Jan commits an 
‘absurdity’, that is to say, a big mistake. Like Caligula’s antics, his conduct 
only  joins  the  ontological  situation  of  the  absurd  with  verbal  confusion.  
13 (Rey  2011 , 21)
However,  as  I  shall  argue  in  final  section  of  this  chapter,  certain  
parts of  Caligula  certainly are comparable with the methods of Beckett 
and  Ionesco.  I  am  also  not  the  only  critic  to  note  ‘how  close   Le 
Malentendu  comes to making the imaginative leap of form and struc -
ture  from  what  Esslin  calls  the  rational  and  discursive  school’,  and  
Freeman  asks,  ‘how  can  an  artist  communicate  to  his  audience  his  
conviction that it is impossible for human beings to communicate?’ 
In  Le  Malentendu ,  ‘the  absurd  sees  to  it  that  each  character  blindly  
ignores that element of what his interlocutor either insinuates or con -
cedes  which  would  bring  about  the  double  recognition’  (Freeman  
1971 , 72–73), and language falls apart, just as it does throughout the 
rest of the Theatre of the Absurd.
4    ‘Une autre face du tragique’
As we have already seen, in the Theatre of the Absurd, the mundane regu -
larly morphs into the absurd, but in this next section, we will take a look 
at how this meaninglessness and nonsense often become humorous and 

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   159
cathartic. This is true of no one’s work more than Ionesco’s.  La Cantatrice 
Chauve  is set (according to Ionesco’s hilarious stage directions) as follows:
SCENE:   A  middle-class  English  interior,  with  English  armchairs.  An  
English  evening.  Mr.  Smith,  an  Englishman,  seated  in  his  
English armchair and wearing English slippers, is smoking his 
English pipe and reading an English newspaper, near an English 
fire. He is wearing English spectacles and a small gray English 
mustache. Beside him, in another English armchair, Mrs. Smith, 
an  Englishwoman,  is  darning  some  English  socks.  A  long  
moment of silence. The English clock strikes 17 English strokes . 
(Ionesco  1958b , 8)
The play itself begins, as we’ve seen, in the context of banal domestic -
ity, and Mr. and Mrs. Smith’s conversations (amongst themselves and 
with  visitors  that  arrive)  devolve  into  complete  nonsense  in  the  most  
baffling and hilarious way. But just like Ionesco’s entire career, the hilar -
ity of this composition was not premeditated—indeed, he was ‘amazed 
to hear the audience laugh at what he considered a tragic spectacle of 
human life reduced to passionless automatism through bourgeois con -
vention and the fossilization of language’ (Esslin  2015 , 109). Ionesco 
embraced  this  effect,  however,  transcending  the  banal  and  using  its  
absurdity to the fullest: ‘To feel the absurdity of the commonplace, and 
of  language—its  falseness—is  already  to  have  gone  beyond  it.  To  go  
beyond it we must first of all bury ourselves in it’, he wrote, ‘What is 
comical is the unusual in its pure state; nothing seems more surprising 
to me than that which is banal; the surreal is here, within grasp of our 
14  In essence then,  hands, in our everyday conversation’ (Ionesco  1955 ).
by delving into the artificial norms and pleasantries we take for granted, 
we can find the juxtaposition of society and mortality at the very core 
of our being.
This is a necessary reminder from Ionesco that, although he presents us a 
world which invokes unstifled laughter, the subject matter at the foundation 
of his work is of the gravest import.  Rhinocéros  (Ionesco  1960c ), for example, 
is inspired by his own experience of the rise in fascism in Romania, and the 

160   G. Whistler
unsettling  feeling  that  people  around  him  were  being  infected  with  a  
monstrous ideological contagion. He recalls:
In the course of my life I have been very much struck by what one might 
call the current of opinion, by its rapid evolution, its power of contagion, 
which  is  that  of  a  real  epidemic.  People  allow  themselves  suddenly  to  be  
invaded by a new religion, a doctrine, a fanaticism. ... At such moments 
we witness a veritable mental mutation. I don’t know if you have noticed 
it, but when people no longer share your opinions, when you can no longer 
make yourself understood by them, one has the impression of being con -
fronted  with  monsters—rhinos,  for  example.  They  have  that  mixture  of  
candour  and  ferocity.  They  would  kill  you  with  the  best  of  consciences.  
And history has shown us during the last quarter of a century that people 
thus  transformed  not  only  resemble  rhinos,  but  really  become  rhinocer -
15 oses. (Ionesco  1960a )
This  was  instantly  recognisable  to  the  audience  at  the  Düsseldorf  
Schauspielhaus  during  the  plays  first  performance—hearing  once  more  
‘the arguments used by the characters who feel they must follow the trend 
as  those  they  themselves  had  heard,  or  used,  at  a  time  when  people  in  
Germany could not resist the lure of Hitler’ (Esslin  2015 , 145).
Numerous elements of  Rhinocéros  are akin to Camus’ own re-   imagining 
of a fascist epidemic,  La Peste . Both authors evidently felt the alienating 
sensation of one’s peers slowly being picked off by an unfathomable dis -
ease, and were concerned with what this situation revealed about human -
ity. ‘The true society, the authentic human community’, Ionesco wrote, 
‘is  extra-social—a  wider,  deeper  society,  that  which  is  revealed  by  our  
common  anxieties,  our  desires,  our  secret  nostalgias’  (Ionesco   1958d ). 
Naturally,  Ionesco’s  composition  is  more  fanciful—supernatural—but  
that, according to Ionesco, is what is so great about the theatrical medium: 
‘Everything is permitted in the theatre: to bring characters to life, but also 
16   to materialize states of anxiety, inner presences’ (Ionesco  1958a , 262).
In choosing such a turn of phrase, however, Ionesco is once again draw -
ing attention to his Camusian inheritance. Camus, himself drawing on 
Dostoevsky, writes in  Le Mythe de Sisyphe , ‘The absurd does not liberate, 
it  binds.  It  does  not  authorise  all  actions.  Everything  is  permitted  does  
not mean that nothing is forbidden’ (Camus  2005 , 65)—while anything 

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   161
is possible in the world of theatre, Camus wants us to remember that in 
real life, we share this absurd condition with others. Ionesco in fact revis -
ited the subject of contagion in  Jeux de Massacre , a late piece cataloguing 
a more literal plague (Lemesle  2017 ). Elsewhere, Ionesco recalls how at 
one time in his youth he dreamed of becoming a saint (Ionesco  1960b ), 
unwittingly  echoing  Camus  once  one,  this  time   à  la  façon  de   Tarrou  
in  La Peste .
But what is so great about the Theatre of the Absurd, is its ability to 
approach this same serious subject matter, and allow us to see the ridicu -
lousness of it.  Rhinocéros  isn’t just, as Esslin puts it, a ‘tract against con -
formism and insensitivity ... it also mocks the individualist who merely 
makes a virtue of necessity in insisting on his superiority as a sensitive, 
artistic being’ (Esslin  2015 , 146). Even those who believe that have a just 
cause appear comical against the backdrop of absurdity, and, in Ionesco’s 
words, ‘all of this can just as well become euphoric; anguish is suddenly 
17  Comedy is thus nothing but  transformed into liberty’ (Ionesco  1955 )
18   Naturally,  the  same   ‘une  autre  face  du  tragique’  (Ionesco   1966 ,  173).
applies to the work of Samuel Beckett, and his works exhibit numerous 
examples  of  the  tragic  merging  with  the  comic.  Virgine  Lupo  suggests  
that ‘this kind of humour is what we might call metaphysical laughter’ 
19  Lupo uses the examples of the Charlie Chaplin-like  (Lupo  1999 , 131).
costumes used in staging  En attendant Godot  as an example of this effect—
in dressing the wastrel, suicidal characters as slapstick heroes, ‘this excess 
20 of pain and horror manages to provoke the comic’ (Lupo  1999 , 128).
But where this kind of theatre offers laughter as a cathartic anthesis for 
the absurd (and perhaps even a kind of therapy for it), ‘never in Camus’ 
theatre have comic and tragic become to this extent two sides of the same 
21   Instead,  Camus  main - reality,  as  they  are  in  Ionesco’  (Rey   2011 ,  26).
tains some hope for the human condition. As Bastien put it, he ‘believes 
in intelligence and is invested in sensibility and the faculties of the imagi -
nation.  For  him,  the  heavy  discovery  of  the  absurd  is  not  terminal’  
22   For  Camus  (as  is  no  doubt  clear  by  now),  the   (Bastien  2009a ,  260).
absurd is the necessary foundation for building an ethics and defending 
the value of human life authentically—it is, as Robbe-Grillet suggest, a 
23   Because   kind  of  ‘tragic  humanism’  (Robbe-Grillet   1964 ,  70–71).
Camus’ absurd is a starting point, it is therefore far less bleak: ‘In essence, 

162   G. Whistler
the  Camusian  man  and  the  Beckettian  man  are  antagonists.  The  first  
obsessed with the passion to live, the other harassed by the image of life 
24   Bastien  sums  this  up  with  a   as  a  miserable  wait’  (Sjursen   1992 ,  83).
snappy conclusion that ‘if the Camusian man is sentenced to death, the 
25  In essence  Beckettian man is condemned to exist’ (Bastien  2009a , 260).
then, the laughter so central to the Theatre of the Absurd springs forth 
from a place of hopelessness—in the face of the absurd, these playwrights 
seem to proffer the old adage that ‘you have to laugh or you’ll cry’. As one 
critic writes, ‘Having understood that his task is impossible, the Sisyphus 
of the ‘theatre of the absurd’ remains permanently seated at the foot of 
26  Camus’ absurd is far less bleak, however, and  the slope’ (Rey  2011 , 26).
instead  of  simply  relying  on  a  laugh  of  harrowing  incredulity,  Camus’  
absurd is a theoretical foundation for life-affirming ethical action.
5    Camus’ Absurd Theatre
Up  until  this  point  we  have  considered  the  innovations  of  two  of  the  
most  prominent  playwrights  of  the  absurd,  and  while  we  have  taken  
Camus  as  an  important  precursor  to  this  movement  in  theatre,  he  has  
been looked at as merely an influence, rather than a contributor. In this 
section,  however,  we  will  examine  some  elements  of  Camus’  theatre  
which (I argue) are in many ways equal to the Theatre of the Absurd—
that is,  les trois spectacles  in  Caligula . It is nigh on accepted wisdom that 
Camus shares only a conceptual background with Ionesco and Beckett, 
and this stance has been put forward by numerous critics. Esslin writes:
The pattern of exposition, conflict, and final solution mirrors a view of the 
world in which solutions are possible, a view based on a recognizable and 
generally accepted pattern of an objective reality that can be apprehended 
so that the purpose of man’s existence and the rules of conduct it entails can 
be  deduced  from  it  ...  [this]  applies  even  to  the  theatre  of  Sartre  and  
Camus,  which  is  based  on  a  philosophy  of  the  absurdity  of  human  exis -
tence.  Even  plays  like  ...   Caligula   allow  the  audience  to  take  home  an  
intellectually formulated philosophical lesson. The Theatre of the Absurd, 
however, which proceeds not by intellectual concepts but by poetic images, 

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   163
neither  poses  an  intellectual  problem  in  its  exposition  nor  provides  any  
clear-cut  solution  that  would  be  reducible  to  a  lesson  or  an  apothegm.  
(Esslin  2015 , 350–351)
According to Morvan Lebesque, Camus is an heir of ‘traditional the -
27  and therefore  atre’, and ‘prisoner of his forms’ (Lebesque  1964 , 170),
should not be considered among these other playwrights of the absurd. 
Popkin is in agreement—he writes, ‘Camus addresses us in the most ele -
vated language he can write. The result has its merits as oratory and dia -
lectic, but it is deficient as drama’ (Popkin  1962 , 172). And while Bastien 
points  out  that   Caligula   ‘is  inventing  many  other  means  of  expression.  
He  takes  advantage  of  translinguistic  codes  which  fall  under  the  senses  
28   she  nevertheless   and  take  over  from  speech’  (Bastien   2009a ,  256),
remarks that, ‘with its linear action and classical language, Camus’ tradi -
tional script [ Caligula ] does not approach the formal revolution specific 
29 to the New Theatre’ (Bastien  2009b , 167–168).
Of  course,  many  of  Camus’  plays  (such  as   Le  Malentendu ,  L’Etat  de  
siège , and  Les Justes ) are indeed for the most part written in a pretty con -
ventional manner, as so many critics suggest. But as Bastien points out 
that ‘Beckett and Ionesco are fully understood only through a Camusian 
30  and naturally it is clear that the Theatre of the  lens’ (Bastien  2006 , 272),
Absurd  couldn’t  exist  without  the  absurd  having  been  theorised  previ -
ously by Camus—but this is hardly a bold claim. What I hope to dem -
onstrate throughout the remainder of this chapter, is that Camus himself 
wrote pieces of drama that can be classified as ‘Theatre of the Absurd’ as 
it bears all the hallmarks of this kind of drama. Caligula performs his own 
theatre of the absurd, and in his performances there is ‘a match between 
the organization of a work and the  non -sense it carries’ (Bastien  2009a , 
31  In other words (as Pierre-Louis Rey puts it), ‘The mystery of the  257).
world [...] is no less opaque for the viewer of  Caligula  than for that of 
32 Godot  or  Endgame ’ (Rey  2011 , 28).
Sounding very much like Camus himself, Ionesco wrote, ‘Because the 
artist apprehends reality directly, he is a true philosopher. And it is from 
the range, the depth and the sharpness of his truly philosophical vision 
33  We have already seen  that his greatness springs’ (Ionesco  1958a , 270).
the  attempts  of  Ionesco  and  Beckett  at  communicating  philosophically  

164   G. Whistler
through art and imbuing their forms with concepts. Here we will look at 
how ‘the sharpness of [Camus’] truly philosophical vision’ comes across 
in  Caligula , and the formal (as well as conceptual) links between Camus 
and  these  playwrights  of  the  absurd.  Each  of  Caligula’s  performances  
exhibit  the  three  tenets  of  absurd  theatre  referred  to  throughout  this  
chapter—that is, a contemplation of mortality, a break between language 
and meaning, and an intertwined relationship between tragedy and com -
edy.  As  we  will  see  in  this  section,  these  three  elements  are  very  much  
interlinked in all three spectacles.
The first of Caligula’s performances is of course is curious imitation of 
Venus,  and  it  is  ‘une  véritable  pièce  de  théâtre’,  according  to  Sophie  
Bastien (Bastien  2006 , 181). In  L’Homme révolté , Camus writes, ‘Hitler, 
at the height of his madness’, embodies the ‘indefatigable ... claim of the 
human race to divinity’ (Camus  2000b , 155). Here, the preposterousness 
of  a  dictator’s  claim  to  divinity  is  parodied  by  Caligula:  having  already  
put the fear of god into his subjects through demonstrations of his nihil -
istic omnipotence, Caligula becomes a god through fantasy and panto -
mime. The setting of the performance provides the looming presence of 
mortality—under the rule of a blood-thirsty dictator, every character is 
aware  that  each  day  might  be  their  last—including  Caligula  himself.  
Here, ‘divinity is reduced to the rank of a fairground attraction’ (Bastien 
34   and  were  the  patricians  able  to  do  something  other  than   2006 ,  182),
fear for their lives, they would have to stifle laughter in the face of this 
grotesque goddess. By becoming God, Caligula subverts religion and rea -
son, parodying the tragic godlessness of the universe and our position in 
it as mortals, but through his comedic capers, the absurdity of life shines 
forth.  As  Stoltzfus  observes,  Camusian  theatre  is  ‘pre-Ionescian’  in  its  
manifestation of ‘tragic farce’ (Stoltzfus  1991 , 191).
Caligula  proclaims,  ‘Today,  I’m  Venus’,  and  Sophie  Bastien  suggests  
that he might as well add ‘Tomorrow, I’ll be something else’, owing to the 
35   fact that ‘he presents himself so much as an actor’ (Bastien  2006 , 182).
Bastien notes the paradox in this presentation—as a player in a brief per -
formance, and as a god, Caligula sarcastically embodies both the ephem -
eral  and  the  eternally  divine  (Bastien   2006 ,  182).  This  performance  is  
parodically liturgical—and as she puts it, ‘By the staging of an artificial 
mysticism, a simulacrum of epiphany, he exhibits his lack of faith. This 

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   165
subversion of a religious event is based on an absurd perception of life’ 
36   This  is  all  conducted  with  meta  self-awareness,   (Bastien  2006 ,  183).
almost breaking the fourth wall, Caligula draws attention to the role he 
has cast himself as in the tragicomedy of life:
CALIGULA:        There’s no understanding Fate; therefore I choose to play 
the part of Fate. I wear the foolish, unintelligible face of 
a professional god.
         ...
SCIPIO:   That too, Caius, is blasphemy.
CALIGULA:       No, Scipio, it’s dramatic art. The great mistake you peo -
ple  make  is  not  to  take  the  drama  seriously  enough.  If  
you did, you’d know that any man can play lead in the 
divine comedy and become a god. (Camus  1984 , 75–76)
It seems here that Caligula (and indeed perhaps Camus) has a sense of 
life itself as absurd theatre, all the world being a stage, in the Shakespearean 
sense. Camus, as Bastien put it, ‘deeply feels the theatricality of life and 
37 takes it as a major manifestation of life’s absurdity’ (Bastien  2006 , 231).
Caligula’s  second  spectacle  is  a  dance  number.  Grotesque,  comical,  
absurd, the dance that the emperor performs is certainly like a short piece 
of immersive  Nouveau Théâtre , but the aspect of this spectacle which is 
particularly  jarring  is  the  context  of  an  audience  of  conspirators  who,  
convinced that their clandestine insurgency against the tyrant has been 
discovered, anxiously await whatever cruel punishment he might throw 
at them—and all that follows is a bizarre and flamboyant mime act:
If the first internal spectacle is remarkable for its development, this one is, 
on the contrary, by its brevity ... The emperor knows that he will die soon, 
hence the brevity of the sequence, just as he knows the inanity of all his 
action, hence the ridiculousness of his costume and his gestures, and the 
fleeting shadow. His dance is the metaphorical abyss of his own situation. 
It is also, with more impact, a metaphor for the human condition. (Bastien 
38 2006 , 186–187)
In other words, this absurd performance is just as much a metaphor for 
Caligula’s own fate, as it is for all of ours.

166   G. Whistler
Pierre-Louis Rey writes, ‘For the authors of the ‘theatre of the absurd’, 
ontologically,  the  body  is  simply   there .  In  the  eyes  of  Camus,  it  is  a  
39  but this misses the point that for both Camus  medium’ (Rey  2011 , 23),
and  these  playwrights  of  the  absurd,  the  body  is  a  condition  of  our  
thrownness,  it  is  the  source  of  all  our  freedoms  and  prisons,  and  death  
happens to us precisely because the body  is there . As we have already seen, 
and as Lupo points out, ‘Beckett ... pushes his mission of rendering lan -
40 — guage  destitute  so  far  by  creating  mimodramas’  (Lupo   1999 ,  127)
necessarily the theatrical body steps in to communicate the absurd, often 
through comic violence and warped figures. But Lupo also suggests that 
‘in Beckett, the body exhibits its sufferings. All his characters are infirm, 
blind,  impotent,  vagabonds  or  old  men  who  constantly  rehash  their  
physical decay’, while ‘Camus never reveals to us the monstrosity of gro -
41  For the  tesque, deformed or mutilated bodies’ (Lupo  1999 , 127–128).
most part this is true (excluding, of course, the sickness and horror in  La 
Peste ),  but  this  doesn’t  mean  that  Camus  doesn’t  find  other  corporeal  
ways to illustrate the absurd—the second spectacle in  Caligula  is of course 
brimming  with  mime  and  grotesque  pageantry.  Lupo  writes,  ‘Camus  
does not use movements or mimes in order to oppose language. The body 
will be language, will express something. However, we will see that the 
42  Lupo  use of this language is not a habit for Camus’ (Lupo  1999 , 131).
nevertheless  points  out  that  there  are  examples  of  ‘mute  scenes’  (Lupo  
43   in   Révolte  dans  les  Asturies ,  Caligula ,  and   L’Etat  de  siège .  1999 ,  132),
Camus even writes in the stage directions, ‘ During this scene all the players,  
Caligula   and  Cæsonia  excepted,  behave  like  marionettes  in  a  puppet  play ’ 
(Camus  1984 , 57). The focus of the current chapter has been (in part) the 
instances  in   Caligula   which  have  such  an  effect— les  trois  spectacle   in  
which the more classical elements of the play are overthrown by absurd 
pantomime. This is particularly pertinent to the second of these perfor -
mances, as here he abandons language altogether. Indeed, for Camus, the 
absurdity of life  is   mime —‘All existence for a man turned away from the 
eternal  is  but  a  vast  mime  under  the  mask  of  the  absurd’  (Camus  
2005 , 91).
In his use of mime, costume, and dance, Caligula toys with the rela -
tionship between language and meaning, often with comical results. The 
third spectacle is a poetry reading, of which Caligula is the stage director, 

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   167
and it is here that we see that the relationship between words and mean -
ing is as unsettling for Caligula as any other absurd dramatist. Lupo writes 
of  ‘the  importance  that  Caligula  gives  to  words’,  suggesting  that  ‘every  
word has a meaning, a deep value and we must not play with it. We must 
respect  language.  The  approach  of  Eugène  Ionesco,  for  example,  seems  
perfectly inconceivable for Camus. Because, in the theatre of the absurd, 
44   language is often disarticulated, relayed by the mime’ (Lupo  1999 , 353).
There is certainly a poignancy for Caligula when it comes to the relation -
ship between words and meaning, and this is something he endeavours to 
share with his subjects in  le troisième spectacle —the struggle for meaning 
in the face of death. Caligula sets Cæsonia, Cherea, and the patricians the 
task of composing and performing a poem on the subject of death. This 
torturously awkward contest effectually trivialises this profound topic—
45  In  ‘it’s Caligula who evaluates how men face death’ (Bastien  2006 , 188).
the context of this recital, given its topic, the pageant’s participants are 
confronted  directly  with  the  inadequacy  of  language  to  express  their  
awareness of mortality.
6    Chapter  Conclusion
As we have seen throughout this volume, Camus was all too aware of the 
problem of communicating philosophical content through form. This is 
no less an issue when it comes to his theatre. Indeed, as Freeman sug -
gests, the reason Camus abandoned his first version of  Caligula  in 1937 
was ‘partly because of the difficulty of communicating the absurd on the 
stage without a totally different concept of form and style—a problem 
which  the  so-called  ‘absurd  playwrights’,  notably  Beckett  and  Ionesco,  
attempted to solve in a radical way’ (Freeman  1971 , 43). It has hitherto 
been  overlooked,  however,  that   Caligula   exhibits  some  of  the  radical  
methods  of  the  Theatre  of  the  Absurd,  even  if  the  play  in  its  entirety  
seems  to  have  (for  the  most  part)  a  rather  classical  structure.  Caligula  
himself is the absurd performer  par excellence , and as Popkin writes, he 
‘compels  us  to  admire  his  comic  talents:  in  one  unconnected  episode  
after  another,  this  tyrant  and  mass-murderer  engages  our  interest  and  
even  our  sympathy  with  his  ingenious  exposures  of  patrician  banality  

168   G. Whistler
and the illogic of everyday life’ (Popkin  1962 , 172). This is true most of 
all in his  trois spectacles , where he uses mime, dance, costume, and word -
play to give his audience (both on and off the stage) a feeling of the absurd.
Thus we see the huge oversight in the scholarship on Camus’ theatre, 
where it is often claimed that ‘Ionesco and his colleagues in the theatre of 
the absurd have innovated, invented a new form of theatre (deconstruc -
tion  of  characters,  explosion  of  language,  disappearance  of  the  action),  
while Camus wouldn’t have participated except for in a very ‘classic’ man -
46  Of  Caligula , Coombs writes: ner’ (Lupo  1999 , 465).
The alliance between a classical style, metaphysical depth and clown antics 
was cemented by an element that perhaps, more than any other, contrib -
uted to the success of  Caligula : the exuberant breath of youth that com -
municates to the work an irresistible movement. At the tensest moment of 
action when the cruel grimace begins to freeze in a grin, a pirouette breaks 
the tension and restores the threatened balance. Charm, cheerfulness and 
buffoonery  are  the  traits  that  have  been  neglected  in  favor  of  the  philo -
47 sophical message. (Coombs  1968 , 87)
And here she certainly elucidates some of the key elements of Camus’ 
(and  Caligula’s)  absurd  theatre.  Communicating  desperation,  lostness,  
and  anguish,  through  mediums  which  provoke  bitter,  yet  liberating  
laughter— Caligula  is absurdly theatrical indeed. In this chapter, we have 
seen how a number of playwrights have picked up Camus’ concept of the 
absurd and run with it. But as has been mentioned on numerous occa -
sions  throughout  this  thesis,  for  Camus,  the  absurd  is  nought  but  a  
  necessary foundation for his ethical project. In the next chapter, we will 
look  at  a  ground-breaking  novel  which  not  only  responds  to  Camus’  
œuvre in a sensitive and scrupulous fashion—it has also adopted Camus’ 
own task of communicating ethical concerns through engagement with 
literature.
Notes
1.  In French, ‘Les auteurs du théâtre de l’Absurde sont peut-être ceux qui 
ont profité de la façon la plus positive de la pensée de Camus’.

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   169
2.  In  French,  ‘Moralistes  avant  d’être  dramaturges,  [Sartre  et  Camus]  ne  
voient dans le théâtre qu’un moyen ... de signifier leurs options philos -
ophiques. À aucun moment, ils ne tentent d’en révolutionner la forme et 
les structures, versant avec insouciance leur vin nouveau dans les vieilles 
outres du théâtre traditionnel’.
3.  In  French,  ‘le  temps  y  est  tragique  précisément  parce  que  rien  ne  s’y  
déroule’.
4.  In French, ‘Le néant ainsi évoqué s’apparente à la mort, qui occupe une 
place centrale dans les préoccupations camusienne et beckettienne’.
5.  In French, ‘rien’.
6.  In  French,  ‘En  versant  plus  ou  moins  dans  la  dérision,  ces  quelques  
exemples  portent  à  croire  que  Camus  et  Beckett  ne  convoquent  
l’intertexte biblique que pour le réfuter’ (my translation).
7.  Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 5).
8.  In French, Mon œuvre est une question de sons fondamentaux rendus 
aussi pleinement que possible, et je n’accepts pas la responsabilité d’autre 
chose.  Si  les  gens  veulent  casser  la  tête  sur  les  harmoniques  c’est  leur  
affaire’.
9.  In French, ‘Le recours à la scène théâtrale et, plus tard, à la radiodiffusion 
vont offrir à Beckett la possibilité d’une presentation immédiate de ses 
existants.  Durant  la  lecture  d’un  roman,  on  est  en  face  de  caractères  
d’imprimerie qu’il faut faire vivre en leur prêtant une silhouette, un vis -
age et une voix imaginaire. Au théâtre, nous nous trouvons devant des 
acteurs  en  chair  et  en  os  qui  parlent  et  qui  agissent  dans  une  portion  
d’espace qui tombe sous nos sens ... le théâtre propose une résonance, 
une temporalité et une espace propres qui donnent à entendre, à voir et 
à vivre ce que le roman ne pouvait que décrire ou laisser imaginer’.
10.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 105).
11.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 102–103).
12.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 106–107).
13.   In   French,    ‘Le   Malentendu    n’illustre   pas   davantage   la   situation   
d’incommunicabilité figurée par la ‘théâtre de l’absurde’ [...] Alors que 
la  pièce  de  Camus  raconte  l’histoire  d’un  quiproquo  circonstanciel,  le  
quiproquo est chez Beckett et Ionesco si consubstantiel au genre humain 
que leurs œuvres n’ont même pas vocation à raconter des histoires. En 
cachant son identité, Jan commet une ‘absurdité’, c’est-à-dire une grosse 
bêtise.  Comme  les  pitreries  de  Caligula,  sa  conduite  ne  rejoint  qu’à  la  
faveur d’une confusion verbale la situation ontologique de l’absurde’.

170   G. Whistler
14.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 111–112).
15.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 144).
16.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 152).
17.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 124).
18.   In English, ‘Another face of tragedy’.
19.   In French, ‘Cette sorte d’humour est ce que l’on pourrait nommer le rire 
métaphysique’.
20.   In  French,  ‘Cependant,  cet  excès  de  douleurs  et  d’horreurs  parvient  à  
provoquer le comique’.
21.   In  French,  ‘Jamais,  dans  la  théâtre  de  Camus,  comique  et  tragique  ne  
sont devenus à ce point, comme ils le seront chez Ionesco, les deux faces 
d’une même réalité’.
22.   In French, ‘croit en l’intelligence et investit dans la sensibilité et dans les 
facultés de l’imagination. Pour lui, le lourd constat de l’absurde n’est pas 
terminal’.
23.   In French, ‘L’absurde est donc bien une forme d’humanisme tragique’.
24.   In French, ‘De leur essence, l’homme camusien et l’homme beckettien 
sont antagonistes. Le premier obsédé par la passion de vivre, l’autre har -
celé par l’image de la vie comme une attente misérable’.
25.   In French, ‘Si l’homme camusien est condamné à mort, l’homme beck -
etienne est condamné à exister’.
26.   In French, ‘Ayant compris que leur tâche était impossible, les Sisyphe du 
‘théâtre de l’absurde’ restent définitivement assis au bas de la pente’.
27.   In French, ‘théâtre traditionelle’, ‘prisonnier de ses formes’.
28.   In  French,  ‘s’invente  bien  d’autres  moyens  d’expression.  Il  profite  des  
codes translinguistiques, qui tombent sous les sens et relaient la parole’.
29.   In  French,  ‘Certes,  avec  une  action  linéaire  et  une  langue  classique,  la  
facture  traditionnelle  de  Camus  n’approche  pas  la  révolution  formelle  
propre  au  Nouveau  Théâtre  ...  [Ionesco]  profite  de  l’enseignement  de  
Caligula et ... en assume les conséquences et l’extrapole’.
30.   In French, ‘on ne comprend pleinement Beckett et Ionesco qu’à travers 
une optique camusienne’.
31.   In French, ‘une adéquation entre l’organisation d’une œuvre et le  non - 
sens qu’elle porte’.
32.   In French, ‘Le mystère du monde [...] n’est pas moins opaque pour le 
spectateur de  Caligula  que pour celui de  Godot  ou de  Fin de partie ’.
33.   Translation in Esslin ( 2015 , 150).
34.   In French, ‘la divinité est ravalée au rang d’une curiosité de foire’.

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   171
35.   “‘Aujourd’hui, je suis Vénus”... Demain, je serai autre chose, pourrait-il 
ajouter: il se présente en tant que comédien’.
36.   In  French,  ‘Par  la  mise  en  scène  d’un  mysticisme  artificiel,  d’un  simu -
lacre d’épiphanie, il exhibe présisément son manque de foi. Cette subver -
sion du fait religieux se fonde sur une perception absurde de la vie’.
37.   In  French,  ‘la  récurrence  de  la  thématique  théâtrale  et  surtout  l’esprit  
dans lequel l’auteur l’utilise, suggèrent que ce dernier ressent profondé -
ment la théâtralité de la vie et qu’il en fait une manifestation majeure de 
son absurdité’.
38.   In French, ‘Si le premier spectacle interne est remarquable par son dével -
oppement, celui-ci l’est, au contraire, par sa brièveté ... L’empereur sait 
qu’il va mourir sous peu, d’où la brièveté de la séquence, comme il sait 
l’inanité  de  toute  son  action,  d’où  le  ridicule  de  son  costume  et  de  sa  
gestuelle,  et  l’ombre  fugace.  Sa  danse  est  une  mise  en  abîme  méta -
phorique de sa propre situation. Elle est aussi, avec plus d’impact, de la 
condition humaine’.
39.   In   French,   ‘Pour   les   auteurs   du   ‘théâtre   de   l’absurde’,   de   façon   
ontologique, le corps  est là . Aux yeux de Camus, il est un moyen’.
40.   In French, ‘Beckett ... pousse très loin son enterprise de destitution du 
langage en créant des mimodrames’ (my translation).
41.   In French, ‘Jamais Camus ne nous expose la monstruosité de corps gro -
tesques, déformes ou mutilés. Chez Beckett, le corps exhibe ses souffran -
ces.  Tout  ses  personnages  sont  infirmes,  aveugles,  impotents,  des  
vagabonds  ou  des  vieillards  qui  ne  cessant  de  ressasser  leur  déchéance  
physique’.
42.   In French, ‘Au contraire, Camus n’utilise pas les mouvements, les mimes 
dans le but de s’opposer au langage. Le corps va être langage, va exprimer 
quelque  chose.  Toutefois,  nous  verrons  que  l’utilisation  de  ce  langage  
n’est pas une habitude chez Camus’.
43.   In French, ‘scènes jouées à la muette’.
44.   In French, ‘l’importance que Caligula accorde aux paroles ... Chaque 
mot a un sens, une valeur profonde et on ne doit pas jouer avec cela. 
On  doit  respecter  la  langage.  La  démarche  d’un  Eugène  Ionesco,  par  
example, semble parfaitement inconcevable pour Camus. Car, dans la 
théâtre  de  l’absurde,  le  langage  est  souvent  désarticulé,  relayé  par  le  
mime’.
45.   In French, ‘c’est Caligula qui évalue comment les hommes font face à la 
mort’.

172   G. Whistler
46.   In French, ‘Ainsi, il semblerait que justement Ionesco et ses collègues de 
théâtre  de  l’absurde  aient  innové,  aeint  inventé  une  nouvelle  forme  de  
théâtre (déconstruction des personnages, explosion du langage, dispari -
tion de l’action), tandis que Camus, n’y aurait participé que de manière 
très “classique”’.
47.   In French, ‘L’alliance entre un style classique, de la profondeur métaphy -
sique et des cabrioles de pître était cimentée par un élément qui peut-
être,  plus  que  tout  autre,  contribua  au  succès  de   Caligula :  le  souffle  
exubérant de jeunesse qui communique à l’œuvre un mouvement irré -
sistible. Au moment le plus crispé de l’action où la grimace cruelle com -
mence à se figer dans un rictus, une pirouette vient briser la tension et 
rétablir l’équilibre menacé. Charme, gaieté, bouffonnerie, sont des traits 
que l’on n’a que trop négligé en faveur du message philosophique’.
References
Balzac, Honoré de. 2012.  Le Faiseur . Paris: Editions Flammarion.
Bastien, Sophie. 2006.  Caligula et Camus: Interférences transhistoriques . New York 
City: Rodopi.
———.  2007.  Le  Théâtre  camusien  en  regard  de  la  modernité.   La  Revue  des  
Lettres Modernes , Albert Camus 21 ( avec un grand carnet critique ): 73–92.
———.  2009a.  De  Camus  à  Beckett:  De  l’absurde  à  l’absolu.   La  Revue  des  
Lettres Modernes , Albert Camus 22,  Camus et l’Histoire : 251–263.
———.  2009b.  Le  Jeu  dans  le  théâtre  d’Albert  Camus:  Polysémie,  polymor -
phie, ontologie.  Interstudia  5: 161–169.
Beckett, Samuel. 1990.  The Complete Dramatic Works . London: Faber and Faber.
Camus,  Albert.  1984.   Caligula  and  Other  Plays .  Translated  by  Stuart  Gilbert.  
London: Penguin.
———. 2000a.  The Outsider . Translated by Joseph Laredo. London: Penguin.
———. 2000b.  The Rebel . Translated by Anthony Bower. London: Penguin.
———.   2005.    The   Myth   of   Sisyphus .   Translated   by   Justin   O’Brien.   
London: Penguin.
———. 2006.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi et al. 
Paris: Gallimard.
Chestier,  Alain.  2003.   La  Litterature  du  silence:  Essai  sur  Mallarmé,  Camus  et  
Beckett . Paris: L’Harmattan.
Coombs, Ilona. 1968.  Camus: Homme de Théâtre . Paris: Nizet.

6    Absurd Theatre:  Caligula  and Beyond   173
Esslin, Martin. 2015.  The Theatre of the Absurd . London: Bloomsbury.
Freeman,  E.  1971.   The  Theatre  of  Albert  Camus:  A  Critical  Study .  London:  
Methuen and Co.
Gessner,  Niklaus.  1957.   Die  Unzulänglichkeit  der  Sprache:  Eine  Untersuchung  
über Formzerfall und Beziehungslosigkeit bei Samuel Beckett . Zurich: Juris.
Ionesco, Eugène. 1955. Le point du départ.  Cahiers des Quatre Saisons , Paris, no. 
1, August.
———.  1957.  Dans  les  armes  de  la  ville.   Cahiers  de  la  Compagnie  Madeleine  
Renaud-Jean-Louis Barrault  20, Paris, October.
———.   1958a.   Expérience   du   théâtre.    Nouvelle   Revue   Française ,   Paris,   
1 February.
———.  1958b.   Four  Plays .  Translated  by  Donald  M.  Allen.  New  York  City:  
Grove Press.
———. 1958c. La tragédie du langage.  Spectacles  2. Paris: July.
———. 1958d. The Playwright’s Role.  Observer , 29 June.
———. 1960a. Interview avec Claude Sarraute.  Le Monde , 17 January.
———.  1960b.  Printemps  1939.  Le  débris  du  souvenir.  Pages  de  journal.  
Cahiers   de   la   Compagnie   Madeleine   Renaud-Jean-Louis   Barrault    29,   
Paris, October.
———.  1960c.   Rhinoceros .  Translated  by  Derek  Prouse.  New  York  City:  
Samuel French.
———. 1966.  Notes et contre-notes . Paris: Gallimard.
———.  1988.   Three  Plays .  Translated  by  Donald  Watson.  New  York  City:  
Grove Press.
Lebesque, Morvan. 1964. La passion pour la scène. In  Camus . Paris: Hachette.
Lemesle, Audrey. 2017.  Eugène Ionesco en ses réécritures: le travail de la répétition . 
Paris: Champion.
Lupo, Virginie. 1999.  Le Théâtre de Camus: Un Théâtre Classique?  Lille: Atelier 
National de Reproduction des Thèses.
Mauriac, Claude. 1958.  L’Alittérature Contemporaine . Paris: Albin Michel.
Mélèse, Pierre. 1966.  Samuel Beckett . Paris: Seghers.
Popkin, Henry. 1962. Camus as Dramatist. In  Camus: A Collection of Critical 
Essays , ed. Germaine Brée, 170–172. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Rey,  Pierre-Louis.  2011.  Philosophie  de  l’absurde,  théâtre  de  l’absurde?  In   La 
passion   du   théâtre:   Camus   à   la   scène ,   ed.   Sophie   Bastien,   Geraldine   
F. Montgomery, and Mark Orme, 17–30. New York: Rodopi.
Robbe-Grillet, Alain. 1964.  Pour un nouveau roman . Paris: Gallimard.
Serreau, Geneviève. 1966.  Histoire du ‘nouveau théâtre’ . Paris: Gallimard.

174   G. Whistler
Sjursen, Nina. 1992. La puissance et l’impuissance: Dialogue entre  Caligula  et 
En attendant Godot . In  Albert Camus et le théatre , ed. Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi, 
83–92. Paris: Imec Éditions.
Stoltzfus, Ben F. 1991. Violence as Tragic Farce in Camus’s  Caligula . In  Themes 
in   Drama   13:   Violence   in   Drama ,   191–201.   Cambridge:   Cambridge   
University Press.
Weil, Simone. 2016.  Attente de Dieu . Paris: Albin Michel.

7
A Novelistic Afterlife
1    Chapter  Introduction
Since  publication,  Algerian  journalist  Kamel  Daoud’s  debut  novel,  
Meursault, contre-enquête  (Daoud  2014 ), has received considerable atten -
tion among Camus scholars and general readers alike. The novel revisits 
some of Albert Camus’ most famous works, but from the perspective of 
post-Independence  Algeria,  providing  the  reader  with  a  rich  allegorical  
account of Algerian identity, politics, and history, and the duality therein, 
as  well  as  (as  I  will  argue  in  this  chapter)  an  exploration  of  the  role  of  
literature in ethical understanding. The revelation and depth of  Meursault, 
contre-enquête  is thus worthy of comparison to other  tours de force  of post -
colonial rewriting such as Jean Rhys’  Wide Sargasso Sea  ( 2012/1966 ) and 
J. M. Coetzee’s  Foe  (2012/1986 ), as well as ethical metafictions such as 
Ian McEwan’s  Atonement  (2016/2001 ). The text itself is in part a pastiche 
of  Camus’  œuvre,  recycling  his  storylines,  motifs,  philosophical  ideas,  
and even whole passages from the original texts, which has led the novel 
to  be  interpreted  in  many  ways—as  an  homage,  as  a  critique,  even  as  
plagiarism. As I hope to show in this chapter,  Meursault, contre-enquête  is 
so much more than that—this novel takes up Camus’ mantle, arguing for 
175 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_7

176   G. Whistler
and   demonstrating   the   power   of   literature   to   bring   about   moral   
1 understanding.
The majority of commentators on Daoud’s novel have understandably 
tended  to  focus  on  the  postcolonial  side  of  the  novel  (e.g.  Richardson  
2015 ;  Lalami   2015 ),  because,  as  one  critic  writes,   Meursault,  contre-   
enquête   ‘exposes  what  might  be  called  the  colonial  unconscious  of  the  
original’s representational strategies’ (Brozgal  2016 , 39). Upon the release 
of the English translation, a review by  Guardian  journalist, Nick Fraser, 
implied that the novel reveals an underlying ‘white racism’ which informs 
L’Etranger ; on account of Camus’ failure to give ‘the Arab’ a name (Fraser 
2015 )—I  contend  that  this  analysis  hardly  does  justice  to  either  text.  
Another  reviewer,  writing  in   Tablet   magazine,  takes  the  more  nuanced  
position  that  the  ‘power  of   The  Meursault  Investigation   comes  from  the  
way it reinstates precisely what Camus omits from  The Outsider : not sim -
ply the name of ‘the Arab’, or a political agenda, but a morality based on 
empathy’ (Kirsch  2015 ). My focus in this chapter is  how  this novel ‘rein -
states’  such  a  morality.  In  its  creation  of  a  dialogue  between  oppressed  
and oppressor, I suggest that  Meursault, contre-enquête  demonstrates the 
ability of narrative praxis to facilitate a reader’s comprehension and recon -
struction of both the self and other. The novel is  not only  the story of a 
man  learning  to  understand  his  supposed  enemy  through  engagement  
with his writing, it is also the story of a man learning to understand him -
self through the activity of reading. As such, I contend that the insights 
generated by engagement with this postcolonial text have important ethi -
cal  implications  which  can  be  applied  to  the  role  of  literary  narratives  
more generally. More specifically, I suggest that the role of Meursault in 
Meursault,  contre-enquête   is  one  that  re-instils  a  non-religious  faith  in  
2  the novel’s protagonist—one that he has lost through his postco - Harun,
lonial encounter with Algeria.
With  a  view  to  the  aims  aforementioned,  the  following  section  will  
make salient some key features of both  L’Etranger  and  Meursault, contre-  
enquête , illustrating their relationship to my argument. In the third sec -
tion,  I  will  then  attempt  to  construct  a  philosophical  framework  for  
understanding the kind of knowledge that Harun attains, by borrowing 
both  from  Eleonore  Stump’s  work  in  philosophy  of  religion  (Stump  
2010 ), and Frank Jackson’s epistemic theory (Jackson  1982 ). In Sect.  4, I 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   177
go  on  to  use  this  framework  as  a  tool  for  analysing  not  only  Daoud’s  
novel,  but  also  for  making  reference  to  Camus’  work.  While  Eleonore  
Stump draws her epistemic theory from Christian theology, I suggest that 
her conception of Franciscan knowledge has useful implications beyond 
these borders, as it hits on something important—the power of narrative 
to communicate alternative perspectives on the world. This secularisation 
of  Franciscan  knowledge  is  also  reflected  in  the  novel’s  exploration  of  
faith and redemption. Guilt is central to the activity of  Meursault, contre-  
enquête —not  only  Meursault’s  guilt  but  also  (as  we  will  come  to  see)  
Harun’s. In the fifth section, therefore, I suggest that, just as faith is often 
derived from the kind of religious stories upon which Stump bases her 
conception of Franciscan knowledge, Harun is able to nurture a kind of 
faith through his engagement with Meursault’s narrative. This faith is a 
non-religious faith in the Other, one that enables Harun to feel redeemed 
from his own guilt, transcending the ethical judgements he imposes on 
himself via post-Independence Algerian norms. This is a post-religious, 
postcolonial faith that enriches Harun’s experience of his homeland, rec -
onciling him to his own otherness.
2    From Meursault to Harun
L’Etranger  is certainly one of the most written about novels of the twenti -
eth century—and rightly so. This text not only approaches some of the 
most important philosophical themes (as we have already seen) but it is 
also tremendously readable, at just over a hundred pages long and in a 
simple  and  engaging  first-person  narrative.  These  qualities  alone  have  
secured it a place on reading lists for philosophy and literature since its 
publication, but more recent studies have focused less on the content of 
3   To  understand  what  this  means  it   the  novel  than  what  it  fails  to  say.
would perhaps help to recap on some details of the plot. Our protagonist, 
Meursault, is a young man living alone and working in an unstimulating 
job  in  French  Algeria.  He  seems  to  apathetically  take  everything  in  his  
stride  (including  personal  relationships  and  even  the  death  of  his  
mother)—he is ‘a poster boy for the unexamined life’, as George Heffernan 
so  eloquently  put  it  (Heffernan   2017 ,  16).  It  seems  as  though  nothing  

178   G. Whistler
could upset this character’s world, until one day he becomes involved in 
a  quarrel  between  a  rather  dubious  friend  of  his  and  a  group  of  young  
Arabic-Algerian men. The turning point of the novel is the moment when 
Meursault finds himself in front of these men with a gun in his hand on 
a scorching beach. The incredible heat of the sun crashing onto the sand 
is too much for Meursault, and he loses control, killing one of the men. 
The second half of the novel catalogues the events that follow this spilling 
of blood—that is, Meursault’s imprisonment, trial, and his awaiting the 
death sentence. Throughout these momentous events, the reader is privy 
to  the  thoughts  of  Meursault,  with  reflections  that  are  philosophically  
very  interesting.  But  the  narrative  is  painfully  one  sided:  the  man  that  
Meursault killed is referred to throughout simply as ‘the Arab’, and con -
sequently  this  other is not engaged with at all—his story and person are 
completely absent from the novel. This is where Daoud steps in, albeit 
almost  70  years  later.  Other  literary  attempts  to  address  this  deficit  
include Leila Aboulela’s radio play  The Insider  (2013 ), which reimagined 
the lives of the Arabic characters of the novel in the postcolonial era, and 
Emteaz Hussain’s play,  Outsiders  (2015 ), which continues the story after 
Meursault’s trial and execution, focusing on the marginalised women in 
the  story  (Arabic-Algerian  and  French-Algerian),  Sumaya,  ‘The  Arab’s’  
sister,  and  Marie,  Meursault’s  girlfriend.  While  these  adaptations  and  
responses  are  of  course  extremely  valuable  and  illuminating,  Daoud’s  
contribution  goes  even  further—it  responds  to  and  engages  in  Camus’  
own project of ethical communication through literature.
Meursault, contre-enquête  is written from the perspective of the brother 
of the dead ‘Arab’, and at last he is given a name—Musa. Musa’s brother, 
Harun, tells us the other side of the story, giving us another view of the 
world that Meursault inhabited. Harun’s life is scarred by the death of his 
older  brother,  and  though  the  murder  appears  in  the  newspapers,  only  
the murderer is named, not the victim. Consequently, Musa’s poor, illit -
erate  family  is  alienated  from  the  crime—they  simply  never  see  him  
again, and Harun is left to obsess about this mysterious killer. One idio -
syncrasy  of   Meursault,  contre-enquête   that  is  important  to  note  is  that  
Camus’ book,  L’Etranger , exists within the world of the novel, appearing as 
a first-person account of Meursault’s crime and trial, written by Meursault 
himself. This text is referred to using an alternative, yet very apt title, ‘The 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   179
4 Other’ (Daoud  2015 , 127),  while the real-life author, Camus, has sim -
ply ceased to exist. While this results in some complicated issues relating 
to authorship and truth (which I will make some reference to towards the 
end of Sect.  3), the presence of the ‘The Other’ in the world of the novel 
highlights  an  issue  which  is  in  fact  central  to  this  chapter—that  is,  the  
role  that  narrative  plays  in  coming  to  understand  the  Other.  By  giving  
Meursault the role of ‘author’ of  L’Etranger , his actions are treated with 
the moral seriousness they deserve. We are also given an extraordinarily 
acute illustration of how a novel’s narrative can act as a window into the 
mind of the Other, through which we can perceive truths otherwise inac -
cessible. This effect demonstrates Iris Murdoch’s claim that ‘prose litera -
ture can reveal an aspect of the world which no other art can reveal ... 
and in the case of the novel, the most important thing to be thus revealed, 
not  necessarily  the  only  thing,  but  incomparably  the  most  important  
thing, is that other people exist’ (Murdoch  1999 , 281–282).
To  return  to  the  plot  of   Meursault,  contre-enquête ,  our  protagonist,  
Harun, grows up bereft by the loss of his brother, and indeed their mother 
never ceases to mourn Musa. It is a long time, however, before Harun is 
even aware that there is a book written by his brother’s murderer about 
the event of Musa’s death; when he discovers this, naturally it is a revela -
tion. When he finally reads  L’Etranger /‘The Other’ what is most striking 
to  him  is  the  complete  absence  of  his  brother  from  the  book.  Yes,  
Meursault  kills  an  ‘Arab’;  yes,  spilling  Musa’s  blood  on  Algerian  sand  
changes  Meursault’s  life  irrevocably;  yes,  committing  murder  brings  
about some intense philosophical reflection on life, death, and guilt; but 
not in the way anyone possessing an ounce of compassion for the victim 
would expect. Musa is only ever referred to as ‘the Arab’, and Meursault’s 
philosophical reflections are brought on by his own imminent death, not 
the fact he has taken another life. As Harun tells us:
Musa’s body will remain a mystery. There’s not a word in the book about it. 
That’s denial of a shockingly violent kind, don’t you think? As soon as the 
shot is fired, the murderer turns around, heading for a mystery he considers 
worthier of interest than the Arab’s life. (Daoud  2015 , 46)

180   G. Whistler
Musa’s  identity  was  erased  not  by  death,  but  by  the  insignificance  
entailed in his status as ‘Arab’ in a colonised country. Nevertheless, this 
mystery has tormented and fascinated Harun since childhood, and, as we 
will  come  to  see,  there  is  more  to  the  relationship  between  Harun  and  
Meursault than immediately meets the eye. As Daoud himself said of it 
in a recent interview:
It’s  the  same  relationship  as  the  decolonised  have  with  the  colonisers:  a  
relationship full of fascination and anger; a relationship of resemblance and 
rejection ... This link between Harun and Meursault very much resembles 
the link that we have in relation to a time, to a coloniser ... to a culture ... 
5 and to ourselves.
And  so,  the  role  of  ‘The  Other’  as  a  novel—as  a  narrative—in  this  
relationship, is central and indispensable, working not only on an indi -
vidual  level  (i.e.  between  the  inner  lives  of  Meursault  and  Harun),  but  
also on a wider, cultural level, as the novel gives insights into the world of 
the oppressed Other, as well as creating a dialogue with historical oppres -
sors. Thus, we return to the task of this chapter: to attempt to analyse the 
movements  and  implications  of  Daoud’s  novel,  the  dialogue  it  creates  
between these characters, and between the inseparable and irreconcilable 
elements of postcolonial identity, as well as relating this to Camus’ own 
aims. The following section will therefore set up a philosophical frame -
work for the task in hand.
3    Franciscan  Knowledge 
and ‘What-It’s-Like-Ness’
Wandering in Darkness , a recent volume on the problem of suffering by 
leading figure in philosophy of religion, Eleonore Stump, encompasses an 
insightful positing of the place of narrative within epistemology. In this 
influential text, Stump argues for the possibility of gaining knowledge of 
the Other through narrative engagement. She sets out her conception of 
two different forms or systems of knowledge, which she labels Franciscan 
and Dominican. Basing her categorisation on the traditions surrounding 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   181
Saint Francis and Saint Dominic, she explains, ‘If argument is the coin of 
the realm for Dominicans, stories fill an analogous role for Franciscans’ 
(Stump  2010 , 46). She continues, ‘The Dominican system is helpful for 
making  clear  distinctions  focused  on  details,  about  which  argument  is  
possible and often frequent’ (Stump  2010 , 41). This is the kind of knowl -
edge she attributes as the goal of the analytic tradition of philosophy—
the kind that can be derived from arguments based on truth claims. On 
the  other  hand,  narrative  and  storytelling  are  central  to  the  Franciscan  
tradition, and therefore the kind of understanding that can be gained via 
these means is what she labels ‘Franciscan’.
My reading of  Meursault, contre-enquête  posits Harun’s reading of ‘The 
6 ; this is due to the impor - Other’ as ‘Franciscan’ within Stump’s schema
tant knowledge and insight that Harun is able to obtain about Meursault 
(and indeed French Algeria) from reading his text, and the empathy iden -
tified by Kirsch as quoted above. For example, there are all kind of facts 
that  could  be  communicated  about  Meursault  via  the  Dominican  sys -
tem—such as that he is French-Algerian, that he killed someone, or that 
he  is  imprisoned.  In  philosophical  terms,  we  could  use  these  facts  as  
premises, and by means of weighing up their logical implications, infer 
further knowledge from these facts. What Dominican knowledge cannot 
account  for,  however,  is  the  perspective  we  gain  from  encountering  his  
narrative, the subtle moments of understanding and resistance we experi -
ence in confronting his story, or the sense we get of Meursault as a per -
son.  This  is  the  stuff  that  cannot  be  reduced  to  propositional  content  
(knowledge  that ), or even rigorous argumentation—this is what we mean 
by Franciscan knowledge.
Stump tells us, ‘The author’s presentation of the character, if it is well 
done, makes that character available to us in somewhat the same way the 
character would have been if he had in fact been directly and immediately 
present to us’ (Stump  2010 , 80). Stump of course does not mean ‘present’ 
in the physical sense, but as though the character’s  personhood  is actually 
perceptible to us (something which physical presence of course does not 
necessarily entail). She refers to this effect as a ‘second person experience’ 
(Stump  2010 , 52)—alike to the experience of being addressed as ‘you’. 
This, I suggest, is how Harun learns from Meursault, and how we in turn 
learn from both of them: the activity of reading elicits a conscious and 

182   G. Whistler
sensitive engagement with their narratives, and we treat them as a people, 
learning to empathise with their actions and motives—something which 
is perhaps more difficult when we encounter otherness in real life, as we 
don’t  have  the  benefit  of  encountering  the  inner  lives  of  others,  as  we  
often do with characters. Through this experience of the Other through 
the narrative, we are able to gain a kind of intersubjective knowledge; in 
the presence of the Other, via the text, we are brought to reflect upon our 
own person, actions, and cultural assumptions.
7   and  by  way  of  further  illustrating  this   Following  Eleonore  Stump,
point,  I  will  reformulate  this  claim  based  on  a  famous  thought  experi -
ment by the analytic philosopher, Frank Jackson ( 1982 , 127–136). The 
traditional  line  of  argument  goes  something  like  this:  Mary  is  a  gifted  
neuroscientist who knows all there is to know about what happens on a 
neurological level when a human sees colours. But what is unusual about 
Mary is that she has spent her entire life living in a black and white room, 
learning from a black and white screen: Mary has no sense data (or  qua-
lia )  of  colours  to  which  she  can  apply  her  theoretical  knowledge.  One  
day,  Mary  leaves  the  room  and  for  the  first  time  she  sees  a  red  rose.  
Jackson  suggests  that,  despite  her  extensive  knowledge  of  the  scientific  
processes  of  perceiving  colours,  upon  seeing  this  rose  Mary  gains  new  
information about what it is to see the colour red from the experience. 
This information is phenomenological; it is the ‘what-it’s-like-ness’ of see -
ing the colour red, equal to Franciscan knowledge.
There are two directions in which Jackson’s thought experiment may 
be applied to my argument. The first is to recognise that Meursault (and 
indeed  readers  of   L’Etranger ,  and  perhaps  even  Camus  himself )  is  in  
many ways akin to Mary. Whilst he has a certain amount of knowledge 
that ,  pertaining  to  Arabic-Algerians  and  their  culture,  he  is  alienated  
from  them  to  such  a  degree  that  they  do  not  feature  as  subjects  in  his  
worldview, even after he has murdered one. For many readers, the experi -
ence  of  encountering   Meursault,  contre- enquête   is  something  like  what  
Mary experiences when she finally leaves her black and white room and 
sees that red rose: for the first time it is possible to appreciate ‘what-it’s-  
like’ for the ‘Arab’, on both a personal and a cultural level—the powerful -
ness of this experience is perhaps what has invoked such strong responses 
from readers such as Fraser’s. The second move to make is to see Harun 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   183
as being kindred to Mary. The War of Independence made every effort to 
erase  French  culture  from  Algeria,  and  growing  up  in  an  environment  
which so strongly denied this important period of Algerian history (and 
the  alternative  account  of  French-Algerian  people),  is  equivalent  to  the  
black and white room. When Harun discovers ‘The Other’, he discovers 
the  possibility  of  a  different  way  of  seeing—he  discovers  ‘what-it’s-like’  
for Meursault, and for French-Algerians in general. For us, the readers of 
both these novels, we are given the opportunity to gain new, Franciscan 
knowledge from both of these accounts (what-it’s-like for both sides of 
postcolonial  Algeria),  and  this  experience  is  what  promotes  faith  in  
the Other.
Of  course,  we  must  acknowledge  that  while  Harun  is  reading  ‘The  
Other’ as a kind of memoir, we read both novels as literary works—and 
there are certainly some noteworthy implications of this distinction. For 
example, we must ask ourselves whether it is even appropriate to speak of 
knowledge  in  this  case,  as  that  brings  into  question  notions  of  truth  
(something  which  is  complex  enough  in  itself,  but  is  made  even  more  
problematic in reference to an intertextual work such as this). We are also 
bound to wonder whether reading a text as fiction instead of autobiogra -
phy  makes  its  moral  concerns  less  persuasive.  While  these  are  certainly  
pertinent questions, I would suggest that they in fact lead us astray from 
the real project of  Meursault, contre-enquête —the creation of a dialogue 
between two alienated perspectives on the same precious homeland, and 
the sense that this dialogue helps make of the fractured identities of both 
sides. While we read  L’Etranger  as fiction and Harun reads ‘The Other’ as 
factual,  both  Meursault’s  story  and  Harun’s  are  partial  and  incomplete:  
they can both be seen as unreliable narrators. This may be seen to throw 
into question whether what we are talking about should really be called 
knowledge,  but  this  in  fact  poses  no  real  problems  for  the  aims  of  
Meursault, contre-enquête : the whole point is understanding the contin -
gencies  of  these  differing  postcolonial  perspectives,  not  trying  to  con -
struct any grander idea of truth. By making the text itself of  L’Etranger  a 
part of Harun’s fictional world, Daoud is enabled to call into question the 
veracity  of  Meursault’s  account  (as  he  does  on  many  occasions),  high -
lighting  the  centrality  of  this  contingency.  As  for  the  moral  salience  of  
actions performed by fictional characters instead of real human beings, 

184   G. Whistler
again we should instead view this as being central to Daoud’s endeavour: 
we as readers are thereby encouraged to enter Harun’s fictional world and 
engage faithfully with the actions of characters as moral agents, treating 
them with all the seriousness and emotion that we would real people.
4    Knowledge of the Other, from 
‘The Other’
Let  us  now  use  this  epistemic  framework  to  look  at  the  novel  in  more  
detail,  and  the  issues  about  which  Harun  gains  Franciscan  knowledge  
through the activity of reading. He describes the revelatory experience of 
reading ‘The Other’ for the first time: ‘I held it as if spellbound. At one 
and  the  same  time,  I  felt  insulted  and  revealed  to  myself.  I  spent  the  
whole night reading that book. My heart was pounding, I was about to 
suffocate,  it  was  like  reading  a  book  written  by  God  himself ’  (Daoud  
2015 , 130). Harun continues, ‘[Reading] allowed me to understand, lit -
tle by little, how your hero saw the world’ (Daoud  2015 , 132), and for 
him this is an experience which helps him make sense of his own postco -
lonial Algerian world. Harun tells us upon reading ‘The Other’, ‘It let me 
see into the murderer’s soul as if I were his angel’ (Daoud  2015 , 131). In 
this moment, he begins to recognise the ways in which he is kindred to 
Meursault,  and  even  their  shared  humanity.  Discovering  an  affinity  
between  himself  and  the  man  he  considered  an  enemy  for  so  long,  he  
refers  to  the  two  of  them  as  ‘The  pair,  him  and  me,  the  unlikeliest  of  
twins’ (Daoud  2015 , 3).
In coming to recognise his enemy as a human being, Harun begins to 
separate the political from the personal. He tells us, ‘If you had met me a 
few decades ago, I would have served you up the version with the prosti -
tute  slash  Algerian  land  and  the  settler  who  abuses  her  with  repeated  
rapes  and  violence.  But  I’ve  gained  some  distance  now’  (Daoud   2015 , 
62).  This  does  not,  of  course,  make  the  injustice  of  colonisation  more  
forgivable,  but  it  does  allow  Harun  to  look  beyond  this  context  to  the  
individuals behind it. He says, ‘When your hero dwells on his mother, I 
understand him better than I do when he talks about my brother’ (Daoud 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   185
2015 , 36)—Harun can relate to Meursault on a personal level, but the 
cultural estrangement which consists in Meursault’s crime (i.e. his own 
inability to empathise with the Arabic community) nevertheless separates 
them.  Even  in  this  ineliminable  moment  of  estrangement,  however,  
Harun shows that an awareness of otherness is the key to reflecting on the 
self. He tells us, ‘There’s always another, my friend. In love, in friendship, 
or even on a train, there he is, the other, sitting across from you and star -
ing at you, or turning his back on you and deepening the perspectives of 
your  solitude’  (Daoud   2015 ,  73).  This  insight  is  brought  into  fruition  
through reading, and it is this element of Harun’ experience which I sug -
gest has wider ethical implications. Harun eventually comes to reflect on 
other judgements he has made of others who inhibited this space between 
‘us’  and  ‘them’  in  which  he  now  resides,  specifically  the  Arabic  women  
who (to some extent) were liberated by contact with French culture. He 
tells  us,  ‘Now  there   were   a  few  skirt-wearing,  firm-breasted  Algerian  
women  who  shuttled  between  our  world  and  the  world  of  the   roumis , 
down  into  the  French  neighborhoods.  We  brats  stoned  them  with  our  
eyes’  (Daoud   2015 ,  19).  In  acknowledging  his  own  previous  lack  of  
understanding, Harun demonstrates the beginnings of an ethical growth.
While Harun of course cannot forgive the murder of his brother, the 
similarities between himself and Meursault that he discovers in the book 
enable  him  to  understand—even  to  empathise—with  its  protagonist.  
Indeed, Harun too has blood on his hands—he commits a murder just as 
lacking  in  motivation—an  act  of  revenge  exacted  upon  the  wrong  
Frenchman. He seems to relate to the arbitrariness of Meursault’s crime, 
describing how, ‘during the summer, when the sun’s so close to earth it 
can make you crazy or even drive you to shed blood’ (Daoud  2015 , 55)—
8  Again, paraphrasing  L’Etranger , he describes  precisely Meursault’s excuse.
how the sound of his gun being fired ‘was like two sharp raps on the door 
9 —where Meursault’s crime leads him  of deliverance’ (Daoud  2015 , 85)
to be condemned, Harun is freed by its repetition. In this, we see again 
that Harun’s world is the flip-side of Meursault’s: while Meursault’s crime 
was thoughtless, Harun’s was premeditated; while Musa was murdered at 
two o’clock in the afternoon, the Frenchman is killed at two o’clock in 
the  morning  (Daoud   2015 ,  79);  while  Musa  remained  anonymous,  
Harun  gives  his  victim  a  name—Joseph  Larquais  (Daoud   2015 ,  88).  

186   G. Whistler
Having found that he too is capable of taking a life, he contemplates the 
act  of  murder  on  Meursault’s  behalf,  telling  us,  ‘The  Other  is  a  unit  of  
measurement you lose when you kill’ (Daoud  2015 , 90). Echoing Camus’ 
10  Harun discovers for himself that  own critiques of violence and nihilism,
taking  a  life  devalues  all  human  life,  including  his  own—as  George  
Heffernan put it, ‘To kill another human being, then, is to kill all human 
beings. To kill another is also to kill oneself.  Murder is suicide ’ (Heffernan 
2017 , 24). Unlike Meursault, Harun walks free—a fact which brings him 
no comfort. He says, ‘The gratuitousness of Musa’s death was unconscio -
nable. And now my revenge had just been struck down to the same level 
of insignificance (Daoud  2015 , 111)’. In the violent context of the War 
of Independence, the Harun’s murder of a Frenchman isn’t even treated 
as a crime. When Harun turns himself in, the police officer questioning 
him  is  just  as  complacent  about  this  murder  as  Meursault  was  about  
Musa’s (Daoud  2015 , 111), and thus Harun finds himself in the face of 
the same emptiness and estrangement which so defines Musa’s murder.
As we are beginning to see, the Franciscan knowledge that ‘The Other’ 
imparts  helps  Harun  to  comprehend  how  he  relates  to  Meursault,  and  
the colonial society the latter represents. Harun is able to identify their 
cultural points of departure, but in encountering the ‘what-it’s-like-ness’ 
of  Meursault’s  experiences  through  reading  ‘The  Other’,  Harun  is  also  
brought to reflect upon his own experience of cultural alienation. He tells 
us that Meursault is ‘ el-roumi , the foreigner, the stranger’ (Daoud  2015 , 
34),   and   clearly   the   unhomeliness—the   uncanny—of   postcolonial   
Algeria  leaves  both  Meursault  and  Harun  as  outsiders.  Focusing  on  
Harun’s  and  Meursault’s  relationship  with  their  homeland  itself,  Luke  
Richardson points out the tension which motivates this need for empathy:
Meursault has rejected an offer to return to Paris choosing instead the plea -
sure  of  colonial  life,  which  he  enjoys—like  swimming,  and  sunshine.  At  
the  beach  he  and  Marie  contrast  with  Masson  and  his  Parisian  accented  
wife, the old generation of French-born immigrants who seem out of place, 
are pale, overweight, swim poorly. Marie and Meursault are the new gen -
eration, born in the country ... They are tanned, at home, swim perfectly. 
The Arabs enter this settled dynamic and instantly disrupt it. Their mere 
presence is demonstrative that the land Meursault [loves] is not, in fact, his. 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   187
That this new French Algerian identity is founded on an illegitimacy—the 
illegitimacy  of  colonial  conquest.  If  he  has  rejected  France,  but  Algeria  
rejects  him,  the   pied  noir   is  a  child  of  nowhere,  a  permanent  outsider.  
(Richardson  2015 )
Harun most certainly is able to get a sense of this dynamic from his 
own reading of ‘The Other’. He remarks himself, ‘How he must have suf -
fered, poor man! To be the child of a place that never gave you birth...’ 
(Daoud  2015 ,  3).  Whilst  the  text  of   Meursault,  contre-enquête   revolves  
around the suffering of Harun and of Arabic Algeria, it also taps into the 
homelessness  of  second  and  third-generation  French-Algerians,  such  as  
Camus himself.
Similarly,  Algeria’s  linguistic  history  naturally  plays  a  key  role  in  the  
way Harun makes sense of the world. Like  L’Etranger ,  Meursault,   contre-  
enquête  was originally written in French. Harun’s mother tongue, how -
ever,  was  of  course  Algerian  Arabic,  and  he  talks  wistfully  about  the  
characteristics of the language, describing it as ‘rich, full of imagery, vital -
ity, sudden jolts, and improvisations, but not too big on precision’ (Daoud 
2015 , 37). But, as much as anything else, this novel is about the difficulty 
11   of finding a means of communicating the experience of the oppressed,
and so Harun ‘had to learn a language other than that one. To survive’ 
(Daoud  2015 ,  37).  In  order  to  understand  Meursault  and  his  writing,  
and to communicate his own story, Harun was compelled to learn French. 
In the act of learning this new language, the language of the coloniser, he 
is no doubt surrendering something of the Arabic side of his identity, but 
he also gains a new perspective, a new idea of the duality at the core of his 
own postcolonial identity. We are told, ‘The French language fascinated 
me like a puzzle, and beyond it lay the solution to the dissonances of my 
world’  (Daoud   2015 ,  119).  He  says  elsewhere:  ‘Books  and  your  hero’s  
language gradually enabled me to name things differently and to organise 
the  world  with  my  own  words’  (Daoud   2015 ,  37).  Through  reading  
Meursault’s words, he gains Franciscan knowledge of an alternative per -
spective  of  the  world.  Before  colonisation,  the  Arabic  language  would  
have been suitable as a tool for understanding himself and his homeland, 
but  in  the  fractured  postcolonial  environment  he  inhabits,  something  
new—an  element  of  otherness—is  necessary.  The  language  that  Harun  

188   G. Whistler
comes to use reflects this: Harun’s French is peppered with Arabic words, 
giving it a whole new character. Harun explains this choice:
I’ve learned to speak this language, and to write in it too ... I’m going to 
do what was done in this country after Independence: I’m going to take the 
stones from the old houses the colonists left behind, remove them one by 
one, and build my own house, my own language. (Daoud  2015 , 1–2)
Harun’s  identity,  like  Algeria’s  identity,  is  one  shaped  and  scarred  by  
colonialism. Even now, after Independence, France has not been erased 
from Algeria; its absence is visceral. Until he learns to read French, he is 
alienated by his inability to speak the language of the coloniser. Once he 
reads ‘The Other’, Harun begins to understand the alienation  of  the colo -
niser and recognises this as a human experience, one he can relate to.
Via  his  reading  of  ‘The  Other’,  he  also  comes  to  feel  kindred  to  
Meursault in his atheism: where Meursault rejects Christianism, Harun 
rejects Islam. He tells us, ‘I’ll go as far as to say I abhor all religions. All of 
them!  Because  they  falsify  the  weight  of  the  world’  (Daoud   2015 ,  69),  
echoing Camus’ own criticisms of transcendence (as discussed in Chap. 
2). A famous scene in  L’Etranger  is the one in which Meursault spends an 
entire Sunday on his balcony watching the world go by, not leaving the 
apartment  (Camus   2000 ,  24–28).  Conversely,  Harun  tells  us,  ‘Actually  
it’s Fridays I don’t like. I often spend them on the balcony of my apart -
ment, looking at the people, the streets and the mosque’ (Daoud  2015 , 
65). In the final chapter of  L’Etranger , Meursault unleashes a frustrated 
tirade at a priest visiting his cell, but Harun tells us, ‘In my case, there’s a 
whole pack of religious fanatics hounding me’ (Daoud  2015 , 139), refer -
ring to the dogma of Islam in Algeria since Independence. These complex 
encounters between the cultures of France and Arabic Algeria forge the 
traits  which  (in  some  ways)  define  the  personalities  of  Harun  and  
Meursault—and  through  reading  ‘The  Other’  Harun  realises  just  how  
kindred they are. He tells us: ‘I was looking for traces of my brother in 
the book, and what I found instead was my own reflection, I discovered 
I was practically the murderer’s double ... [It was like a] mirror held up 
to  my  soul  and  to  what  would  become  of  me  in  this  country,  between  
Allah and ennui’ (Daoud  2015 , 131). In the final scene of the book, he 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   189
recounts the time that an imam tried to talk to him about God, and it is 
here that he once and for all merges with Meursault, quoting  L’Etranger  
at some points word for word; both voices speak at once from a place of 
otherness and estrangement (Daoud  2015 , 140–142). While both Harun 
and Meursault are kindred in their irreligiousness, in the following sec -
tion I will examine my claim that, through narrative engagement, Harun 
is able to benefit from a different kind of faith.
5    Faith and Redemption: Meursault’s 
Defence
The system of difference that Harun is able to create (through Franciscan 
knowledge) enables him to relate to Meursault, but that is only the first 
movement made in this dialogue between supposed enemies. At the core 
of  Harun’s  identity  is  a  profound  sense  of  guilt—not  only  the  guilt  he  
feels for outliving his brother Musa, or indeed for his own poorly justified 
violence, but also for abandoning the religion and the political cause so 
important to many Algerians of his generation (i.e. Islam and the fight 
for  Independence).  For  readers  today,  it  is  easy  enough  to  sympathise  
with  Harun,  as  the  injustice  of  colonialism  can  no  longer  be  ignored;  
Harun need not be redeemed. However, my analysis of  Meursault, contre-  
enquête  depends on us achieving something which is perhaps more diffi -
cult—that  is,  learning  to  understand  and  re-humanise  the  apparently  
conscienceless coloniser. While we have already seen some evidence for 
the  painful  alienation  of  second-generation  French-Algerians,  we  are  
likely to encounter more resistance when trying to reconcile Meursault 
himself, due to his indefensible crime; Harun, however, is able to sym -
pathise  and  relate  to  Meursault.  This  section,  therefore,  will  highlight  
several  instances  of  Camus’  novel  which  might  enable  readers  of  
Meursault’s narrative to sympathise with him in a way which would not 
be possible without engagement with his narrative (i.e. if we were in the 
position of his jury). In keeping with this chapter’s non-religious applica -
tion of Franciscan knowledge, and harkening back to my discussion of 

190   G. Whistler
faith in Chap.  2, I will explore the effect of Meursault’s narrative in terms 
of ‘faith in the Other’.
Meursault’s own guilt, and lack of awareness of it, is of course central 
to  L’Etranger . Meursault kills a human being and believes himself to be 
innocent until he sees himself through the eyes of his jury, When at last 
he tells us, ‘for the first time I realized that I was guilty’ (Camus  2000 , 
87). His lack of remorse towards the ‘the Arab’ is not only important in 
the  text  itself,  it  is  also  the  lynch-pin  of  many  readings  of   Meursault, 
12   However,  there  are  many  times  when,  as  readers  of   contre-enquête .
L’Etranger ,  we  (and  Harun)  are  able  to  identify  the  fact  that  Meursault  
does indeed have a conscience, and while he often appears to repress it, is 
has an undeniable effect on his behaviour. For example, when his mother 
dies, he feels compelled to apologise to his boss when he needs to ask for 
time off work. He says, ‘It’s not my fault’ (Camus  2000 , 9), betraying a 
feeling  of  guilt  towards  his  mother  for  having  relinquished  her  care.  
When he arrives at her retirement home and meets the warden, his guilty 
conscience  once  again  resurfaces  and  we  are  told,  ‘I  felt  as  if  he  was  
reproaching  me’  (Camus   2000 ,  10).  We  also  know  that  she  was  bored  
and unhappy living with her young son—he tells us, ‘When she was at 
home,  she  used  to  spend  all  her  time  watching  me  in  silence’  (Camus  
2000 , 11), but that he never adjusts to her absence from his apartment, 
instead living like Miss Havisham in the debris of another life. He tells us:
It was just right when mother was here. But now it’s too big for me and I’ve 
had to move the dining-room table into my bedroom. I live in just this one 
room now, with some rather saggy cane chairs, a wardrobe with a mirror 
that’s  gone  yellow,  a  dressing-table  and  a  brass  bed.  The  rest  is  a  mess.  
(Camus  2000 , 25)
While  his  living  like  a  hermit  in  his  own  house  may  yet  again  stem  
from a feeling of guilt towards his mother, this certainly shows that when 
the prosecutor at Meursault’s trial accuses him of ‘burying his mother like 
a heartless criminal’ (Camus  2000 , 93), he has missed something that we 
(and indeed Harun) have not. In these moments of recognition, we are 
able to develop a kind faith in Meursault, compelled by (as Stump would 

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   191
put it) a second-person experience of him through narrative. This is how 
he is redeemed in Harun’s eyes.
Of course, Meursault’s defence in court is undeniably weak. He cannot 
account for the evidence against him, and he is unwilling to embellish his 
story  to  gain  the  sympathy  of  the  court.  The  reason  that  Meursault  is  
unable  to  make  his  jury  understand  his  lack  of  motive  is  because,  we  
might  say,  he  tells   the  truth,  the  whole  truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth . 
Throughout the novel, the style that Camus uses to construct Meursault’s 
story  is  clipped  and  matter-of-fact.  Thanks  to  the  imaginative  activity  
required by reading the novel, we as readers are able to get a sense of him 
as a person—but in court the simplicity of his testimony fails him. All 
that  can  be  inferred  from  Meursault’s  clumsy  and  brief  account  is  his  
guilt. It is precisely for this reason that Camus can claim, somewhat con -
troversially, that ‘one wouldn’t be far wrong in seeing  The Outsider  as the 
story of a man who, without any heroic pretensions, agrees to die for the 
truth’ (Camus  2000 , 119). It is obvious to any reader of  L’Etranger  that 
something is missing from Meursault’s testimony—he fails to engage his 
audience’s (the jury’s) imagination and therefore they are unable to put 
themselves in his position, whereas we readers can. Under the scrutiny of 
the theatrical, persuasive, and emotive show of his prosecutor, Meursault’s 
estrangement in the courtroom turns into demonisation. The failure of 
Meursault’s truthful account of his crime to gain any allies is what really 
represents the absurd in this novel: the conflict between faith and reason. 
From our faith in Meursault (cultivated by imaginative engagement), we 
as readers cannot fail to feel for him, to be horrified by his fate and frus -
trated  when  his  words  fail  him.  Here  we  see  that  sometimes  the  facts  
aren’t enough when attempting to determine something as nebulous as 
justice. It is precisely this effect that Eleonore Stump is pointing towards 
in her critique of Dominican systems of knowledge. Ethical understand -
ing can be extraneous to factual information, which is why no jury would 
acquit Meursault. By failing to appeal to the emotions and sympathy of 
the jury he allowed himself to become an outsider—they are unable to 
read him in the way that Harun is.
In  the  colonial  moment  that  Meursault  (and  indeed  Camus)  inhab -
ited, there is little opportunity to reflect on one’s life through the eyes of 
the oppressed other (i.e. the Arabic-Algerian community). This is   precisely 

192   G. Whistler
what is missing from  L’Etranger . Harun, however, is given the opportu -
nity, through reading ‘The Other’, to look at Algeria through a lens that 
is  less  fractured  than  the  postcolonial  one  through  which  he  normally  
sees.  While  this  alternative  lens  has  its  blind-spots  (such  as  ‘the  Arab’  
himself ),  it  enables  Harun  to  see  what  has  been  erased  by  the  War  of  
Independence,  and  this  flip-side  makes  Harun’s  own  world  view  more  
complete, more cohesive. It is for this reason that ‘The Other’ represents 
the necessity for Harun of making sense of the colonised self through the 
engagement with the colonised Other. While we may be able to forgive 
Harun his faults easily enough, until he has read ‘The Other’, he is crip -
pled by his own guilt—guilt for the ways in which he feels alienated from 
Arabic Algeria. After reading Meursault’s story, however, he not only re-  
humanises his brother’s killer, he also finds redemption for his own guilt 
towards his culture and mother country, coming to understand that his 
fractured identity is a product of an (until that moment) invisible Other. 
It is Meursault, this Other, in which his faith finds purchase.
6    Chapter  Conclusion
In this chapter I have argued that, through attaining Franciscan knowl -
edge from encountering literary narrative, readers are able to engage in a 
kind  of  non-religious  faith-building  practice,  something  which  I  have  
applied to both Daoud’s and Camus’ novels. At the centre of  Meursault, 
contre-enquête   is  Harun  and  Meursault’s  homeland,  Algeria,  and  the  
many  cultural  conflicts  that  the  country  is  so  familiar  with.  Naturally,  
these  issues  play  an  important  role  in  many  readings  of  this  text,  but  
instead of simply being a critique of Camus’ colonial blinkers, I have sug -
gested that the contrasts between Meursault and Harun (French-Algerian 
and Arab-Algerian) are deployed as part of a wider ethical venture; this 
novel  is  most  definitely  about  postcolonial  identity,  but  it  has  ethical  
implications which can move beyond this context, as well as link it back 
to  Camus’  own  works.  It  is  about  coming  to  understand  a  common  
humanity  which  transcends  the  dichotomy  of  colonised/coloniser.  As  
Kamel Daoud put it, ‘What interests me is humanity, not their passports’ 
13 (Daoud  2017 ).

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   193
What  Harun  in   Meursault,  contre-enquête   learns  from  Meursault  in  
L’Etranger   is  not  that  Meursault’s  beliefs  or  perspective  on  the  world  is  
more accurate or justified than his own; instead he learns the  possibility  of 
Meursault’s perspective and comes to understand the causes and effects of 
such a perspective. The otherness of this perspective thereby throws his 
own  into  sharp  relief,  and  the  sameness  and  difference  he  experiences  
through  the  text  help  him  to  learn  both  about  himself  and  about  the  
Other. This understanding, I suggest, helps Harun to rebuild faith in his 
life; he acquires faith in the Other, and despite the fractured postcolonial 
perspective he inhabits, he is able to transcend his sense of estrangement 
and to re-humanise Meursault. In this sense, Daoud carries on Camus’ 
own  venture  of  promoting  intersubjective  ethical  reflection,  using  the  
backdrop of postcolonial Algeria to provide a plethora of self/other dis -
tinctions. When we read these two novels side by side, it becomes much 
easier to appreciate the trauma present on both sides of colonialism, the 
alienation and fragmentation of identity that the inheritors of colonial -
ism  experience,  but  it  also  shows  that  sometimes,  literary  dialogues  
between oppressed and oppressor such as these can enable us to  relate to  
and  have faith in  those we may otherwise consider our enemy.
Notes
1.  This  chapter  is  adapted  from  an  earlier  article  originally  published  in  
Literature and Theology , under the title ‘“What-It’s-Like” for the  Other : 
Narrative Knowledge and Faith in  The Meursault Investigation ’ (Whistler 
2018 ) .  I am much indebted to Oxford University Press for granting me 
permission to revisit this material here.
2.  This  discussion  of  non-religious  faith  draws  upon  the  earlier  one  in  
Chap.  2.
3.  A trend sparked by Cruise O’Brien ( 1970 ) and Saïd ( 1993 ).
4.  In French, ‘L’Autre’.
5.  Daoud in an interview with Maciej Kałuża ( 2017 ). In French: ‘Je crois 
que c’est le même rapport qu’ont les décolonisés avec les colonisateurs: 
un rapport plein de fascination et de colère; un rapport de ressemblance 
et  de  rejet.  Je  pense  que  ce  lien  entre  Haroun  et  Meursault  regarde  

194   G. Whistler
  profondément le lien qu’on a vis-à-vis d’une époque et d’un colonisateur 
et d’une culture. Et un rapport avec nous-mêmes.’
6.  From a postcolonial perspective, it might seem somewhat problematic to 
utilise  a  category  from  the  Christian  tradition  in  the  analysis  of  a  text  
which  challenges  the  erasure  of  ‘the  Arab’  in   L’Etranger ,  but  despite  
Stump’s background in Christian theology, she is trying to make a broad 
claim  about  the  possibility  of  learning  from  narrative  (rather  than  just  
saying something specific about scripture), and so her choice of termi -
nology  is  unfortunate,  but  incidental  to  the  philosophical  point  being  
made.  At  this  point  it  also  seems  pertinent  to  emphasise  the  fact  that,  
although  Meursault,    contre -enquête     challenges    colonialism    and    
Christianity,  it  is  also  critical  of  conservative  Islam  and  its  categorical  
rejection of the European influences on Algerian culture (more will be 
said on this matter in Sect.  4).
7.  Other  discussions,  in  the  context  of  epistemology,  of  understanding  
gained  through  engagement  with  literature,  include  Eleonore  Stump’s  
use  of  examples  from  Trollope’s  Palliser  novels  (Stump   2010 ,  53),  and  
László   Kajtár’s   recent   article,   ‘What   Mary   Didn’t   Read:   Literary   
Narratives  and  Knowledge’  ( 2016 ),  in  which  he  uses  a  similar  recon -
struction to describe the phenomenon of fear of death experienced upon 
reading Cormack McCarthy’s  The Road .
8.  Meursault  tells  us,  ‘Mixing  up  my  words  a  bit  and  realizing  that  I  
sounded ridiculous, I said quickly that it was because of the sun. Some 
people laughed’ (Camus  2000 , 99).
9.  Compared  to  Meursault’s  ‘it  was  like  giving  four  sharp  knocks  on  the  
door of unhappiness’ (Camus  2000 , 60).
10.   Camus  wrote  in  one  version  of  the  introduction  to   L’Homme  révolté , 
‘Murder  is  the  same  thing  as  suicide  ...  absolute  nihilism,  that  which  
accepts suicide, also accepts murder’ (In French, ‘Meurtre et suicide sont 
même chose ... Le nihilisme absolu, celui qui accepte le suicide, accepte 
aussi le meurtre.’) (Camus  2006 , III: 1240–1241).
11.   For further reading on the possibility of communication in the context 
of colonisation, see Spivak ( 1988 ).
12.   For  example,  Brozgal’s  ( 2016 ),  and  Fraser’s  ( 2015 ),  as  previously  
mentioned.
13.   In French: ‘ce qui m’intéresse, c’est l’homme, pas son passeport’.

7    A Novelistic Afterlife   195
References
Aboulela, Leila. 2013.  The Insider  [Radio Play]. BBC Radio 3. London: British 
Broadcasting Corporation.
Brozgal, Lia. 2016. The Critical Pulse of the Contre-enquête: Kamel Daoud on 
the Maghrebi Novel in French.  Contemporary French and Francophone Studies  
20 (1): 37–46.
Camus,    Albert.    2000.     The    Outsider .    Translated    by    Joseph    Laredo.    
London: Penguin.
———. 2006.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi et al. 
Paris: Gallimard.
Coetzee, John Maxwell. 2012/1986.  Foe . London: Penguin.
Cruise O’Brien, Connor. 1970.  Albert Camus: Of Europe and Africa . New York: 
Viking Press.
Daoud, Kamel. 2014.  Meursault, contre-enquête . Arles: Actes Sud.
———. 2015.  The Meursault Investigation . Translated by John Cullen. London: 
Oneworld Publications.
———. 2017. Interview de Kamel Daoud par Maciej Kałuża.  Presence d’Albert 
Camus  9: 120–128.
Fraser, Nick. 2015. The Meursault Investigation by Kamel Daoud Review—A 
Beautiful Riposte to Camus and  The Outsider .  The Observer , July 19.  https://
www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/19/the-meursault-investigation-  
review .
Heffernan, George. 2017. Beyond Victims and Executioners: Camus and Daoud 
on ‘Progressive Violence’ and Genuine Humanism (Or What Harun Learned 
from Meursault).  Journal of Camus Studies : 11–46.
Hussain, Emteaz [Writer] and Corfield, Fraser [Director]. 2015.  Outsiders . Pilot 
Theatre Company.
Jackson,  Frank.  1982.  Epiphenomenal  qualia.   The  Philosophical  Quarterly   32  
(127): 127–136.
Kajtár,   László.   2016.   What   Mary   Didn’t   Read:   Literary   Narratives   and   
Knowledge.  Ratio  29 (3): 327.
Kirsch,  Adam.  2015.   The  Meursault  Investigation   by  Kamel  Daoud.   Tablet 
Magazine ,   June   17.    http://www.tabletmag.com/jewish-arts-and-culture/
books/191489/the-meursault-investigation .
Lalami, Laila. 2015. The Meursault Investigation by Kamel Daoud.  New York 
Times  Book  Review ,  June  8.   https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/14/books/
review/the-meursault-investigation-by-kamel-daoud.html .

196   G. Whistler
McEwan, Ian. 2016/2001.  Atonement . London: Penguin.
Murdoch,  Iris.  1999.   Existentialists  and  Mystics:  Writings  on  Philosophy  and  
Literature . London: Penguin.
Rhys, Jean. 2012/1966.  Wide Sargasso Sea . London: Penguin.
Richardson, Luke. 2015. Did Camus Kill an Arab?: Readership and Authorship 
in  Kamel  Daoud’s   The  Meursault  Investigation .  Presentation  at  The  Albert  
Camus Society US/UK Annual Conference, November 13, 2015.
Saïd, Edward. 1993.  Culture and Imperialism . New York: Vintage.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1988. Can the Subaltern Speak. In  Marxism and 
the  Interpretation  of  Culture ,  ed.  Cary  Nelson  and  Lawrence  Grossberg.  
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Stump,  Eleonore.  2010.   Wandering  in  Darkness:  Narrative  and  the  Problem  of  
Suffering . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Whistler, Grace. 2018. ‘What-It’s-Like’ for the  Other : Narrative Knowledge and 
Faith in  The Meursault Investigation .  Literature and Theology  32 (2): 161–177.

8
Conclusion: Ethics Through 
Interdisciplinarity
As we saw in the introduction to this book, numerous theorists (such as 
Arthur C. Danto ( 1984 ), Berel Lang ( 1990 ), Martha Nussbaum ( 1983 , 
1990 , 1995 ), and Jon Stewart ( 2013 )) have expressed dissatisfaction with 
the current homogeneity in academic philosophical style. While we have 
seen  some  strong  arguments  for  not  collapsing  the  difference  between  
philosophy  and  literature  entirely  (such  as  Richard  Posner’s  ( 1997 )),  I  
have endeavoured to show that some literature (in this case Camus’) can 
make a fruitful contribution to the way we think about and tackle moral 
problems.  I  believe  that  the  key  to  recognising  this  is  to  maintain  that  
there  are  indeed  differences  between  philosophical  and  literary  writing  
conventions,  and  that  this  is  by  no  means  a  bad  thing.  Therefore,  we  
should manage our expectations accordingly when it comes to assessing 
the  value  of  philosophical  or  literary  texts.  Analytic  philosophical  texts  
provide  rigour  and  clarity—they  help  us  to  focus  in  on  the  specifics  of  
moral quandaries and assess the value of our responses to these problems 
using our powers of reason—this is of course an extremely valuable tool, 
and at no point in this book have I hoped to disprove the value of reason. 
However, while literature cannot hope to offer the same kind of precision 
when it comes to tackling philosophical problems, if can offer    provocative 
197 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4_8

198   G. Whistler
illustrations  of  moral  problems  in  all  their  nuance  and  subtlety.  If  we  
accept that literature is unlikely to present its arguments in the same way 
as conventional philosophical treatise, we are able to focus instead on the 
things that literature can do—that is, the subtle techniques which elicit 
philosophical reflection, without, as Nussbaum puts it, hoping to ‘wrest 
... clarity from the obscure’ (Nussbaum  1990 , 282). I suggest, therefore, 
that in supplementing traditional philosophical writing styles with more 
creative methods, moral philosophy can take advantage of these different 
approaches, allowing for both nuance and precision.
Of course, in the history of philosophy there are numerous examples 
of  philosophers  writing  before  the  arising  of  such  uniformity,  and  no  
doubt  one  could  spend  a  lifetime  trying  to  pinpoint  the  innumerable  
techniques that philosophers have drawn on to bring their subject matter 
to life, so to speak. In this book, however, I have contented myself with 
selecting just one philosopher who seems to me to have taken the rela -
tionship  between  form  and  content  in  moral  philosophy,  and  pretty  
much  made  a  career  out  of  toying  with  it—that  is,  Albert  Camus.  In  
order to demonstrate such a claim, I have presented a series of case studies 
of the techniques he utilises and offered some analysis of how these might 
be effective. I don’t doubt that there are in fact more instances of his sty -
listic innovation which have yet to be studied in such a way, but I believe 
that this book fills a considerable gap—not only within Camus scholar -
ship,  but  also  in  reference  to  debates  around  the  genre(s)  of  moral  
philosophy.
As  we  have  seen,  Camus  didn’t  just  experiment  with  philosophical  
style  (as  indeed  all  writers  do,  to  some  extent)—he  also  explicitly  con -
demned philosophy’s reliance on reason alone. This critique is the basis 
for his endeavour to formulate alternative means of provoking philosoph -
ical  reflection—ones  that  don’t  just  rely  on  reason,  but  also  stimulate  
compassion and empathy. Of course, we might say that emotions can be 
just  as  dangerous  as  false  reasoning  (and  I  am  not  about  to  argue  with  
that), but for Camus, positive emotional responses are at the heart of all 
ethics, and so he wanted to find ways of doing philosophy which were 
able  to  draw  upon  them  in  a  constructive  way.  This  is  the  reason  for  
which he turned to literature.

8    Conclusion: Ethics Through Interdisciplinarity   199
At this stage, we have looked at numerous efforts on the part of Camus 
to weave philosophical content with form. We have seen, for example (in 
Chap.  4),  how  he  composed  fables  and  allegories  to  demonstrate  the  
value of solidarity, or to critique existentialism’s nihilistic tendencies. We 
have also seen (in Chap.  5) how he used dialogues to encourage reflection 
on ethical quandaries. For the most part, it would be unrepresentative to 
call these encounters with his philosophy strictly argumentative, but they 
nevertheless present us with moral and philosophical problems and offer 
us a way to engage with and reflect upon the issues being addressed. At 
no stage in this book have I suggested that these methods are the only, or 
ideal, ones for approaching moral problems. Rather, I have analysed these 
methods as a means of demonstrating Camus’ aims as a writer and a phi -
losopher—that  is,  to  establish  alternative  means  of  approaching  moral  
and philosophical problems. Considering the success of these methods, I 
suggest  that  contemporary  ethical  theory  would  benefit  greatly  from  a  
diversification  in  method,  and  that  much  can  be  learned  from  Camus’  
own attempts.
What I have not ventured to suggest, however, is how we might be able 
to implement such a diversification. It would be unreasonable to propose 
that  contemporary  moral  philosophers  should  change  their  preferred  
styles of writing, based on any claim that there are other effective modes 
of ethical communication—I would not like to be accused of ‘turning an 
is into an ought’, as it were. What I would like to see change, however, is 
the  vehemence  with  which  alternative  writing  styles  are  rejected  in  the  
world  of  academic  philosophical  writing.  When  it  is  claimed  that  phi -
losophy is a ‘dead discipline’, as sadly it often is, it is at least in part due 
to the apparent stagnation that professionalisation has caused. No longer 
is philosophy the product of years of solitary reflection, or of dialogue in 
the market place—instead, it is a career which, like many others, conjures 
images of conference centres and corporate bureaucracy. If philosophy is 
to survive its ever more unstable status in the current academic and finan -
cial climate, an influx of diversity and creativity in methods would surely 
be a step in the right direction.
Setting  aside  this  somewhat  tangential  meditation  on  the  future  of  
philosophy as a discipline, I will conclude by revisiting a famous quote 
from Camus which illuminates the relationship between philosophy and 

200   G. Whistler
literature. As I have cited earlier on in the book, he claimed that ‘a novel 
is  never  anything  but  a  philosophy  put  into  images’  (Camus   2006 ,  I:  
794). What he says here is undoubtedly true—every novel (at least the 
good ones) contains some element of philosophy, whether it be the philo -
sophical  worldview  of  the  author  or  the  themes  it  incorporates  into  its  
subject matter. This is hardly contentious, and Camus’ own novels are of 
course  particularly  good  examples  of  how  novels  can  deal  with  philo -
sophical problems. However, Camus also tries to reinstate the reverse—
that  is,  the  literary  elements  of  philosophical  writing.  Having  offered  
arguments for the diversification of philosophical style, as well as numer -
ous examples of literary techniques that provoke moral reflection, I hope 
by now to have demonstrated why this is surely a good thing.
References
Camus, Albert. 2006.  Œuvres complètes I–IV . Edited by Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi 
et al. Paris: Gallimard.
Danto,  Arthur  C.  1984.  Philosophy  as/and/of  Literature.   Proceedings  and  
Addresses of the American Philosophical Association  58 (1): 5–20.
Lang, Berel. 1990.  The Anatomy of Philosophical Style . Oxford and Cambridge, 
MA: Basil Blackwell.
Nussbaum,  Martha.  1983.  Flawed  Crystals:  James’s  The  Golden  Bowl  and  
Literature as Moral Philosophy.  New Literary History  15 (1): 25–50.
———.  1990.   Love’s  Knowledge:  Essays  on  Philosophy  and  Literature .  Oxford:  
Oxford University Press.
———. 1995.  Poetic Justice: The Literary Imagination and Public Life . Boston: 
Beacon Press.
Posner, Richard. 1997. Against Ethical Criticism.  Philosophy and Literature  21 
(2): 1–27.
Stewart,  Jon.  2013.   The  Unity  of  Content  and  Form  in  Philosophical  Writing . 
London: Bloomsbury.

1
Index
A Agency, 126
Abbou, André, 137 Agent, 26, 38, 140, 184
Abdelkrim, Zedjiga, 53 Agnostic, 49, 54
Aboulela, Leila, 178 Algeria, 30, 93n9, 103, 176, 183, 
Abstraction, 6, 19, 25, 26, 39n4,   186–188, 192, 193
53, 57, 69n12, 102–107, 131,  Alger Républicain , 30
139 Allan, Derek, 132
Absurd, the, 3, 21–23, 33, 34, 38,  Allegory, 35, 37, 50, 92, 97–116, 
51, 53, 68, 73–92, 99, 102,  116n2, 199
107, 109–111, 113, 114, 132,  Amash, Paul, 85
138–139, 148, 150, 152, 153,  Ambiguity, 3, 7, 16, 17, 37, 39n4, 
157, 158, 160–168, 191 92, 98, 102, 109, 115, 116, 
Academia, 36 139, 154, 155
Adam, Jean-Michel, 77, 82 Analytic, 2, 4–7, 16, 28, 37, 39, 
Adamov, Arthur, 38, 147 39n4, 114, 181, 182,  
Adjective, 76, 87 197
Aesop, 105, 115 Andersen, Hans, 115
Aesthetic, 12, 26, 27, 29–31, 33, 35,  Aoudjit, Abdelkader, 7, 17
37, 81, 83, 127, 131 Aphorism, 4
1  Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.
201 © The Author(s) 2020
G. Whistler,  Camus’ Literary Ethics , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37756-4

202              Index
47–49, 52, 53, 60–63, 66, 75,  Approach, 1, 7, 8, 13, 16, 18, 20, 
77, 82–84, 86–88, 97, 98,  26, 27, 33, 35, 37–39, 48, 49, 
100, 101, 103, 108, 110,  51, 54, 55, 57, 85, 101, 108, 
117n11, 129, 131, 132, 136,  111, 114, 116, 122, 127, 129, 
140, 147, 150–152, 154,  136, 139–141, 148, 161, 163, 
158–161, 165, 181, 183–186,  167, 177, 198
190, 192, 194n6, 199 Arab, the, 38, 75, 85–87, 103, 176, 
Being-towards-death, 54 178–180, 182, 186, 190, 192, 
Belief, 21, 22, 26, 38, 49, 52, 67,  194n6
102, 109, 110, 114, 123,  Arabic, 30, 178, 185, 187, 188
125–127, 129–131, 133–136,  Argument, 5, 7–9, 18, 23, 24, 35, 
139, 140, 149, 193 36, 40n6, 100, 108, 114, 
Berber, 30 116n3, 121, 124, 126, 130, 
Berthold, Daniel, 51 141, 160, 176, 181, 182, 197, 
Bias, 8, 18, 20, 104 198, 200
Blackburn, Vivienne, 49, 57 Aristotle, 4
Bloch-Michel, J., 137 Atheism, 49, 188
Bronner, Stephen, 1, 22, 25, 29 Augustine, 49, 52, 53
Brontë, Emily, 13 Authenticity, 29, 54, 57, 58, 74–80, 
Brozgal, Lia, 176 83, 91, 110
B C
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 37, 121–126,  Cain, James M., 75, 77, 79, 86, 90, 
128–130, 133, 134, 136, 139,  91
140, 141n3 Caligula, 138, 158, 163–168
Balibar, Étienne, 83, 93n7 Caligula , 33, 38, 102, 138, 147–168, 
Balzac, 24, 152 170n32, 172n47
Barry, Catherine, 66 Carroll, Noel, 40n5
Barthes, Roland, 91, 94n14, 99, 100,  Cascardi, Anthony J., 134
102, 105 Catholic, Catholicism, 48, 49
Bastien, Sophie, 70n20, 148, 150,  Champion, James, 115
152, 158, 161–165, 167 Chestier, Alain, 155, 156
Beardsmore, R. W., 40n5 Christianity, 36, 37, 48–54, 56, 57, 
Beckett, Samuel, 38, 147, 149–156,  59, 62, 63, 65–68, 109, 
158, 161–163, 166, 167 112–114, 130, 194n6
Being, 2, 4, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 18,  La Chute , 40n10, 48, 64–66, 134, 
19, 24, 27, 29, 37, 38, 40n6,  136, 137, 141n3, 142n17

    Index      203
74, 99, 100, 110, 116,  Claire, Thomas, 61, 64
121–123, 126–141, 141n3,  Clamence, 65, 66, 136, 137, 142n17
142n14, 142n15, 157, 176,  Cliché, 31, 147, 154, 157
180, 183, 189, 193, 199 Coetzee, John Maxwell, 175
Diamond, Cora, 40n5 Colonialism, 103, 117n8, 188, 189, 
Dickstein, Morris, 104 193, 194n6
Le Dœuff, Michèle, 101 Combat , 30, 31, 56
Don Faust, 33–34 Comedy, 148, 149, 157, 161, 164, 
Don Juan, 35 165
Don Quixote, 35 Compassion, 10–13, 56, 57, 140, 
Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 13, 24, 37, 38,  179, 198
121–132, 134, 135, 137,  Confucius, 4
139–141, 160 Coombs, Ilona, 168
Dufau, Benoît, 141n3 Costes, Alain, 109
Dunwoodie, Peter, 131, 141n2 Cottingham, John, 6
Duran, Jane, 2 Cristaudo, Wayne, 49, 50, 55, 67
Cruickshank, John, 36, 67, 97, 98, 
106, 116
Cruise O’Brien, Connor, 103, 193n3 E
Cycle, 33, 41n16, 42n38, 55, 102,  Eaton, Anne, 40n7, 40n9
127 Education, 19, 40n6
Eliot, T. S., 47
Emerson, Caryl, 124
Emotion, 12, 13, 18–21, 26, 60,   D
76, 90, 103, 130, 184, 191,  Dante, 65
198 Danto, Arthur C., 4, 100, 197
Empathy, 11, 12, 23, 55, 176, 181,  Daoud, Kamel, 38, 175–180, 
186, 198 183–189, 192, 193, 193n5
Empiricism, 53 Davison, Ray, 139, 140, 141n2
Esslin, Martin, 38, 147–152, 154,  Death, 21–23, 33, 34, 49, 53, 54, 
155, 158–163 57, 59–61, 70n19, 75, 80, 85, 
L’Etat de siège , 33, 163, 166 94n13, 105, 107, 109, 114, 
L’Etranger , 32–34, 37, 38, 57, 62,  121, 124, 131, 140, 151–154, 
63, 68, 69–70n19, 73–82, 84,  162, 166, 167, 177–180, 186, 
86–88, 90, 91, 98, 99, 102,  194n7
107–109, 123, 127, 134,  Death penalty, 34
142n15, 151, 176–179, 182,  Denham, Alison, 7
183, 185, 187–193, 194n6 Dialogue, dialogic, 4, 5, 20, 25, 28, 
Evil, 54, 102, 105, 128 32, 36–38, 49, 51, 52, 62, 66, 

204              Index
124, 148–151, 154, 156, 158,  Examples, 6, 9–15, 20, 23–26, 28, 
164, 167, 168, 180, 198,   31, 39, 40n9, 54, 63–65, 76, 
199 77, 81, 86, 88, 98, 100, 102, 
Fraser, Nick, 176, 182, 194n12 103, 116n1, 121, 123, 126, 
Freeman, E., 158, 167 127, 130, 134, 138, 141n2, 
142n15, 152, 157–161, 166, 
167, 171n44, 181, 183, 190, 
194n7, 198–200 G
L’Exil et le Royaume , 61, 63, 109 Gaetani, Giovanni, 49, 50
L’Express , 30 Genet, Jean, 38, 147
Existence, 26, 51, 54, 62, 87, 91,  Genre, 3, 4, 102, 116, 121, 127, 
109–111, 114, 115, 117n11,  169n13, 198
121, 154, 162, 166 Gessner, Niklaus, 154
Existentialism, 28, 36, 49, 75, 99,  God, 21, 22, 26, 37, 48, 50–54, 
110, 111, 113, 114, 117n11,  56–58, 63, 66, 79, 104, 111, 
122, 199 114, 121, 124, 125, 131, 132, 
152, 164, 165, 184, 189
Goldie, Peter, 41n12
Golomb, Jacob, 1, 75 F
Gosling, Justin, 130 Fable, 36, 37, 62, 92, 97–116, 199
Grammar, 87 Faith, 47, 51–53, 56–64, 66, 67, 
Gramont, Alexandre de, 30 111, 127, 140, 164, 176, 177, 
Grand, 31, 32, 103 183, 189–193, 193n2
Grégoire, Vincent, 85 Feeling, 9, 11, 25, 60, 61, 76, 87, 
Grenier, Roger, 22 90, 93n9, 107, 136, 137, 148, 
Grimm, 115 150, 157, 160, 168, 190
Grouix, Pierre, 64 La Femme adultère , 61
Guilt, 19, 66, 111, 121, 136, 177,  Feuer Miller, Robin, 134
179, 189–192 Fiction, 14, 16, 19–21, 24, 29, 32, 
57, 97, 103, 123, 126, 139, 
140, 156, 183
Fictional world, 12, 14, 183, 184 H
Finitude, 21, 23, 49, 110 Hamilton, Christopher, 40n5
Fisher, Walter. R., 18 Hampshire, Stuart, 39n4
Flaubert, Gustave, 3 Hanna, Thomas L., 2, 3, 35, 49
Foley, John, 93n9 Happiness, 60, 132
Foot, Philippa, 39n4 Heffernan, George, 177, 186
Form, 1–39, 52, 53, 69n19, 74–82,  Heidegger, Martin, 54
91, 98, 99, 108, 117n11, 121,  Heims, Neil, 2

    Index      205
Journalism, 30, 31 Hemingway, Ernest, 37, 75, 76, 86, 
Joy, 22, 27, 108, 109 90, 91
Judgement, 7, 10, 12, 16, 26, 37,  Hermet, Joseph, 52
39n4, 122, 136, 138, 177, 185 L’Homme révolté , 22, 25, 33, 62, 84, 
Judt, Tony, 1 104, 107, 112, 113, 164, 
Les Justes , 33, 163 194n10
Human condition, 25, 38, 102, 107, 
108, 115, 147, 148, 150, 154, 
161, 165 K
Human nature, 15, 20, 52, 56, 110,  Kafka, Franz, 24, 76, 107, 108
113 Kajtár, László, 194n7
Hussain, Emteaz, 178 Kaplan, Alice, 108
Hutcheon, Linda, 109 Kaufmann, Walter, 1, 122, 124
Kiefer, Anselm, 47
Kierkegaard, Søren, 51, 97, 110, 111
King, Adèle, 85 I
King Lear, 35 Identity, 11, 38, 98, 101, 110, 121, 
Kirsch, Adam, 176, 181 157, 158, 175, 180, 183, 
Knowledge, 1, 7, 12, 13, 39, 40n8,  187–189, 192, 193
53, 99, 130, 176, 177,  Ideology, 30, 98, 105, 126
180–183, 191 Immortality, 21
Krapp, John, 129, 131, 133, 135,  Imprisonment, 105, 150, 178
139 Inauthenticity, 17
Independence (Algerian), 188, 189
Indifference, 22, 48, 51, 59, 73–75, 
80, 85, 87–90, 93n6, 94n13 L
Intersubjectivity, 37, 39, 133, 141,  Lacoue-Labarthe, Phillipe, 37, 
182, 193 99–101, 116n3
Ionesco, Eugène, 38, 147, 149,  Lager, Alexis, 28
151–153, 156–163, 167, 168 Laïcité , 49
Isaac, Jeffrey C., 134 Lalami, Laila, 176
Islam, 188, 189, 194n6 Landy, Joshua, 40n5
Lang, Berel, 5, 6, 100, 197
Learning, 11, 13, 27, 60, 129, 176, 
182, 187, 189, 194n6 J
Lebesque, Morvan, 163 Jackson, Frank, 176, 182
Lehan, Richard, 74, 76, 77, 80,  Jaspers, Karl, 117n11
86–88, 90 John, Eileen, 40n5
Lemesle, Audrey, 161 Jones, Peter, 140

206              Index
Meursault, contre-enquête , 38,  Levinas, Emmanuel, 68n6
175–179, 181–183, 187, 189,  Lévi-Valensi, Jacqueline, 2, 36
190, 192, 193, 194n6 Locke, John, 12, 13
Mime, 165–168 Logic, 16, 18, 20, 24, 76, 78, 79, 86, 
Moral improvement/moral growth,  87, 101, 141, 150, 155, 156
9, 24, 25 Longstaffe, Moya, 70n19
Morisi, Eve, 26, 27 Lottman, Herbert. R., 127
Mortality, 33, 34, 61, 93n9, 104,  Louden, Robert B, 6
106, 149–154, 159, 164, 167 Love, 55, 56, 58, 63, 66, 75, 89, 
La Mort heureuse , 32, 60, 61, 69n19 130, 136, 185, 186
Motive, 17, 55, 75, 87, 124, 182,  Lupo, Virginie, 38, 161, 166–168
191
Mulhall, Stephen, 15
Murder, 55, 75, 77, 85–87, 90, 103,  M
132, 178, 179, 185, 186,  MacIntyre, Alasdair, 39n4
194n10 Maher, Jimmy, 65, 66
Murdoch, Iris, 179 Le Malentendu , 33, 102, 134, 138, 
Mysticism, 53, 66, 164 158, 163
Myth, 35–37, 92, 97–116, 116n2 Malraux, André, 22, 24, 32
Le Mythe de Némésis , 34 Mauriac, Claude, 155
Le Mythe de Sisyphe , 23, 24, 26, 29,  McEwan, Ian, 175
33–35, 37, 51, 53, 55, 63, 84,  McGregor, Rob Roy, 109, 110
88, 99, 100, 102, 107, 108,  Meaning, 21, 22, 29, 33, 49, 51, 54, 
110, 113, 114, 116n1, 160 58, 69n19, 74, 80–84, 90, 91, 
97, 98, 106, 108, 109, 111, 
113, 115, 130, 134, 149, 
154–158, 164, 166, 167 N
La mesure , 112, 113 Narrative, 14, 16–19, 77, 80, 82, 87, 
Mélèse, Pierre, 155 98, 100, 111, 114, 116, 124, 
Melville, Herman, 24 137, 139, 150, 156, 176–182, 
Mersault, 69n19 189–192, 194n6
Metaphor, 34, 50, 53, 98, 104, 165 Narrativity, 17, 18
Methodology, 3, 34 Nature, 4, 5, 7, 14, 15, 18, 20, 52, 
Meursault, 32, 37, 38, 57–61,  56–62, 67, 83, 90, 91, 98, 
69–70n19, 74–80, 82–91,  102–107, 110, 113, 130, 132, 
92n5, 93n7, 106, 108, 109,  136, 140, 141, 155
127, 134–136, 142n15, 151,  La Nausée , 28, 29
176–193, 193n5, 194n8 Nazism, 102, 105

    Index      207
Parker, Emmett, 30, 105, 131 Nealon, J. T., 126
Partenie, Catalin, 98 Nemesis, 33
Particular/particularity, 3, 4, 6, 10,  Neoplatonism, 52
11, 13, 15, 16, 20, 22, 25–27,  Nietzsche, Friedrich, 28, 49, 97, 
37, 40n6, 48, 66, 75, 79, 81,  110, 116n1
97, 99–103, 105, 116n3, 121,  Nihilism, 9, 26, 66, 138, 186, 
123, 124, 154, 165, 166, 200 194n10
Passé composé , 75, 80–83, 91 Noces , 60, 61
Passions, 13, 26, 78, 162 Noël, Mireille, 77, 82
Paterson, William, 66 Nothingness, 152, 157
Patrick, Henry, 57 Nussbaum, Martha, 7–9, 13, 14, 
La Peste , 25, 31–33, 37, 62, 98, 99,  40n6, 197, 198
102–105, 107, 109, 116n6, 
117n10, 123, 124, 131, 133, 
151, 160, 161, 166 O
Peyre, Henri, 49, 67 Objective, 14–16, 20, 22, 82, 124, 
La Pierre qui pousse , 63, 64 128, 129, 133, 151, 162
Pinter, Harold, 147 Occupation, 107
Plague, 31, 62, 63, 67, 103, 105,  O’Connor, Timothy, 130
106, 132, 133, 161 Orwell, George, 74, 84, 99, 103, 
Plato, 5, 12, 13, 28, 98, 99, 103,  104, 107, 155
129 The Other, 12, 16, 17, 20, 28, 49, 
Plotinus, 49, 53 52, 55, 56, 62, 91, 108, 129, 
Poetry, 12, 101, 166 130, 133, 134, 177, 179–190, 
Politics, 29, 104, 106, 139, 175 192, 193, 193n1, 194n7
Politzer, Heinz, 108 Otherness, 177, 182, 185, 187, 189, 
Popkin, Henry, 163, 167, 168 193
Posner, Richard, 7–13, 40n6, 197
Postcolonial, 38, 85, 175–178, 180, 
183, 184, 186, 187, 192, 193,  P
194n6 Pagan, 53, 62, 63
Prometheus, 33, 107, 113 Palmer, Frank, 140
Propaganda, 31 Paneloux, 62, 63, 104, 116n6, 131
Proust, Marcel, 24 Pantheistic, 60
Pantomime, 164, 166
Parable/parabolic, 37, 92, 97–116, 
134, 135 Q
Paris Soir , 30 Quarantine, 107, 133, 151

208              Index
R Sainthood, 63
Rambert, 25, 116n6, 133 Sanson, Hervé, 27
Raphael, David Daiches, 40n5 Sartre, Jean-Paul, 1, 2, 17, 28, 34, 
Rathbone, David, 32, 55, 60, 61 56, 74, 76, 82, 84, 86, 87, 
Rationality, 15, 18, 21 110, 111, 127, 135, 148, 149, 
Reason, 1, 5, 8, 9, 12–17, 20, 21,  158, 162
23, 25–27, 32, 34, 36, 38,  Scherr, Arthur, 58
51–55, 65, 67, 88, 100, 103,  Secular, 22, 48, 53, 56, 59, 63, 67
105, 113, 115, 124, 127, 130,  Sentence (grammatical), 79
131, 138, 164, 167, 191, 192,  Sermon, 49, 50, 63, 104
197, 198 Serreau, Geneviève, 38, 149
Redemption, 65, 66, 177, 189–192 Sharpe, Matthew, 49
Religion, 21, 25, 47–50, 52, 64,  Sherman, David, 1
111, 113, 114, 160, 164, 176,  Sincerity, 27, 137
180, 188, 189 Sisyphus, 33, 35, 63, 107–109, 113, 
Remorse, 107, 109, 190 132, 162
Renaud, Armand, 78, 79, 87 Sjursen, Nina, 152, 162
Le Renégat , 37, 99, 109, 110, 113,  Skilleås, Ole Martin, 40n5
114 Sleasman, Brent. C., 126, 137–139
Resistance, 125, 181, 189 Slochower, Harry, 36, 99, 110–114
Revolt, 3, 10, 22, 23, 62, 64, 104,  Solidarity, 23, 53, 56, 62, 64, 66, 
106, 108, 111–113, 132, 133 105, 133, 199
Rey, Pierre-Louis, 140, 150, 158,  Souci , 26
161–163, 166 Spender, Stephen, 133
Rhetoric, 5, 12, 13, 30, 63, 103 Spirituality, 37, 48, 79
Rhys, Jean, 175 Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 194n11
Richardson, Luke, 176, 186, 187 Srigley, Ronald D., 36, 111
Rieux, 25, 31, 62, 63, 103, 116n6,  Stendhal, 3, 24
131–133 Stewart, Jon, 4, 5, 7, 29, 100, 197
Robbe-Grillet, Alain, 150, 161 Stoltzfus, Ben F., 164
Roberts, Peter, 2, 3 Strawson, Galen, 17, 18
Rorty, Richard, 116n3 Stump, Eleonore, 38, 176, 177, 
Royal, Robert, 53, 55, 67 180–182, 190, 191, 194n6, 
Ryan, Stephen, 63 194n7
Style, 3–13, 21, 23, 24, 30, 32–35, 
37, 53, 74–80, 83–91, 92n4, 
S 94n14, 97, 100, 115, 137, 
Sade, Marquis de, 24 149, 154, 167, 168, 172n47, 
Saïd, Edward, 193n3 191, 197–200

    Index      209
Trust, 56, 57, 61, 63, 111 Subjectivity, 15, 78
Truth, 12–16, 20, 27, 29, 31, 52, 53,  Suffering, 11, 13, 19, 22, 23, 25, 27, 
99–101, 106, 115, 121, 122,  31, 36, 37, 47–49, 51–59, 
124, 125, 127–129, 131, 133,  61–63, 66, 67, 93n9, 105, 
140, 141, 156, 157, 179, 181,  116n6, 121, 130, 131, 133, 
183, 191 140, 166, 180, 187
Suicide, 34, 65, 107, 113, 127, 151, 
194n10
Sutherland, Stewart, 139, 141 V
Symbol, 24, 50, 54, 58, 61, 65, 88,  Value, 2, 6, 9–12, 15–18, 22, 23,  
97–99, 108, 113 51, 55, 104, 110, 124, 128, 
133, 135, 140, 161, 167, 197, 
199
Verb, 32, 69n19, 80–82 T
Vichy, 63 Tarrou, 63, 103, 132, 133, 161
Violence, 55, 88, 109, 113, 156,  Tense, 75, 80–83, 91
166, 184, 186, 189 Theatre of the Absurd, 38, 147–150, 
152, 154, 156, 158, 161–163, 
166–168
Theodicy, 47, 54 W
Thought experiment, 6, 10, 138, 182 War, 63, 105, 131, 183, 186,  
Time, 3–5, 16, 20, 26, 31, 33, 36,  192
38, 50–53, 56, 59, 63, 65, 74,  Wasiolek, Edward, 123, 127, 131, 
77, 79–82, 84–88, 90, 93n6,  136
94n13, 102, 106, 107, 112,  Weil, Simone, 152
123–126, 134, 149–154, 156,  Whistler, Grace, 68n2, 70n22, 
157, 160, 161, 179, 180, 182,  193n1
184, 189, 190 Williams, Bernard, 15, 19, 20, 
Todd, Olivier, 26, 31–33, 48, 122,  40n10
127, 128, 142n13 Williams, Rowan, 55, 56
Tolstoy, Leo, 123–126, 139 Wollheim, Richard, 19
Totalitarianism, 62, 63, 104 Wood, James, 49, 51, 52, 57
Tragedy, 138, 148, 149, 164
Transcendence, 21, 22, 51, 54, 55, 
57, 60–62, 82, 111, 121, 123,  Y
124, 130, 131, 133, 136, 188 Young-Bruehl, Elisabeth, 30