

E L E M E N T S   O F   A   L I F E
R O B E R T   Z A R E T S K Y
CORNELL UNIVERSITY PRESS
ITHACA AND LONDON

FOR TED ESTESS

C O N T E N T S
Acknowledgments Regarding Camus 1939: From County Mayo to Kabylia 1945: A Moralist on
the Barricades 1952: French Tragedies 1956: Silence Follows Epilogue
Notes

A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
This small book is the work of many people. At the University of Houston, the
provost,  John  Antel,  and  the  dean  emeritus  of  the  Honors  College, Ted  Estess,
conspired  to  provide  me  with  a  semester’s  leave  that  allowed  me  to  meet  my
deadline. William Monroe, dean of the Honors College, and Joseph Pratt, dean of
the  College  of  Liberal  Arts  and  Social  Sciences,  also  offered  critical  support.
Colleagues at Houston—Sarah Fishman, Ted Estess, and Dorothy Baker—read and
commented on parts of the manuscript, as did my friend John Scott. My French
publisher, David Gaussen, has been an enthusiastic and sharp-eyed reader. Jeffrey
Isaac spoke up for the book when it was still just an idea, while David Carroll saved
me  from  making  a  number  of  historical  and  textual  errors.  My  copyeditor  Jane
Todd did a superb job, as did Cornell’s editorial team, led by Susan Specter and
Susan  Barnett.  Peter  Potter  has,  as  always,  gracefully  balanced  the  demands  of
friendship and criticism. This is no less true of my wife, Julie Zaretsky: she knows
how much I owe her. Finally, I am indebted to Tzvetan Todorov, Alice Conklin, and
David Mikics. Despite their own busy lives, they read and reread the entire work,
sharing their excitement and hesitations, encouragement and doubts, insights and
corrections. They made this a far better book than it otherwise would have been,
and I alone am responsible for the remaining weaknesses.
For more than twenty years, my friend and mentor Ted Estess has shown those
around him what it means to attend to the world and to others. I dedicate this book
to him.

R E G A R D I N G   C A M U S
“We live with a few familiar ideas. Two or three,” Albert Cam us once wrote. “We
polish  and  transform  them  acco rding  to  the  societies  and  the  men  we  happen  to
meet. It takes ten years to have an idea that is really one’s own—t hat one can  talk
1
about.”  By the same token, the world has long had a few familiar ideas about the
author  of   The  Stranger   and  The  Plague, The  Myth  of   Sisyphus,   and  The  Rebel.
There is the idea of  a Camus who probed the notions of  freedom and justice, who
reflected on the dangers of  either notion becoming an absolute claim, and who tried
to  reconcile  their  conflicting  characters. There  is  also  the  idea  of   a  Cam us  who
wrote  about  the  nature  of   exile  both  from  one’s  native  land—in  his  case,  French
Algeria— and from a world bereft of  a god. And there is the idea of  a Cam us who
gave voice to an entire spectrum of  silence: the silence of  childhood innocence, the
silence  of   the  political  prisoner  or  disenfranchised  native,  the  silence  of   tragic
conflicts, and the silence of  a cosmos indifferent to our need for meaning.
These ideas about Camus not only constitute elements of  his life but also explain
the abiding relevance his work has for our lives. Like many others of  my generation,
I  first  read  Camus  in  high  school.  I  carried  him  in  my  backpack  while  traveling
across Europe, I carried him into (and out of) relationships, and I carried him into
(and  out  of)  difficult  periods  of   my  life.  More  recently,  I  have  carried  him  into
university  classes  that  I  have  taught,  coming  out  of   them  with  a  renewed
appreciation  for  his  art. To  be  sure,  my  idea  of   Cam us  thirty  years  ago  scarcely
resembles  my  idea  of   him  today.  While  my  admiration  and  attachment  to  his
writings  remain  as  great  as  they  were  long  ago,  the  reasons  are  now  more
complicated and critical.
One constant in my understanding of  Cam us’s significan ce over these many years
is how, until his untimely death in 1960, he wrestled with certain ideas and shared
this  struggle  with  readers.  The  quality  of   that  struggle—e ngaged  in  with  an
intellectual integrity that led to a fortifying hopelessness—h as marked all who have
read  him.  If   there  is  one  conviction  that  scholars  and  nonscholars  share,  it  is  that
Camus  is  still  an  indispensable  companion  in  our  intellectual  and  ethical  lives.  He

appears to us, in a way that few other writers do, as someone who wrote for his life
and for our lives as well.
This book is neither a full biography nor a scholarly commentary. It is an essay
in  which  I  trace  the  ways  these  “familiar  ideas”  weave  through  Cam us’s  life.  Each
chapter is devoted to a specific event: Camus’s visit to Kab ylia in 1939 to report on
the conditions of  the local Berber tribes; his decision to sign a petition to commute
the  collaborationist  writer  Robert  Brasillach’s  death  sentence  in  1945;  his  famous
quarrel with his friend Jean-Paul Sartre in 1952 over the nature of  communism; his
silence  over  the  war  in  Algeria  after  1956.  Given  the  importance  of   each  of   these
moments, I take the liberty of  moving back and forth across time and space in order
to explore the many layers of  its significan ce. Moreover, I deliberately bring to the
fore  individuals  and  ideas  that  other  acco unts  often  leave  in  the  background. The
reader  will  find  discussions  of   the  Greek  writers Thucydides  and  Aeschylus,  the
religious   thinkers   Augustine   and   Rousseau,   the   French   essayists   Michel   de
Montaigne  and  Sébastien-Roch  Nicolas  Chamfort,  and  even  the  Irish  nationalist
playwright  J.  M.  Synge.  Some  of   them,  like  Synge  and  Chamfort,  gave  Cam us
unexpected  ways  to  express  his  own  concerns;  others,  like  the  ancient  Greeks,
exerted a greater influence than is usually recognized. These thinkers are not walk-
ons  in  the  story  of   Camus’s  life;  instead,  Cam us  turns  to  them  during  the  most
critical moments.
One  other  thinker,  though  not  discussed  in  the  book,  is  nevertheless  present:
Simone Weil.  After World War  II,  Camus,  under  the  auspices  of   the  publishing
house  Gallimard,  founded  a  series  called  “Espoir”  (Hope).  He  published  Weil’s
L’enracinement,  subsequently translated into English as  The Need for Roots,  in this
series.  A  recurrent  concern  in  Weil’s  thought  is  what  she  called  the  work  of
attention. This  elusive  yet  crucial  human  activity  is  not  simply  “paying  attention,”
drawing an object closer to us and placing it under a magnifying glass. It is not even
necessarily  seeing  with  one’s  own  eyes.  Instead,  it  is  stepping  back  and  waiting  for
the object to draw closer to you. It is apprehending the world and others, as free as
possible from the psychological scrims our egos are forever building. Weil compared
the attentive individual to a “man on a mountain who, as he looks forward, sees also
2
below  him,  without  actually  looking  at  them,  a  great  many  forests  and  plains.”
While  her  (unorthodox)  Christian  faith,  along  with  her  transcendental  grounding
of   the  work  of   attention,  separated  her  from  Cam us,  in  her  description  of   the

activity itself  she closely mirrors Cam us’s sensibility. One of  the great constants in
Camus’s  work  and  life  is  precisely  this  kind  of   attentiveness.  It  is  a  quality  that
marks not just his fictional characters but often their creator as well.
When we attend to others, we tend to listen rather than talk. For this reason, the
other side to the coin of  attentiveness is silence. Cam us’s artistry and morality are,
in part, expressed by such silences. There are the silences that shimmer like mirages
in the austere Algerian landscap es, and those in which so many of  his characters are
steeped as they regard the world. There is also the silence in which Cam us wrapped
himself  in the late 1950s as French Algeria collapsed into war. Born in Algeria and
raised with the values of  republican  France, Camus was torn between the competing
and ultimately irreconcilable claims represented by French imperialism and Algerian
nationalism. Finally, in 1957, he declared he would no longer speak about the war in
public— a vow that, with two exceptions, he kept until his death three years later.
Much  noise  has  inevitably  swirled  around  this  silence  ever  since.  So,  too,  for  a
different kind of  silence that hovered over Cam us during his last years. By the early
1950s, Camus felt stifled and emptied; he feared he had fallen silent becau se he no
longer had anything to say as an artist. The violent public quarrel with Sartre over
Camus’s  philosophical  essay  The  Rebel   led  not  just  to  the  end  of   their  friendship
but also to deepening doubts on Camus’s part about his art. As he told one friend,
3
“I  feel  like  ink  absorbed  by  a  wad  of   paper.”  The  subsequent  publication  of   his
novel  The  Fall   lifted  these  doubts,  but  only  for  a  time. When  Cam us  received  the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1957, some critics thought he was too young for the
award (he had just turned forty-four). For others, however, Camus was too old and
washed up: the prize, they concluded, confirmed that Cam us was a literary relic who
had nothing more to say. Camus shared these doubts: in his short story  “Jonas, or
the Artist at Work,” he portrays an artist whose life slowly empties of  creativity, an
artist reduced to staring at a blank can vas. Though first written several years before,
the  story  was  published  in  his  1957  collection  of   short  stories,  Exile  and  the
Kingdom,  and spoke clearly to Camus’s predicam ent.
Camus’s  emphasis  on  silence,  in  his  art  and  in  his  politics,  mirrored  his
determination to speak for others who, in various ways, were condemned to silence.
In his Nobel address, Camus declared that art’s nobility is rooted in  “the refusal to
4
lie about what one knows, and the resistance to oppression.”  Camus described and

denounced  the  plight  of   French  Algeria’s  Arab  and  Berber  populations  at  a  time
when these peoples were all but invisible to most French citizens. Immediately after
the war, he no less forcefully decried France’s use of  torture in Algeria, horrified by
the ways in which the French, so recently oppressed under the Germans, had become
the Arabs’ oppressor. Then there was his stubborn battle against French government
censors during the early months of  World War II, when he tirelessly combated the
5
“sophistic  claim  that  a  nation’s  morale  entails  the  sacrifice  of   its  freedoms.”  This
claim,  along  with  his  condemnation  of   the  French  republic’s  outlawing  of   the
Communist Party after the declaration of  war—“ law concerns us all” and can not be
applied selectively—apply not just to other crises in Cam us’s time but also to those
6
we  confront  in  our  own.  The  urgency  of   Camus’s  voice  still  claims  our  attention,
and his lucidity still serves as a model.
Many  critics  have  rightly  observed  that  Cam us’s  stubborn  humanism  looms
especially  large  today.  If   we  are  not  careful,  however,  we  will  miss  just  how
extraordinary  his  stance  was  and  remains. This  does  not  mean  he  was  a  saint—o n
the  contrary,  Camus’s  colleagues,  friends,  and  family  offer  ample  witness  to  his
flaws.  Looking  back  on  his  quarrel  with  Sartre,  we  are  torn  between  horror  at
Sartre’s attack of  his former friend in the pages of   Les Temps Modernes  and unease
over  the  intellectual  and  personal  shortcomings  in  Cam us  that  Sartre  rightly
identified.  Paradoxically,  some  of   Cam us’s  virtues  also  blur  his  significan ce.  His
battle  against  totalitarianism,  courageous  in  his  own  day,  has  since  become
orthodoxy.  His  loathing  of   the  Algerian  nationalist  movement,  the  Front  de
Libération Nationale (FLN), has been largely justified by the subsequent history of
an  Algeria  ruled  by  a  single  party.  His  efforts  to  lay  a  foundation  for  morality,
viewed  as  quaint  by  many  of   his  contemporaries,  have  since  been  joined  by  many
thinkers. And who today would dispute his passionate defense of  the necessity for
direct and sincere dialogue? In a way, the world—or, at least, those who devote their
lives to analyzing it—has cau ght up to Camus.
The  problem,  however,  is  that  most  of   us  are  quite  comfortable  with  these
positions: our morality and our humanism seem easily learned but scarcely earned. I
doubt that Camus, were he alive today, would feel at home in the company of  either
the  neoliberal  or  the  neoconservative  thinkers  who  claim  him  as  an  inspiration.
Instead,  he  would  still  be  an  exile  and  an  outsider—a  moralist  who,  as Tony  Judt

7
remarks, is by nature uneasy with himself  and his world.  In part, this stems from
Camus’s  insight  into  the  fundamental  nature  of   life.  His  work  touches  on  the
mystery—for better or worse, he called it the “absurdity”—o f  the human condition
and  its  resistance  to  meaning.  It  is  the  human  being’s  confrontation  with  the
universe, not something inherent to the universe itself, that leads to absurdity. “The
absurd,” Camus wrote in  The Myth of  Sisyphus,   “depends as much on man as on
8
the world.”  At such moments, wading in a sea we thought we knew, we are suddenly
knocked off  our feet by a kind of  metaphysical riptide.
Camus insisted that absurdity does not lead to a nihilistic life. On the contrary,
the very ability to acknowledge the absurd requires a moral effort. “All I can  hope to
do,”  he  said  shortly  after World War  II,  “is  show  that  generous  forms  of   behavior
can  be engendered even in a world without God and that man alone in the universe
can  still create his own values. That is, in my opinion, the sole problem posed by our
9
era.”
And  it  remains  one  of   the  great  problems  of   our  era.  Camus’s  writings  have
become guides for the perplexed—a status that left Cam us uncomfortable. “I speak
for no one,” he insisted. “I have enough difficulty speaking for myself. I don’t know,
or I know only dimly, where I am headed.” While an element of  false modesty was
at  play,  there  was  also  a  deep  element  of   sincerity.  Cam us  becam e  the  voice  of   a
generation with dizzying speed: he published his first novel,  The Stranger,  in 1942
and emerged from the war as the spokesperson for the Resistance and existentialism.
Little more than a decad e later, in 1957, he won the Nobel Prize. Then, on January
4, 1960, he was killed when a car in which he was riding in southern France swerved
off  the road and slammed into a tree.
°  °  °
When Camus died, he was carrying a briefcase that contained a handwritten text
of  nearly 150 pages. It was the manuscript of   Le premier homme  ( The First Man ),
a novel he had begun writing in earnest after winning the Nobel Prize. Early in the
unfinished  novel,  the  hero,  Jacq ues  Cormery—l ike  Cam us,  a  middle-aged  French
Algerian—visits a military cemetery in the Breton town of  Saint-Brieuc. Guided by
the  caretaker,  Cormery  finds  the  reason  for  his  visit:  a  simple  gravestone  with  the

inscription  “Henri Cormery, 1885–1914.” Jacq ues Cormery was scarcely a year old
when  his  father  was  killed  in  the  Battle  of   the  Marne.  As  he  gazes  at  the  stone,
Cormery  “automatically  did  the  arithmetic:  twenty-nine  years.  Suddenly  he  was
struck by an idea that shook his very being. He was forty years old. The man buried
10
under that slab, who had been his father, was younger than he.”
At  this  point,  both  Cormery  and  Camus  begin  the  search  for  their  pasts.  But
while  The First Man  is Camus’s most personal work, it is not unique in that respect.
Throughout his short life as a writer, Camus implicated himself  in his art: behind
his sharp and chiseled phrases throb powerful memories, experiences, concerns, and
passions. One of  his close friends, Jean de Maisonseul, found that Camus used the
first-person  je   too  often  in  his  first  collection  of   essays,  L’Envers  et  l’endroit —a
gentle  accusation  that  Camus  acce pted:  a  writer  “needs  to  remain  behind  the
11
scenes,” he admitted.  In a preface he wrote to a new edition of  the essays in 1958,
Camus insists on their personal nature:  “This little book has considerable value as
12
testimony.”  And this is no less true of  his last work,  The First Man,  which Camus
used the way others use memoir, as an effort to cast his past into meaningful shape.
Camus   once   confessed   he   “never   recovered”   from   his   harsh   and   spare
13
childhood.  Camus’s family resided in the Belcourt neighborhood of  Algiers in an
apartment  with  three  small  rooms  and  a  kitchen,  no  plumbing,  no  electricity,  and
just  one  toilet  shared  by  the  three  families  in  the  building.  He  lived  there  from
infancy until high school with his grandmother, mother, brother, and uncle; as for
Camus’s father, Lucien Camus, he, like Henri Cormery, had died in the Battle of  the
Marne  in  1914.  All  that  his  widow  retained  was  a  photograph  and  a  fragment  of
the shell that had killed him. Camus and his older brother, Lucien, shared a single
bed, wedged into the same room with their mother’s bed; the sole window gave onto
the  inner  courtyard. The  grandmother  had  a  room  to  herself,  while  her  brother,
Camus’s Uncle Etienne, slept in a room that also served as the dining area. Under
the dull yellow glow of  a hanging oil lamp was a single table where the family ate,
the  children  did  their  homework,  and  Etienne  cleaned  his  hunting  gun  and  picked
the fleas from his dog, Brillant, all under the grandmother’s fierce glare.
In an early essay, Camus reveals the impact his childhood home had on his life.
The  story’s  narrator  sits  in  an  otherwise  empty  Arab  café  in  Algiers  as  night  falls,
deep in thought about the “child who lived in a poor neighborhood.” He recalls his

old  house  so  well  that  he  could  go  back  there  on  the  darkest  night  and  climb  the
unlit  stairs  “without  stumbling  once.  .  .  .  His  legs  retain  the  exact  height  of   the
steps;  his  hand,  the  instinctive,  never-conquered  horror  of   the  banister.  Becau se  of
14
the  cockroaches.”  The  vermin  cam e  with  the  territory,  as  did  the  shadows  and
smells.
But the territory was veined with other and better memories as well. Belcourt was
to interwar Algiers what the Lower East Side was to New York City in the interwar
years:  a  densely  populated  neighborhood  of   poor  but  not  destitute  workers  and
artisans, professionals and shopkeepers, attracted to the host country by its credo of
equality  and  opportunity.  Most  of   the  residents  of   Belcourt  were  European
immigrants known as  pieds noirs:  Spaniards, Italians, Maltese, and a sizable Jewish
community. The  broad  boulevards  such  as  rue  de  Lyon  were  lined  with  ficus  trees
and  laced  with  trolley  lines,  while  the  narrow  streets  were  thick  with  small  shops,
workshops,  and  tenements,  with  knots  of   children  playing  can ette  vinga   (a  cross
between tennis and stickball), all the while dodging pedestrians, street vendors, stray
dogs, and squawking chickens.
The sea offered Camus and his friends what the Hudson River offered the youth
of   New York:  an  escap e  from  the  pounding  summer  heat  of   the  city.  During  his
postwar visit to New York, an uneasy Camus watched the traffic on Riverside Drive
and thought of  the sea: “The uninterrupted line of  cars . . . sang dull and distant—
15
exactly  the  sound  of   the  waves.”   It  is  a  rare  work  by  Camus  that  is  not  instilled
with  the  author’s  abiding  love  of   the  Me diterranean.  His  literary  characters,  from
Meursault in  The Stranger  to Rieux in  The Plague  or Cormery in  The First Man,
all find in the sea reprieve from the sound and fury of  society. So, too, does Cam us:
only  when  he  swims  in  the  waters,  then  drops  to  the  sand  on  the  beaches  of   the
Mediterranean does he become at one with the world. Under this sun, he  “dons no
16
mask.”  The Mediterranean is a philosophical no less than a physical state, elevated
by Camus to the symbol of  an ancient world of  human values and thought, profane,
clasping the earth, a world he erected against the overreaching and dry ideologies he
associated with the gray landscap es of  urban Europe.
Yet  there  was  one  ideology  whose  importance  Camus  gladly  credited:  French
republican ism.  Until  the  end  of   his  life,  Camus  remained  attached  to  both  the
reality and the promise of  France’s republican  credo. Upon the death of  his father,

Camus becam e a  pupille de la nation:  a ward of  a state indebted to those who had
been sacrificed on its behalf. Ever since 1870, the French secondary school system
had taught its students not just how to read and write but how to be Frenchmen and
-women. One of  the republican  school’s fundamental tasks was the making of  good
citizens: men and women imbued with the progressive and egalitarian, rational and
secular values bequeathed by the French Revolution.
The  vanguard  of   this  massive  effort  at  civil  pedagogy—i n  a  sense,  the
missionaries of  this new secular religion—w ere the primary school teachers. Known
as  instituteurs,   they  fanned  out  to  the  provinces,  including  Algeria,  to  carry  the
gospel  of   the  republic.  Few  men  better  exemplified  this  mission  than  Louis
Germain, who taught the ten-year-old Cam us. A veteran of  World War I, Germain
took  notice  of   the  boy  not  only  becau se  he  was  a  pupille  de  la  nation   but  also
becau se  Camus’s  intelligence  and  intensity  set  him  apart  from  his  classmates.
Germain  persuaded  Camus’s  grandmother  and  mother  to  allow  him  to  take  an
examination  that  would  provide  an  acad emic  scholarship  for  the  lycée,   or  high
school.  Though  they  were  dubious—the  grandmother,  in  particular,  thought  it
better  to  have  the  boy  apprenticed  and  earning  a  salary  instead  of   idling  away  his
time  in  a  classroom—the  family  was  swayed  by  Germain’s  eloquence.  For  several
weeks,  Germain  tutored  Camus  and  a  couple  of   classmates  every  day  after  school.
For the first time in their lives, the children felt “they existed and that they were the
17
objects  of   the  highest  regard:  they  were  judged  worthy  to  discover  the  world.”
Camus passed the exam and, he insisted, his life was changed forever.
Camus in fact discovered two worlds: one of  material poverty, which clung to the
spare  and  tattered  family  possessions  in  Belcourt,  the  other  of   spiritual  wealth,
found  in  the  waves  breaking  in  the  distance  and  star-strewn  sky  sweeping  over  his
head. His work and life were filled with the tension he felt between the kingdoms of
scarcity and fullness, of  society and nature; he had a palpable sense that he himself
straddled the two realms. At night, the young Cam us would gaze out the apartment
window that gave onto the street: though overwhelmed by the smell of  the “stinking
corridor” behind him and the feel of  the rotten seat bottom fraying under him, at
18
the same time, “with eyes raised, he drank in the pure night.”
For  Camus,  the  most  overpowering  memory  of   childhood  was  of   silence. The
grandmother,  Catherine  Sintes,  a  widow,  bitter  and  violent,  was  unlettered  and

laco nic; with Camus and his brother, Lucien, she often expressed herself  with slaps
and whippings rather than words. Uncle Etienne had been mute until his early teens;
after   an   operation,   he   was   able   to   speak,   but   only   haltingly   and   simply,
communicating  “as  much  by  onomatopoeic  sounds  and  gestures  as  with  the
19
hundred-odd words at his disposal.”  And his mother, also named Catherine, was
illiterate and partly deaf. Acco rding to a family tradition, Catherine Sintes had been
perfectly at ease speaking as a young woman; it was only in 1914, after she received
news of  the death of  her husband, that her speech was hobbled.
It was when she lost her husband and her tongue that Cat herine Camus lost what
little  freedom  she  had  had. With  the  infant  Albert  and  the  toddler  Lucien,  she
moved back in with her mother in Belcourt. She spent the rest of  her life working
long hours as a cleaning woman, returning to a home ruled by a harsh matriarch and
to  two  sons  whom  she  loved  but  was  scarcely  able  to  protect,  much  less  nurture.
When  the  grandmother  grabbed  her  whip  and  began  to  beat  one  of   the  children,
Catherine  Sintes  stood  to  one  side,  pleading  only  that  she  not  strike  him  on  the
head.  She  was  there,  yet  as  elusive  as  the  father  Cam us  never  knew;  she  was
indispensable, but silent like the world that refused to surrender meaning; she filled
her son’s life, though the nature of  her presence was forever an enigma.
When we are stripped down to a certain point, Cam us wrote, “hope and despair
20
are equally groundless and the whole of  life can  be summed up in an image.”  For
Camus,  that  image  almost  certainly  was  his  mother.  Even  more  than  the  sea,  the
figure of  the silent mother occu pies the center of  Cam us’s writings: it is the sun, or
perhaps  the  dark  matter,  toward  which  everything  else  is  pulled.  It  is  the  death  of
Meursault’s  mother  that  begins  the  unmaking  of   his  life;  it  is  the  mostly  wordless
presence of  Rieux’s mother that prevents the unmaking of  a world swept by plague;
it is under the silent gaze of  his mother that Cormery begins the search for his past.
As  he  began  to  piece  together  The  First  Man   in  the  last  years  of   his  life,  Camus
wrote that the novel would repeat “the entire journey in order to discover his secret:
he  is  not  the  first.  Every  man  is  the  first  man,  nobody  is. This  is  why  he  throws
21
himself  at his mother’s feet.”
While this act does not lead to a final answer, it does lead to a deeper awareness
of   life’s  inexhaustible  richness.  When  the  young  Camus  would  return  to  the
apartment,  he  sometimes  found  his  mother  already  there,  “huddled  in  a  chair,

gazing in front of  her, wandering off  in the dizzy pursuit of  a crack along the floor.
As the night thickened around her, her muteness would seem irredeemably desolate.”
Camus would stand at the door, looking at “her thin shape and bony shoulders, and
stop,  afraid.”  Camus  writes:  He  is  beginning  to  feel  a  lot  of   things.  He  is  scarcely
aware of  his own existence, but this animal silence makes him want to cry with pain.
He  feels  sorry  for  his  mother;  is  this  the  same  thing  as  loving  her?  She  has  never
hugged or kissed him, for she wouldn’t know how. He stands a long time watching
her. Feeling separate from her, he becomes conscious of  her suffering. She does not
hear him, for she is deaf. . . . The silence marks a pause, an immensely long moment.
Vaguely  aware  of   this,  the  child  thinks  the  surge  of   feeling  in  him  is  love  for  his
22
mother. And it must be, becau se after all she is his mother.
The silence of  shadows is a brute fact of  life: it remains when everything else dies
away; it is all that was before anything else comes into being. When Camus imagines
his  own  birth  in  The  First  Man,   he  portrays  his  mother  and  father  lying  next  to
each other on mattresses that had been placed near a fireplace. The newborn  “slept
in  silence  except  for  an  occas ional  weak  gurgle,”  while  an  exhausted  mother  and
father  lay  under  a  roof   that  had  moments  earlier  rattled  from  a  violent  rainstorm.
Silence also engulfs the room where Camus, now an adult, tends to his mother after
she fainted in her apartment. Just as his own father did forty years before with his
mother,  now  the  son  stretches  himself   out  alongside  her  on  the  narrow  bed;  the
silence that drapes itself  over them is not unwelcome: “All that remained was a great
garden of  silence interrupted now and then by the sick woman’s frightened moans. .
. . The world had melted away. . . . Finally he fell asleep, but not without taking with
23
him the tender and despairing image of  two people’s loneliness together.”
There are also the silences of  sunlight—the calm of  siesta time in Algiers, when
the calls of  Arab vendors underscore the lush sluggishness of  time and the hush of
the  empty  streets.  But  there  is  also  the  hammering  silence  that  overwhelms
Meursault  on  the  beach  in  Algiers  moments  before  he  kills  the  Arab  in  The
Stranger,  the stillness of  plague-ridden Oran in  The Plagu e,  and the ominous quiet
of   the  primitive  classroom  high  on  an  isolated  plateau  in  “The  Guest,”  when  the
teacher,  Daru,  realizes  that  words  are  useless  and  dialogue  impossible.  Silence,  in
short,  is  never  merely  physical  or  aural.  For  Camus,  it  is  also  metaphysical  and
ethical.  In  the  beginning  was  silence:  the  peace  of   a  prelapsarian  world.  “All  this

24
noise,”  he  wrote,  “when  peace  would  be  to  love  and  create  in  silence!”   Just  as  in
the scenes of  the mother and son lying in silence, when Cam us seems to come full
circle, first a newborn, then an adult, so too in his travels. In an essay on a visit to
Tipasa, an ancient site on the Algerian coast, Camus describes finding  “something
which in spite of  time and in spite of  the world was offered to me and truly to me
alone.”  From  this  something  “not  a  sound  cam e”;  even  the  sea  “lay  silent,  as  if
breathless.”  In  this  silence,  Camus  understood  that  he  had  returned  to  himself:  “I
felt I had come back to harbor, for a moment at least, and that from now on this
25
moment would never end.”
But  the  moment  does  end,  of   course,  leaving  only  a  memory  of   silence.  As  he
leaves Tipasa,  Camus  reflects  on  this  experience  and  what  it  might  mean.  Silence
bespeaks a world indifferent to politics and to others, while language is the work of
a world of  social struggle and political engagement. The two worlds are equally vital,
but  they  are  also  opposed  to  each  other.  “There  is  beauty  and  there  are  the
humiliated,”  Camus  insisted;  he  wishes  to  remain  faithful  to  both. Yet  “this  still
sounds  like  ethics,  and  we  live  for  something  that  transcends  ethics.  If   we  could
26
name it, what silence would follow!”
The interpretation of  silence is, at best, an uncertain enterprise and, at worst, a
fool’s  errand.  Our  situation  is  similar  to  that  of   Cam us  when,  as  a  child,  he
acco mpanied  his  illiterate  grandmother  to  the  cinema.  It  was  the  age  of   silent
movies,  and  Camus  had  to  translate  the  subtitles  for  the  old  woman.  It  was  an
awkward task: the child had to speak loudly enough so that his grandmother could
understand  but  softly  enough  not  to  disturb  the  others.  He  also  had  to  translate
accu rately  enough  to  remain  faithful  to  the  story  but  quickly  enough  to  keep  up
with the moving pictures. He managed this difficult job when it cam e to films like
The Mark of  Zorro,  but other movies were just too complicated:  “Caught between
his  grandmother’s  demands  and  the  ever-angrier  reprimands  of   his  neighbors,  [he]
27
would end by remaining completely silent.”
Although some things can not be named, they can  still be shown. This brings us
back,  as  it  did  Camus,  to  the  image  of   his  mother.  Shortly  before  his  death,  he
described his literary goal: to write a book at whose center would be “the admirable
silence of  a mother and one man’s effort to rediscover a justice or a love to match

28
this silence.”  I am not sure what Camus meant by this claim. But Camus may not
himself  have fully understood what he meant. Perhaps this is how it should be: as
Ludwig Wittgenstein  said,  while  certain  things  can not  be  said,  particularly  in  the
realm  of   ethics,  this  does  not  make  them  nonsensical  or  meaningless.  We  are
stymied  by  the  limits  of   language  when  we  try  to  talk  about  the  good  becau se
ethical propositions do not belong to the world of  facts. But talk about the good we
shall, talk about it we must. Wittgenstein declared that ethics,  “so far as it springs
from the desire to say something about the meaning of  life, the absolute good, the
absolute  value,  can   be  no  science. What  it  says  does  not  add  to  our  knowledge  in
any sense. But it is a document of  a tendency in the human mind which I personally
29
can not help respecting deeply and I would not for my life ridicule it.”
The  contradiction  at  the  heart  of   Camus’s  remark—n amely,  that  the  writer’s
effort  to  rediscover  a  justice  or  a  love  equal  to  his  mother’s  silence  forces  him  to
speak—is  also  the  contradiction  at  the  heart  of   our  own  lives. We  spend  them
looking  for  the  right  words  in  which  to  cast  our  greatest  questions  and  deepest
concerns. But final answers are not forthcoming—nor should we expect them to be.
Instead, the continuous revision of  our writing leads to a re-vision, a new vision, of
what  is  most  important  in  our  lives.  Iris  Mu rdoch—a  keen  admirer  of   Cam us’s
work—insisted  that  our  “moral  improvement  is  improvement  of   vision.”  Cam us
would certainly have agreed with this sentiment: from his earliest writings to the end
of   his  life,  he  yoked  himself   to  this  task,  his  words  plowing  ever  closer  to  the
silences at the core of  our lives and worlds.

F R O M   C O U N T Y   M A Y O   T O   K A B Y L I A
Yes, there is beauty and there are the humiliated.
Whatever the difficulties the enterprise may present, I would
like never to be unfaithful either to one or the other.
Rarely  had  turn-of-the-century  Ireland  seemed  so  familiar  as  it  did  in  interwar
Algeria. The comic masterpiece by the early twentieth-century Irish playwright John
Millington Synge,  The Playboy of  the Western World,  had traveled to the edge of
the  Eastern  world  in  1939.  An  amateur  theatrical  group,  the Théâtre  de  l’Equipe,
was performing the play in the jewel of  the French colonial crown, Algiers. But in
unexpected  ways,  Synge’s  and  the  audience’s  worlds  were  similar.  Both  were
impoverished  margins  of   empires:  French  Algeria  and  British  Ireland.  Both  were
home  to  indigenous  peoples,  Irish  Catholics  and  Arab  Mu slims,  respectively,  who
were  increasingly  dissatisfied  with  foreign  rule.  Both  were  blasted  by  famine—
resulting, in part, from imperial misrule—t hat forced great waves of  immigrants to
foreign  shores.  Both  harbored  ruling  classes,  the  Anglo-Irish  gentry  and  pied  noir
settlers, who were as much exiles in their adopted lands as they were in the mother
countries. And both communities nurtured circles of  artists who fought to express
the experience of  the colonized through the medium of  the colonizer’s language.
Albert  Camus,  the  actor  playing  the  role  of   Christy  Mah on  appreciated  these
parallels.  In  fact,  Camus  and  Christy  were  kindred  spirits.  Like  Cam us’s  father,
Lucien Camus, who had died in the Battle of  the Marne in 1914, a year after the
birth of  his son, Old Mahon, Christy’s father, had also been killed—or so his son

thought. Christy had bashed him on the skull with a shovel, to discover days later
that  he  had  only  knocked  him  unconscious.  Both  Camus  and  Christy  had  tongues
that soared in flight, sweeping along women in their wake. (One can  only imagine
the reaction of  one of  the members of  the amateur cast, Francine Faure, who would
soon become Camus’s second wife—an d the victim of  his serial infidelities—w hen
Pegeen  tells  Christy  that  “any  girl  would  walk  her  heart  out  before  she’d  meet  a
young  man  was  your  like  for  eloquence  or  talk  at  all.”)  Both  men  even  shared  the
same heritage: Christy’s background (or so he proclaimed) was in equal parts French
and  Spanish;  the  family  of   Camus’s  father  hailed  from  Bordeaux  (and  not  from
Alsace, as Camus had always believed), and his mother’s family cam e from Maj orca.
And both men were still unformed. At the play’s high point, when Christy learns
Pegeen  loves  him,  he  wonders:  “Is  it  me?”  During  the  same  period,  though  for
different  reasons,  Camus  also  asked:  “Is  it  me?”  As  he  wrote  in  his  journal:  “I  am
uncertain  of   the  future  but  have  achieved  total  liberty  toward  my  past  and  toward
myself.  Here  lies  my  poverty,  and  my  sole  wealth.  It  is  as  if   I  were  beginning  the
game  all  over  again,  neither  happier  nor  unhappier  than  before.  But  aware  now  of
where my strength lies, scornful of  my own vanities, and filled with that lucid fervor
1
which impels me forward toward my fate.”
° ° °
In  1907,  the  opening  of   Synge’s  comedy  in  Dublin  sparked  a  riot.  Rather  than
the  play’s  depiction  of   rural  poverty,  popular  violence,  or  rough  justice,  the
audience,  acco rding  to  some  observers,  had  been  shocked  by  an  allusion  to  local
women in their undergarments. While there were no riots at the Salle Pierre Bordes
in 1939, poverty, violence, and justice were very much on the minds of  the actors
and  audience  that  night. This  was  particularly  true  for  Cam us,  the  leader  of   the
Théâtre de l’Equipe, the theatrical troupe responsible for the production. As he had
already  told  one  of   his  high  school  teachers,  “I  have  such  a  strong  desire  to  see
2
reduced  all  the  misfortune  and  bitterness  which  poisons  humankind.”   Camus
echoed this sentiment in his journal: “I must bear witness,” he insisted. “When I see
things clearly, I have only one thing to say. It is in this life of  poverty, among these

vain  or  humble  people,  that  I  have  most  certainly  touched  what  I  feel  is  the  true
3
meaning of  life.”
Between  1936  and  1939  both  the Théâtre  de  l’Equipe  and  its  predecessor,  the
Théâtre  du  Travail,  were  known  as  la  bande  à  Camus.   Veteran  of   a  school
production of  Alexandre Dumas’s  Three Musketeers,  Camus must have enjoyed the
4
tag.  If  it was a coincidence that he played the role of  d’Artagnan, it was a happy
one. Like the Gascon (and his compatriot, Cyrano de Bergerac), Camus was a young
man from a region famed for its lyricism and courage. And as youthful and untried
as  d’Artagnan,  Camus  quickly  imposed  himself   on  the  others  as  leader.  Dumas’s
observation  that  it  was  “as  if   d’Artagnan  had  commanded  others  his  entire  life”
applied equally to Camus.
No  less  important,  d’Artagnan  leads  his  fellow  musketeers  in  their  celebrated
refrain: one for all and all for one. Since become a cliché, it nevertheless expressed
more  than  simple  romantic  verve  when  exclaimed  by  friends  united  in  a  common
enterprise. That refrain also underscores a dilemma at the heart of  communitarian
thought:  How  to  reconcile  individual  initiative  and  group  cohesion?  Both  theater
groups insisted on equal participation between the actors and audience, just as they
insisted  on  full  parity  among  themselves. Yet,  despite  these  official  claims,  Cam us
was clearly first among equals. He had founded both groups, influenced the choice
of   plays,  directed  the  productions,  and  wrote  his  own  works  or  adapted  those  of
others. Yet this caused little dissension or resentment. One for all, all for one: these
theatrical  ventures  sprang  from  Camus’s  conviction  that  theater  must  project  the
5
“collective realization of  one man’s thought.”
They  also  sprang  from  the  idealism  then  sweeping  through  the  French  Left.  As
fascism threw its shadow across the continent during the 1930s, movements on the
Left  began  to  stir.  In  France,  the  formation  of   the  Popular  Front  in  1934—t he
fragile alliance of  Socialists, Communists, and Radicals—was spurred by a common
fear of  fascism at home. Though the Popular Front’s time in power was short-lived,
the idealism it nurtured was at the heart of  Cam us’s theatrical work. It was a time
when André Malraux’s early novel,  L’âge du mépris  (Days of  Contempt), portraying
a  working-class  community’s  resistance  to  Nazism,  was  galvanizing  French  youth.
The  novel  overwhelmed  Camus.  In  fact,  the  young  man  was  impressed  enough  to
write  to  Malraux,  asking  for  permission  to  adapt  the  story  for  the  Théâtre  du

Travail. The  older  man,  in  turn,  was  impressed  enough  by  the  unknown  writer’s
gumption  that  he  sent  a  one-word  reply:  “Play.”  Camus  was  as  overjoyed  by  the
dramatic command as he was by the familiar  tu  form in which it was cast.
° ° °
“André  Malraux”  was  perhaps  André  Mal raux’s  greatest  dramatic  creation:  few
figures in modern France were more gifted at representing themselves on the stage
of   history—or  more  driven  to  do  so.  By  the  time  Camus  entered  university,  he
sympathized  with  this  desire. When  among  friends,  Camus  reveled  in  playacting,
miming  scenes,  declaiming  speeches,  mixing  comedy  and  tragedy.  (A  bit  like  a
North  African   Damon  Runyon,  he  especially  relished  the  patois  and  acce nts  he
heard in the streets and cafés of  Algiers.) But as with his hero Mal raux, the young
pied  noir   often  blurred  the  line  between  theater  and  reality,  stage  and  street.  Even
when alone, he tended to see his life in theatrical terms. Commentators have, in fact,
suggested that Camus turned himself  into a character and director in his letters and
6
writings:  acting  for  Camus  was  “a  fundamental  form  of   existence.”   How  else  to
conceive a man who, in his journal, expressed the desire to be “the perfect actor”?
At  first  glance,  this  is  a  common  human  trait:  we  all  try  to  make  sense  of
ourselves by staging our lives. Many of  us are old hands at such cognitive two-steps,
when we stand outside ourselves, assuming the roles of  director and commentator.
For Camus, this habit becam e more frequent as he grew more famous.  “I’m at my
best at funerals. Really, I shine,” he wrote with muted sarcasm in the early 1950s. “I
walk  slowly  through  iron-festooned  suburbs,  down  wide  lanes  bordered  by  cement
trees leading to holes dug in the cold ground. There, under a dimly red sky, I look
on as stout fellows lower my friend six feet under. A clay-covered hand passes me a
flower:  I  never  miss  when  I  toss  it  into  the  grave.  I  show  the  proper  piety  and
emotions, my head tilted just right. To everyone’s admiration, I find the right words.
7
But I take no credit: I am waiting.”
Yet Camus mined this tendency in remarkable ways. His notebooks bristle with
reflections,  often  contradictory,  on  authenticity  and  acting.  On  the  one  hand,  he
urged  himself   to  be  “deep  through  insincerity”  and  admired  Eugène  Delacroix’s
remark that the  “illusions I create with my painting are the most real thing in me.

The rest is shifting sand.” Soon after he turned thirty, Cam us declared that at this
age  a  “man  ought  to  have  control  over  himself   .  .  .  be  what  he  is  .  .  .  settle  in  to
8
being natural, but with a mask.”
On  the  other  hand,  Camus  blurred  the  line  between  sincerity  and  insincerity,
mask and self. In a particularly complex passage he sketched in 1937 for  A Happy
Death,  the character Patrice insists that  “if  the actor gave his performance without
knowing that he was in a play, then his tears would be real tears and his life a real
life. . . . I am carried away by the knowledge that the game I am playing is the most
exciting and serious there is.” He adds after a pause:  “And I want to be this perfect
9
actor.”
Is the mask our natural self ? Or instead, is there a natural self  still intact behind
the mask? Camus’s thoughts reflect the concerns expressed two centuries before by
Jean-Jacq ues Rousseau. So similar to the Swiss thinker in other respects, Cam us here
turns Rousseau on his head. In his  Letter to d’Alembert,  Rousseau famously damns
theater:  it  is  a  surrogate  for  existence,  a  simulacrum  of   community,  a  sink  of
iniquity and falsehood. Acting, for Rousseau, was becoming the “fundamental form
of  existence” in the modern age—and this was precisely the problem. “When we do
not live in ourselves but in others, it is their judgments which guide everything.” The
problem with theater, Rousseau declared, was that it gets in the way of  life, coming
between  man  and  his  world,  between  man  and  his  own  self. Theater  is  thus  little
more  than  modern  life  writ  small.  Instead  of   cultivating  the  virtues  of   citizenship
and family, tragedians stage these virtues, replacing reality with appearance and lived
experience with vicarious experience.
At first glance, Camus takes this “problem” and turns it into a solution: since we
are  condemned  to  act,  let  us  act  well  and  let  us  act  together.  While  Rousseau
believed it was only in solitude that he could regain his own self, Camus, though he
had  an  aptitude  for  solitude,  was  convinced  it  was  only  in  the  company  of   others
that  he  could  find  or  shape  his  self.  “Seek  contacts.  All  contacts,”  he  exhorted
himself   in  1936.  “If   I  want  to  write  about  men,  should  I  stop  talking  about  the
countryside? If  the sky or light attract me, shall I forget the eyes or voices of  those I
10
love?”
But Camus also wished that he could be the perfect actor. Did he mean so perfect
that he would become his role? Or so perfect that his real self, standing to one side,

could only admire the performance? It may well be that, for Cam us, the “actor is the
11
man who incarnates unreality and hence he is the only true man.”  Not that Camus
ever associated truth with unreality: he was too rooted in the world’s profane truths
and beauties to ever believe that. But if  by  “unreality” we understand only  “art” or
“artifice,” we get closer to the truth.
Camus does not say if  he had ever read Rousseau’s critique of  theater. If  he had,
however, he would have sided not with Rousseau but with Rousseau’s friend become
nemesis,  Denis  Diderot.  In  his  Confessions,   Rousseau  recounts  a  visit  he  made  to
the  philosophe   at  the  prison  of  Vincennes.  On  entering  Diderot’s  cell,  Rousseau
threw  himself   into  his  friend’s  arms  “with  my  face  pressed  against  his,  speechless
except  for  the  tears  and  sobs  that  spoke  on  my  behalf,  for  I  was  choked  with
tenderness and joy.” When they finally disengaged, Diderot triumphantly turned to
another  visitor:  “Observe,  Monsieur,  how  my  friends  love  me!”  Rather  than  wring
his  hands  over  issues  of   sincerity,  Diderot  applauded  the  theatrics  of   goodness,
either at the Comédie Française or in a prison cell. It was good to stage the good.
Camus, like Diderot, believed in the moral potential of  theater. This conviction
helps explain the weakness of  his theatrical pieces, which are often mired in a kind
of   ethical  didacticism.  But  this  conviction  also  reveals  Cam us’s  great  desire  to
connect with others: to enter into a dialogue not just with his fellow actors but also
with his audience. As Camus often repeated (but did not always practice in his own
12
theatrical pieces), on “stage as in reality, the monologue precedes death.”  Far from
corrupting and enslaving us, Camus believed, theater could make us better and freer.
Becoming better and freer, however, depended on the audience. In its manifesto,
the Théâtre  du Travail  declared  it  was  “sometimes  advantageous  to  art  to  descend
from its ivory tower.” To this end, the group decided, gate proceeds would go to a
fund  for  unemployed  workers  in  Algiers. Yet  benighted  crowds  hungry  for  culture
were  not  necessarily  waiting  at  the  tower’s  front  door.  Camus  and  his  friends,
determined to bring art to the people, discovered that the people were, by and large,
much  less  determined  to  come  to  the  art.  While  hundreds  turned  out  for  the
performance,  few  of   them  were  European  or  Arab  workers.  Instead,  the  spectators
reflected the social character of  Camus’s gang: young, European, and bourgeois. And
yet  the  play’s  impact  on  this  small  slice  of   the  French  Algerian  community  was

immediate and important. As one spectator later recalled, they “saw unfold on stage
13
our own struggle against the degrading mindset of  fascism.”
This spirit of  resistance also swept through the troupe’s preparations for  Revolt
in  Asturias,   a  collective  work  dramatizing  an  uprising  of   Spanish  miners  in  1934.
The mayor of  Algiers, Maximim Rozis, a member of  the militant right movement
Action  Française,  denied  Camus’s  troupe  permission  to  stage  the  work  in  the
municipal  theaters.  The  play  was  derailed,  prodding  a  furious  Cam us  into  a
relentless  letter  cam paign  against  Rozis—among  the  gentler  remarks  he  made  was
14
that  “we  can   no  longer  say  ridicule  kills,  since  Rozis  is  still  alive.”  The  Spanish
Republican s  had  just  engaged  Franco’s  rebels  in  a  slow,  agonizing,  and  ultimately
losing war. In many ways, the Spanish Civil War turned out to be a rehearsal for the
“good  war”  soon  to  begin  across  the  globe:  one  that  pitted  the  forces  of   fascism
against  the  forces  of   democracy. While  the  republic  attracted  dubious  allies—f irst
and  foremost  the  Soviet  Union—it  also  claimed  the  allegiance  of   groups  and
individuals committed to democratic and progressive ideals. Cam us later placed the
Spanish Civil War at the center of  his personal history as well as world history. The
bloody events in Spain were a  “personal tragedy,” but they were also his generation’s
tragedy: “Our history begins with this lost war and our true teacher has been Spain.
She has taught us that history does not choose between just and unjust cau ses, and
15
that it submits to sheer force when not to mere chance.”
° ° °
Camus had the Spanish Civil War in common with an Englishman to whom he is
often compared, George Orwell. Indeed, they shared the same disease as well. While
fighting  with  the  Republican s  in  1936,  a  bullet  tore  through  Orwell’s  throat,
contributing to the tuberculosis that eventually killed him. Tuberculosis had found
Camus long before that: he was scarcely seventeen when he had his first coughing fit
in Algiers. One winter’s day in 1930, the spasms grew so violent that Cam us began
to  vomit  blood.  After  being  rushed  to  a  local  hospital,  he  was  given  a  grim
prognosis. On his release from the hospital, Cam us told his Uncle Gustave, “I don’t
16
want to die.”

Though  his  stay  at  the  hospital  was  short,  his  memory  of   it  was  long.  In  an
unpublished  fragment,  titled  “A  Poor  Neighborhood’s  Hospital,”  Cam us  offers  a
bleak  sketch  of   a TB  ward.  One  morning,  a  group  of   patients,  “ugly  and  skeletal,
their voices strangled from laughter and coughing,” leaves the building to sit outside.
After a while, one of  them says to no one in particular, “The illness comes quickly,
17
but leaves slowly.”
Tuberculosis did not kill Camus, but it subjected his body to a kind of  foreign
occu pation  for  the  rest  of   his  life.  Cam us  sometimes  resisted,  more  often
acco mmodated  himself   to  the  disease.  He  admired  friends  such  as  Robert  Namia,
who announced one evening that he was quitting the Théâtre de l’Equipe’s rehearsals
18
for  Hamlet,  for he had decided to go to Spain.  But Camus knew it was foolhardy
to cross the Pyrenees. In 1936, the Spanish republic did not need foreign volunteers
who could more easily spit their own blood than spill that of  others.
By 1936, however, Camus had taken a step Orwell had always refused: he signed
on  with  Communism. The  preceding  fall,  he  joined  the  French  Communist  Party
(PCF).  Here  as  elsewhere,  Camus  solicited  the  help  of   his  high  school  literature
teacher,  Jean  Grenier,  to  think  through  his  decision.  Grenier  had  suggested  that
Camus’s energy might best be yoked to organized politics. Grenier had few illusions
—a  rarity  at  that  time—about  the  radiant  future  projected  by  the  PCF.  In  his
lectures  and  essays—Grenier  had  a  modest  literary  reputation  in  Paris,  publishing
from  time  to  time  in  the  country’s  most  prestigious  literary  journal,  La  Nouvelle
Revue Française —he warned against the unequal struggle between the life of  ideas
and political idealism. As he warned Camus,  “each time man creates new values, he
19
creates new shackles.”  But he had equally few illusions about his protégé’s desire to
engage  the  world.  Like  so  many  others  of   his  generation,  Cam us  aspired  “towards
20
something that transcends the human.”  The PCF, Grenier thought, might serve as
a  suitable,  though  temporary,  place  for  Cam us’s  moral  convictions  and  political
restlessness.
As a result, a teacher who distrusted messianic ideologies led his favorite student,
who was immune to  “ideal truths,” to join a party embodying these very ideologies.
To  Grenier’s  curt  question—“Should  one,  for  an  ideal  of   justice,  acce pt  stupid
ideas?”—Camus  answered  “yes.”  His  assent  was  short-lived:  stupid  ideas,  Cam us
quickly  understood,  make  for  a  stupid  world.  In  his  journal,  Camus  proudly

described  himself   as  an  intellectual—i n  other  words,  “someone  whose  mind
21
watches  itself.”   No  less  important,  the  intellectual  attends  not  just  to  his  own
thoughts but to the lives of  others. In a way, Cam us inhabited his thought, no less
than the lives of  others, the way he inhabited a role on stage: with great energy and
equally great critical distance.
It was an art of  living that did not endear him to the local Communist apparatus.
Along with questioning others no less than himself, Camus took to heart the party’s
egalitarian ethos. The PCF had had the great merit, unique among France’s political
parties,  of   taking  seriously  the  miserable  lot  of   the  Arab  and  Berber  populations.
When  Camus  joined  them  in  late  1935,  French  Communists  had  already
established  themselves  as  foes  of   French  imperialism.  The  PCF   demanded  the
political enfranchisement of  Algeria’s Muslim population, as well as their economic
and social betterment. This was a truly revolutionary stance in a country where nine
out  of   ten  residents,  all  of   them  Arab  or  Berber,  were  politically  excluded  and
economically exploited.
Camus’s  decision  was  neither  sudden  nor  surprising. While  still  a  high  school
student, he joined a weekly journal called  Ikdam.  Founded by the grandson of  the
nineteenth-century  Algerian  nationalist  Abd  al-Kad ir,  Ikdam   demanded  that  the
French republic live up to its ostensibly universalist credo. A nation founded on the
rights  of   man  and  of   the  citizen  must  extend  those  same  rights  to  the  Arabs  and
Berbers under its rule. For these early Muslim nationalists, as for Cam us, the official
republican   policy  of   assimilation  was  not  a  lie  that  cloaked  the  brutal  reality  of
22
colonization—or, more accu rately, it was neither simply nor inevitably a lie.  While
French  colonial  policy  was  undeniably  racist  and  paternalist,  it  was  not  only  that.
Infused  with  the  universal  and  egalitarian  sentiments  of   1789,  France’s  republican
credo  remained  untouched  by  the  racial  and  ethnic  considerations  that  tainted  the
policies  of   other  Western  imperial  powers.  In  that  narrow  space  between  the
inspiring rhetoric of  republican ism and the depressing reality of  everyday racism, it
was  possible  to  believe  that  Algeria  would  always  be  fully  French,  fully  republican ,
and  fully  free  for  all   of   its  inhabitants.  A  generation  of   indigenous  nationalist
leaders—the interwar Algerian leader Ferhat Abbas is a notable example—as  well as
exceptional  pieds  noirs   such  as  Camus  all  acted  on  the  belief   that  France’s  role  in
23
the colonies was to lay the foundations for equality, not enslavement.  In the end,

however,  such  men  and  women  were  too  few  in  the  face  of   the  reality  of
institutional and popular racism. In this regard, it is telling that most proponents of
assimilation  did  not  direct  their  efforts  at  the  indigenous  peoples,  whom  they
judged  too  barbaric,  but  instead  at  European  immigrants  to  Algeria  like  Cam us’s
own family.
Camus  nevertheless  joined  in  the  last  great  effort  to  bring  pieds  noirs   and
Muslims  under  the  same  republican   roof.  In  Ma y  1937,  the  Algerian  newspapers
carried  a  manifesto  whose  aims,  though  in  fact  moderate,  seemed  absolutely
revolutionary  in  the  context  of   the  times.  In  half   a  dozen  terse  paragraphs,  the
manifesto’s  fifty  signers,  including  Camus,  declared  their  support  for  the  Blum-
Viollette project. Proposed by the Popular Front prime minister Léon Blum and his
representative in Algeria, Maurice Violette, the bill, which never becam e law, would
have extended full political rights to more than twenty thousand Arabs and Berbers.
For  conservatives,  it  was  too  great  a  step,  whereas  nationalists  dismissed  it  as  too
small. But for Camus, it was a necessary step in the right direction. A culture can not
survive  without  dignity,  the  manifesto  stated,  and  a  civilization  can not  flourish
under oppressive laws. How could one even speak of  culture when an entire people
is  “deprived  of   schools”  or  of   civilization  when  people  are  “bowed  under
24
unprecedented misery and humiliating laws”?
The  PCF  supported  the  bill.  Yet  just  months  later,  the  party’s  leadership
sacrificed  its  anticolonialism  to  strategic  considerations.  Joseph  Stalin  had  decided
that fascism represented a greater threat to the Soviet Union than did imperialism,
and  that  Nazi  Germany  posed  a  greater  danger  than  imperial  France  or  England.
Acco rdingly,  Communist  parties  across  the  continent  were  ordered  to  mute  their
anticolonial  rhetoric  and  instead  turn  their  attention  to  the  fascist  threat.  Cam us
refused  to  go  along  with  this  brutal  instance  of   realpolitik.  For  him,  the  two
struggles were complementary, not antagonistic. As he wrote to his friend and fellow
Communist,  Claude  de  Fréminville,  “I  will  never  place  a  copy  of   Marx’s  Capital
25
between life and my fellow men.”  By fellow men, Camus meant Arabs and Berbers
no less than  pieds noirs.
° ° °

As  a  student  at  the  University  of   Algiers,  Camus  wrote  his  thesis  on  neo-
Platonism  and  Augustine. The  work  is  largely  a  concoction  of   secondary  sources
26
and unexceptional glosses, but it remained close to Camus’s heart.  This may well
be,  in  part,  becau se  he  felt  so  close  to  his  subject.  Cam us  was  fond  of   calling
Augustine,  who  was  born  in  what  is  now  Libya,  the  “other  North  African .”
Augustine  demanded  that  the  world  reveal  an  ultimate  meaning,  all  the  while
wrestling  with  its  sensual  attractions.  In  his  Confessions,   Augustine  recounts  his
great struggle with sexual desire and the unbearable tension between his love of  God
and his love of  the carnal world. Nearly driven mad, he uttered his famous prayer,
“Lord save me, but not just yet.” Like Augustine, Cam us was intensely aware of  the
power and pleasures of  the physical world; like Augustine, he also knew that nature
itself   offers  no  lessons.  But  here  they  diverged:  for  Augustine,  God  alone  has  the
answer; for Camus, however, man would have only questions.
In an important sense, Camus’s passage through the PCF resembled Augustine’s
experience  with  Manichaeanism.  No  other  belief   system,  he  thought,  better
explained  the  character  of   our  lives. The  Manichees  affirmed  the  existence  of   two
antagonistic  entities,  Good  and  Evil,  one  associated  with  light,  the  other  with
darkness  or  matter. These  two  principles,  they  said,  have  been  locked  in  a  battle
since  the  beginning  of   time,  climaxing  with  the  advent  of   Jesus  Christ.  A  deep
desire  courses  through  this  belief   system:  to  salvage  those  elements  of   light  that
have  been  imprisoned  and  sullied  by  the  physical  world.  From  the  moment  of   the
fall, man  and  god have struggled to regroup and purify themselves. In short, human
beings are no longer mere subjects of  history, they are now cast as actors.
Manichaeanism thus offered a rational conception of  God steeped in the saving
passion  of   Christianity.  It  was  a  cult  of   redemption,  but  expressed  with  greater
intellectual  rigor  than  Christian  apologetics.  How  better  to  reconcile  the  existence
of  evil and the fragility of  goodness than by asserting that they were two universal
impulses at war with each other? No less important, the Man ichees satisfied a young
man’s  thirst  for  action  and  his  desire  to  fight  on  behalf   of   the  good.  And  so  the
young Augustine, desperate for meaning and engagement, joined the Manichees. Yet
he was never at home with them: their rigid approach failed, in the end, to offer the
answers he demanded. After several years, he finally left, restless and unsatisfied, and
ultimately converted to Christianity.

Camus was equally ill at ease with the Communists. While the party allowed the
young  man  to  work  on  behalf   of   a  future  “good”  for  all  humankind,  it  did  not
tolerate members who questioned party dogma. When the local cell was told to tar
their former allies, Algerian nationalists, as fascist lackeys, all in the interest of  this
ideological  good,  Camus  protested.  After  all,  one  of   his  duties  had  been  the
recruitment  of   Arab  members:  to  repudiate  this  activity,  he  felt,  was  morally  and
politically  wrong.  Though  the  local  leadership,  in  particular  Am ar  Ouzegane,
sympathized with Camus’s rebelliousness, their flexibility was limited. In November
1937 Camus was expelled from the party—a formality, really, since he had already
gone his own way. He would not abandon the Algerian Arabs, even if  others insisted
that the train of  History was pulling out of  the station without him.
° ° °
The  PCF  was  impressed  by  Camus’s  theatrical  activities  and  had  hoped  to
harness  this  energy  for  their  cau se.  For  Cam us,  too,  theater  had  been,  in  part,
politics  by  other  means.  But  acting  did  not  pay  the  bills,  particularly  after  Cam us
cut his ties with the PCF. As a result, he sought other avenues that would allow him
to  write  and  earn  a  living  at  the  same  time.  It  is  during  this  same  period  that  he
established  ties  with  a  local  newspaper,  Alger-Républicain,   which  was  launched  in
late  1937  as  a  counterweight  to  Algiers’s  two  conservative  newspapers. The  life  of
Alger-Républicain   was  bold,  short,  and  desperate,  the  perfect  vehicle  for  a  young
man  with  few  prospects  and  great  ambitions.  Like  Cam us’s  theater  troupes,  Alger-
Républicain  was politically engaged but unattached to a political party or platform.
And just as Camus’s theatrical productions refused to subordinate artistic concerns
to ideological claims,  Alger-Républicain  placed truth ahead of  political convictions.
Such,  at  least,  was  its  claim  in  its  stirring  manifesto:  insisting  that  the  paper’s  sole
concern  was  the  “public  interest,”  the  editors  made  clear  that,  by  “public,”  they
meant  all  the inhabitants of  French Algeria: the paper was as opposed to an  “anti-
Semitism  made  in  Germany”  as  it  was  to  social  policies  “aimed  at  keeping  our
indigenous friends in a position of  inferiority.” The newspaper insisted on full social
and  political  equality  for  all  Frenchmen  “regardless  of   their  race,  religion,  or
27
philosophy.”

These  admirable  sentiments  had  a  limited  audience  in  interwar  Algiers.  The
number of   Alger-Républicain  readers was never commensurate with the newspaper’s
fervor. Moreover, for reasons of  economy, the paper’s editor, Pascal Pia, staffed the
newsroom  with  absolute  beginners  who  were  willing  to  work  for  a  pittance.  As
much an amateur here as on the stage, Camus nevertheless leaped at the opportunity
—to Pia’s great satisfaction: “He never said anything insignifican t,” Pia later recalled
28
about his rookie reporter, “yet he expressed himself  plainly.”
At first, however, Camus dismissed his work as insignifican t. His assignments, he
told  Grenier,  boiled  down  to  reporting  about  dogs  hit  by  cars:  “You  know  better
than  I  do  how  disappointing  this  profession  has  been.” Yet  Camus  also  found  it
29
compelling. He felt free: “I don’t feel constrained and everything I do seems alive.”
He  eventually  found  the  platform  offered  by  the  newspaper  as  compelling  as  his
theatrical activities. In December 1938, Cam us filed the first story that carried his
byline, a visit to a prison ship docked at Algiers. As Camus walked toward the ship
on  this  cold,  wet,  and  windswept  day,  he  saw  three  Arabs,  faces  pressed  to  one  of
the  portholes,  gazing  silently  at  Algiers.  Unlike  their  fellow  French  prisoners,  who
were now “strangers in a strange world,” these three men seemed to be searching for
“something  of   themselves  in  the  rain.”  As  for  the  reporter,  he  makes  no  effort  to
maintain critical distance: “I’m not very proud to be here.”
As he boarded the ship, steeling himself  for an official tour no doubt meant to
convey the reach and majesty of  impartial justice, Camus worried about his dripping
raincoat. Its damp scent, redolent of  the outside world, was the last thing these men
needed. As he prepared to leave the hold, he writes, “one of  the prisoners asks me in
Arabic for a cigarette.” Camus knew it was against the rules but did not say so to the
prisoner.  That  would  have  been  such  a  “ludicrous  reply,”  Cam us  realizes,  for
someone seeking  “a sign of  complicity, a fellow man’s gesture.” And yet, Cam us did
not respond to the man, instead meeting the request with silence. Only after he left
the ship did he realize that he was seized not by pity but by something different and
deeper:  “There  is  no  sight  more  dismal  than  that  of   men  who  have  become  less
than human.” Camus can not escap e the sight of  men for whom the clammy odor of
a winter’s day in Algiers is proscribed. His one wish is to convey  “the singular fate
30
of  men who have been struck from humanity.”

With  the  “Hodent  affair”  in  1939,  Cam us  acted  to  prevent  yet  another  such
“singular  fate”  from  befalling  one  man.  Michel  Hodent  was  a  minor  French
bureaucrat  who,  despite  the  hostility  of   his  superiors,  tried  to  help  poor  Arab
farmers  living  in  his  jurisdiction.  Trumped-up  charges  were  made  against  him,
leading  to  a  hasty  trial  and  imprisonment.  In  a  series  of   articles  for  Alger-
Républicain   during  the  spring  of   1939,  Camus  attacked  the  state’s  case  against
Hodent.  His  repeated  references  to  a  suspicious  bordereau,   the  meticulous
dissection  of   the  testimony  and  evidence,  the  use  of   an  “open  letter”  to  the
authorities, and the repeated appeals to justice all recall the language of   “J’accu se,”
Emile  Zola’s  celebrated  defense  of   Alfred  Dreyfus  fifty  years  before.  But  with  a
difference:  Zola  focused  largely  on  an  abstract  notion  of   justice,  while  Cam us
attends  to  the  injustice  done  to  a  single  man. The  worst  crimes  become  possible,
Camus warned, when we refuse to see men as men. This conviction appears early in
Camus’s  notebooks:  “My  whole  effort,  whatever  the  situation,  misfortune  or
31
disillusion,  must  be  to  make  contact  again.”   Camus  latches  on  to  this  moral
imperative  in  a  closing  plea  to  the  governor  general.  “We  have  glimpses  of   you  in
processions,  laws,  and  speeches,”  he  tells  the  official  in  his  open  letter.  But  “where
do  we  find  the  man  in  all  of   that?”  Behind  the  stage  set  and  scenery,  it  “happens
that  the  man  appears.”  Camus  appeals  to  this  flesh-and-blood  man  on  behalf   of
another man: to save the life of  an individual “in a world where the humanity of  so
32
many  others  is  lost  to  absurdity  and  misery  .  .  .  amounts  to  saving  oneself.”
Hodent was eventually released.
Later that year, Camus tried to provoke another “affair” with his series of  reports
on the trial of  twelve Arab farmhands accu sed of  arson. The fires had broken out
during a strike begun by Arab workers: they were protesting a daily wage—f our to
six francs—that scarcely allowed them to live. The fires burned down a handful of
hovels,  and  there  was  no  evidence  of   the  men’s  guilt.  Instead,  the  dozen  men
confessed  to  the  crime  only  after  the  police  tortured  them—w aterboarding
happened  to  be  the  preferred  method. They  each  faced  five  years  of   hard  labor  if
found  guilty  by  the  jurors.  And  all  twelve  men  were  fathers;  their  families,  Cam us
noted, would be left without their principal wage earner.
For  Camus,  these  men  were  guilty  only  of   speaking  the  truth:  they  “dared  say
33
that  their  salary  did  not  suit  their  dignity  as  men.”   As  a  result,  the  trial’s  sole

purpose  was  to  warn  others  against  acting  on  the  same  impulse.  If   Arab  workers
insisted on being treated as human beings, they would pay a very high price. Yet, if
“democracy  had  any  meaning  at  all,  we  will  find  it  here  and  not  in  the  official
boilerplate” offered by elected officials. Camus asked the jurors to recall that, in the
ritual address to the court made before delivering their verdict, they would declare
that  they  were  speaking  “in  the  name  of   the  French  people.”  But  this,  Cam us
34
warned, would be “a lie” if  followed by a guilty verdict.
After his success in the Hodent affair, Cam us now tasted failure. His articles did
not save the twelve men: they were found guilty and punished. Yet these were trials
in more than the judicial sense of  the word: for Camus, they were also trials, essays,
in  ethical  imagination.  Just  as  Zola  becam e  Zola  in  the  crucible  of   the  Dreyfus
affair—becoming the public figure we recognize today—s o too did Cam us become
Camus  during  these  journalistic  affairs. They  honed  not  just  his  language  but  also
his appreciation for the vast gap between French ideals and imperial rule in Algeria.
Camus  hammered  at  the  prejudices  of   his  fellow  pieds  noirs,   the  hypocrisy  and
fecklessness  of   most  local  officials;  he  demanded  a  French  Algeria  equal  to  its
republican   values.  As  he  declared  after  a  similar  event,  when  the  government
imprisoned  several  Muslim  nationalists:  “If   only  this  was  simply  a  stupid  and
incredibly  narrow-minded  policy  that  misunderstands  the  great  power  exercised  by
martyrs. But such actions are also deadly for France’s reputation and future. If  there
35
ever was an anti-French politics, it is in the policy of  our government.”  In other
words, France was falling short of  its own history and values. This would be fatal,
Camus held, but it was not fated. It was not a matter of  “exalting the French empire
but  of   making  it,”  he  wrote,  adding,  “it  will  never  be  made  against  its  own
36
subjects.”  This  truth  was  made  clear  during  his  visit  that  spring  to  the  region  of
Kabylia.
° ° °
“The final and most revolting injustice is consummated when poverty is wed to
the  life  without  hope  or  the  sky  I  found  on  reaching  manhood  in  the  appalling
slums of  our cities. . . . Though born poor in a working class neighborhood, I never
knew  what  real  misfortune  was  until  I  saw  our  chilly  suburbs.  Even  extreme  Arab

37
poverty can not be compared to it, becau se of  the difference in climate.”  Camus’s
lyricism here gets the better of  him. Famine did not strike the urban poor in France,
but even the blinding Algerian sun could not hide the fact that, during the 1930s,
its people were dying of  starvation in Kabylia.
East  of   Algiers,  a  jagged  line  forms  the  horizon:  it  is  the  Djurdjura,  the  craggy
mountain range of  Kabylia. Though a short distance from the cap ital city, Kab ylia
could have been, for most of  the city’s European residents, on another planet. The
land was arid, seamed by valleys pocked with fig and olive orchards, and farmed by
Berbers  whose  mountaintop  villages  seemed  nearly  hermetic,  bare  walls  blindly
facing the outside world, with windows and doors opening inward.
Assemblies  of   elders  governed  village  life  in  Kabylia—a  mark  of   primitive
equality for some observers, a sign of  patriarchal power for others. (As first among
equals in the Théâtre de l’Equipe, Cam us must have been attracted to both aspects.)
This  form  of   self-governance  helped  make  it  the  last  region  in  Algeria  to  be
“pacified”  by  the  French.  Paradoxically,  when  Napoleon  III  fell  from  power  in
France in 1871, the future narrowed rather than widened for the Berbers. The most
powerful  shield  for  the  native  peoples  of   Algeria  had  been  Napoleon’s  empire:
imperial officials long tried to contain the greed of  European settlers. But as post-
Napoleonic  France  groped  its  way  toward  a  republican   form  of   government,  the
pieds  noirs   rushed  to  stake  their  claims  in  Kabylia. When  the  Berbers  resisted,  the
local authorities unleashed the military that, in turn, performed as successfully and
bloodily as their counterparts had against the Paris Commune.
The  settlers  completed  the  process  they  had  begun,  confiscating  land  and
exacting  heavy  tributes  from  the  Berber  tribes.  The  arable  valleys,  which  could
scarcely support the people already trying to scratch out a living there, were taken by
settlers,  who  had  been  given  carte  blanche  by  the  local  administration.  Pushed  out
of  the valleys, the Berbers either returned to their mountain villages or emigrated to
metropolitan France, just as Irish peasants went to England. The Berbers were also
subjected to a regime of  exceptional laws, known as the  code de l’indigénat.  It was
illegal for them to speak disrespectfully to French officials, defame the government,
or  travel  without  an  official  permit.  Mo st  ironic,  the  republic  revived  the  feudal
practice of  the  corvée:  the local population becam e an unpaid and unwilling labor
pool for European landowners. Despite its unforgiving soil, Kab ylia thus welcomed
the seeds of  revolution: as one local poet wrote, the French  “have sowed hatred in

the villages/We store it under the ground where it remains/The abundant yield of
38
a harvested field.”
° ° °
“When  one  reaches  the  first  slopes  of   Kab ylia,  catching  sight  of   small  villages
huddled  near  the  summits,  the  men  draped  in  white  woolen  robes,  the  paths
bordered by olive trees, fig trees and cact us, the simplicity of  life and landscap e, man
39
and earth, one can not help but think of  Greece.”  Or at least, the narrator can not
help but think of  Greece, forcing on us the unexpected comparison in order to undo
our  preconceptions  about  Algeria.  In  the  opening  lines  of   his  first  report  from
Kabylia,  dated  June  5,  1939,  Camus  culls  references  and  images  from  picturesque
acco unts  of   Kabylia  written  by  other  European  visitors.  They  are  exotic  but
recognizable—the narrative equivalent of  a Club Med vacat ion.
For that matter, they are like the stage sets of  commercial theater—o verdone and
predictable—so  despised  by  Camus’s  theatrical  muse,  Jacq ues  Copeau.  During  the
interwar period, Copeau, the celebrated director of  the Théâtre du Vieux Colombier,
rebelled  against  the  bourgeois  traditions  of   French  theater.  Rather  than  cultivating
lush  stage  scenery  and  actors  all  too  eager  to  chew  on  it,  Copeau  stripped  his
productions bare: everything and everyone were yoked to the written word.
Camus carefully read Copeau’s essays in the  Nouvelle Revue Française,  the same
journal to which Jean Grenier contributed. The Parisian director showed Cam us how
the unreality of  theater can  be made to serve as a reality check. The stage, Copeau
insisted, must be as  “empty and as bare as possible [and] shaped by the unfolding
40
of  a story: such a set is most beautiful in its natural state, primitive and vacan t.”  In
the opening passage of   “Misery in Kab ylia,” Cam us, like Copeau, pushes away the
traditional  décor.  And  like  him,  Camus  banishes  familiar  stage  settings:  “But  let  it
41
be said now: this land’s misery is overwhelming.”  The snow-frosted slopes, already
opening  to  ski  resorts;  the  quaint  local  practices,  always  a  familiar  opening  for  a
forgettable tale, all dissolve. Camus instead marshals his actors, Berber men, women,
children;  he  reveals  the  script  they  have  been  dealt,  a  litany  of   despair  and  agony;
and he allows the story to tell itself.

Two  years  earlier,  Camus  had  already  drafted  the  opening  to  his  reports  from
Kabylia. In October 1937, he had made a cam ping trip to the region. Like Sisyphus,
Camus  pushed  his  own  burden,  tubercular  lungs,  up  and  down  the  barren  hills,
noting  the  “concentrated  effort  of   walking  uphill,  the  air  burning  my  lungs  like  a
red-hot iron or cutting into them like a sharpened razor.” His labored breathing did
not  stop  him  from  seeing  this  world:  Cam us  reports  on  the  villages,  flora,  and
inhabitants. The  ties  between  Kabylia  and  Greece  filled  his  thoughts.  Mar veling  at
the  rough  land,  Camus  kept  being  drawn  back  to  Greece.  But  no,  he  reminded
himself: he was abroad at home, he was in Kab ylia. Here lies the critical difference:
in the  Notebooks,  he maintained the parallel—it is as if   “the whole of  Greece had
suddenly  been  set  down  between  the  sea  and  mountains,  reborn  in  its  ancient
splendor”—whereas  the  title  of   his  first  article  in  Alger-Républicain,   “Greece  in
Rags,” makes the comparison only to demolish it. The recent, catastrophic harvests,
coupled with the administration’s inertia and the indifference of  the  pieds noirs,  led
42
Camus to mock the earlier parallels he himself  had made.
Camus  overturns  other  inevitable  invocations  of   the  picturesque.  At  dusk,  he
climbed  with  a  Berber  companion—Cam us  stayed  with  friends  during  his  visit,
most of  whom were Berber schoolteachers—to a hill overlooking the town of  Tizi-
Ouzou. For a moment, he wrote, he was carried away by the starry sky and grand
vistas.  Then  he  spied  fires  dotting  the  slopes:  a  scene  seemingly  resonant  with
ancient  Greeks  at  one  with  the  world.  But  he  suddenly  recalls  the  purpose  of   the
fires:  starving  villagers  used  them  to  bake  pancak es  made  from  rotten  oats.  His
43
companion then breaks the silence: “Shall we go down?”
At the start, Camus announces his method:  “I will use a minimum of  words to
44
describe what I saw.”  The barer the stage, the clearer the text; the clearer the text,
the  sharper  the  moral  meaning.  In  an  important  sense,  for  Cam us,  the  moral
landscap e was as “real,” as brute, as the physical landscap e of  North Africa. The two
landscap es  are,  in  fact,  entwined.  In  1937,  he  had  already  begun  to  stake  out  a
“Mediterranean nationalism,” one that embraced  “physical life [and not] reasoning
45
and abstractions.”  Truths were rooted in the desert and coasts; they were concrete,
tactile, elemental.  “Between this sky and the faces turned toward it there is nothing
on  which  to  hang  a  mythology,  a  literature,  an  ethic,  or  a  religion—o nly  stones,

46
flesh, stars, and those truths the hand can  touch.”  Or, in the case of  the Berbers, it
47
is “wheat, bread, and a brotherly hand: the rest is only words.”
Yet  words  scarcely  sufficed  for  what  Cam us  saw  in  Kabylia;  it  was  certainly
beyond  anything  he  had  imagined.  He  knew,  for  example,  that  the  official
distribution of  grain did not meet the needs of  the population. “But what I did not
48
know  is  that  these  shortages  were  killing  people.”   In  spare  language,  Camus
depicted  the  horrifying  reality  of   villages  where  malnourished  children  played  by
open  sewers,  fainted  from  hunger  in  classrooms,  fought  with  dogs  over  kitchen
scraps,  were  racked  with  convulsions,  and  died  from  eating  poisonous  roots. The
absolute wretchedness of  everyday life undermined the standard excuse of  imperial
apologists:  all  of   this  was  due  to  the  Berber  “mentality,”  the  bundle  of   local
traditions and customs that threw a wall between these primitive souls and France’s
civilizing mission. Nonsense, replied Camus. It was a question of  water, food, roads,
and  schools—all  of   which  Kabylia  sorely  lacked  and  which  the  French  authorities
did not supply.
Camus  dispatched  a  dozen  articles  from  Kabylia,  all  of   them  carrying  the  same
message: the misery of  these human beings must not be obscured by  “glib phrases
49
or  meditations.  It  is.  It  cries  for  our  attention,  it  despairs  of   getting  it.”   Camus
attended  to  this  cry  of   despair  in  two  different  yet  overlapping  registers:  political
and ethical. In political terms, his despair was especially deep, if  only becau se of  the
gap  between  the  ideals  of   the  French  republic  and  the  reality  of   Kab ylia.  Cam us
nevertheless  insisted  on  the  relevance  of   the  republican   ideal  for  Kab ylia’s
predicam ent. There was nothing glib or self-righteous in his emphasis on education:
instead,  the  student  of   Louis  Germain  spoke  from  the  heart.  The  practice  of
separate and unequal education had to end. The classroom had to be integrated: the
people of  Kabylia, Camus wrote, will have  “more schools the day we do away with
the artificial barriers separating the European and indigenous systems of  education.”
Only  then,  by  sitting  at  the  same  desks,  will  “two  peoples  made  to  live  together
50
come to know each other.”  Let us focus, he said, on the bonds of  fraternity, not
the barriers of  difference that existed between the two peoples. If  France believed in
its policy of  assimilation, if  it believed Muslims were truly worthy of  being French,
51
then  “we  can not  begin  by  separating  them  from  us.”   In  the  end,  for  Camus,

France  had  to  practice,  not  simply  preach,  republican ism—t he  ideology  that
rendered France’s imperial heritage so problematic but also so promising. If  France’s
“colonial  conquests  were  ever  to  find  their  justification,  it  is  to  the  degree  that  it
allows the conquered peoples to keep their identities. If  we have but one duty in this
country, it is to permit a people so proud and humane to remain true to itself  and
52
its destiny.”
Camus  assumed  the  Berber  destiny  would  dovetail  with  that  of   France:  a  naïve
claim,  perhaps.  Equally  naïve,  for  some,  was  his  belief   that  seeing  was  believing—
and that believing would lead to practical policy. Cam us wrote that if  the deputies
of   the  French  National  Assembly,  regardless  of   political  affiliation,  took  the  same
itinerary he had taken in Kabylia, the solution would be at hand. But was this belief
naïve?  It  underscored,  of   course,  Cam us’s  allegiance  to  the  universal  bonds  of
fraternity  embodied  by  the  republic.  More  important,  however,  it  flowed  from  a
simple,  but  not  simplistic,  ethical  orientation:  seeing  rightly  is  a  prerequisite  to
acting rightly. Camus recounted a visit he makes to a  gourbi,  or hut, in the village of
Adni. In a “dim and smokey room, I was welcomed by two women, one quite aged,
the other pregnant. Three children stare uncomprehendingly at me. . . . I don’t see a
single piece of  furniture. Only after my eyes grow accu stomed to the darkness do I
see  signs  of   human  life:  three  great  basins  of   white  clay,  and  two  earthen  bowls.”
When Camus asks the pregnant woman, who is  “cradling her enormous stomach,”
where  she  slept,  she  “pointed  to  the  earthen  floor  under  my  feet,  next  to  a  drain
53
serving as toilet.”
Camus  does  not  ask  the  reader  to  enter  this  woman’s  head—he  himself   can not
do it, though he is standing there, in the darkened room where  “animal odors and
smoke grip [his] throat.” Instead, he can  do no more than step  next  to her—next to
the  open  pit  serving  as  a  toilet,  next  to  her  swollen  belly,  next  to  three  famished
children—and pay attention. As Michael Walzer notes, we do not enter someone’s
head when we step into their shoes. “To think that we do is a characteristic mistake
of  philosophers who believe that heads have no histories. We don’t, becau se we can ’t,
reproduce  other  people’s  ideas;  instead,  we  reiterate  our  own.  But  the  recognition
that  the  others  have  experiences  and  ideas  similar  to  ours  is  already  a  significan t
54
moral achievement.”

Camus made a near identical point: we always take a step forward, he wrote, when
55
we  substitute  a  human  problem  for  a  political  problem.   For  better  or  worse,  he
offered no grand theoretical frame for his claim. But he did not believe he needed
to: moral outrage was the work of  experience, not theory; hatred of  injustice is the
result of  a life lived, not a book opened.
° ° °
Camus’s  embrace  of   his  era’s  responsibilities  had  immediate  consequences,
personal  and  political.  Three  days  after  Camus’s  last  dispatch  from  Kab ylia,  La
Dépêche Algérienne,  a conservative newspaper with close ties to Mayor Rozis—who
had  earlier  prevented  Camus’s  troupe  from  staging  Revolt  in  Asturias —launched  a
series  of   articles  written  by  a  house  journalist,  R.  Frison-Roche. Titled  “Kab ylie
39,” the articles try to undo the damage done by Camus’s reports. At the very start,
Frison-Roche makes clear his position on the benefits of  French imperialism:  “The
work  France  has  acco mplished  here  in  less  than  a  century  would  strike  the  most
56
obtuse  visitor.”   Obtuseness,  it  seems,  was  not  Camus’s  only  flaw:  Frison-Roche
also suggests that his (unnamed) colleague was blinded by ideology. The misery of
the  Berbers  was  not  the  result  of   unfeeling  French  administrators,  he  declares,  but
of  the grim Malthusian math afflicting Kabylia: there are too many mouths to feed,
too  many  people  crowded  onto  too  little  land.  Infrastructure,  land  distribution,
water acce ss, education, and grain distribution: these subjects, to which Cam us gave
so much attention, are mostly ignored by Frison-Roche. Instead, time and again, he
57
celebrates “the great and beautiful things France has done in Kabylia.”
Alger-Républicain   welcomed  the  controversy:  How  else  could  the  struggling
newspaper  win  publicity?  But  all  the  controversies  in  the  world  could  not  save  Pia
and Camus’s paper from its continued financial difficulties and the growing material
constraints under which it was now placed. France had just lurched into war against
Germany, but even before the declaration of  war in September, the local government
had  targeted  political  movements  it  considered  insufficiently  patriotic.  Both  the
Communist Party and the nationalist Algerian People’s Party (PPA) were outlawed,
its leaders imprisoned, and its rank and file harassed. The government’s violence and
shortsightedness stunned Camus:  “It is not martyrs we need to make, but free and

respected  citizens.”  As  the  number  of   political  martyrs  grew,  so  too  would  the
number of  Algerian nationalists.
Camus again invoked this simple political calculus in the wake of  a bloody police
action  at  a  PPA  rally  in  mid-August.  He  could  not  decide  which  was  worse:  the
moral  baseness  of   the  action  or  its  political  stupidity.  Such  activities,  he  warned,
were as  “damaging for France’s prestige as they are for its future. If  there ever was a
true anti-French politics, it is revealed in these events.” Camus demanded the release
of   the  imprisoned  demonstrators,  declaring  with  a  lucidity  that  only  now  seems
commonplace,  “We  will  not  stamp  out  the  claims  of   the  indigenous  peoples  by
passing  over  them  in  silence,  but  by  examining  them  in  a  spirit  of   generosity  and
justice.  The  only  way  in  which  we  can   eradicate  Algerian  nationalism  is  by
58
suppressing the injustices from which it is born.”
The  following  month,  it  was  Alger-Républicain ’s  turn  to  be  hounded  by  the
government. Government censors were installed in the newspaper’s offices, assigned
the  task  of   guaranteeing  the  newspaper’s  patriotic  moxie:  as  the  governor  general
told  the  paper’s  shareholders,  “We’re  at  war,  que  diable !  I’m  counting  on  your
59
patriotism.”   Camus  lampooned  this  justification,  finding  it  as  dubious  when
applied  to  France’s  war  effort  as  to  its  civilizing  mission:  the  republic’s  well-being
could be served only by truth, not by lies and censorship.  “I am foolish enough to
believe,” he wrote after the government announced its first wave of  press laws, “that
in order to defend democracy, we must strengthen democratic practices. We can not
60
seek  peace  through  dictatorial  means.”   Camus  was  particularly  disturbed  by  the
vagueness of  the press laws: the fewer the details, the greater the encroachment on
freedom   of    speech.  These   laws,   he   declared,   “permit   everything,   authorize
61
everything, and threaten everybody.”
The  unequal  battle  between  Alger-Républicain   and  the  censors  entered  its
endgame  as  France’s  “phony  war”  with  Germany  stretched  into  winter.  Blank
patches pocked the pages, the fruit of  the censors’ rejection of  specific articles and
of  Camus’s refusal to fill them with patriotic boilerplate. And as the staff  withered
as a result of  the tightening budget and military call-ups, Cam us began to resemble
the  sole  defender  of   a  fort  who  runs  from  post  to  post  to  give  the  enemy  the
impression they are facing a great force. He signed some articles with pseudonyms,
published others anonymously, and reprinted passages from classical French writers,

daring  the  censors  to  find  fault  with  the  patriotism  of   Victor  Hugo  or  Pierre
Corneille.  Still  other  passages  he  refused  to  identify,  luring  the  censors  into  an
ambush. Camus once confronted his uniformed tormentors with an article they had
rejected:  “Messieurs,”  he  announced,  “it’s  by  Mo ntaigne. The  name  was  omitted.
62
Shall  we  really  strike  it  out?”  This  was  so  much  more  than  a  game  of   cat  and
mouse,  however.  Seizing  a  rare  opportunity  to  write  under  his  own  name,  Cam us
pinpointed  the  fundamental  values  at  stake:  “In  our  time  the  press  is  a  terrifying
weapon in the hands of  those who control it. It makes and unmakes public opinion,
it provokes, it restrains, and it exasperates. A well-known statesman once said that all
he needed to lead the country to war was to wage a six-week press cam paign. He was
63
absolutely right.”
On  New  Year’s  Day  1940,  Camus  began  his  editorial  by  noting  the  annual
tradition  of   wishing  others  the  very  best  in  the  future.  The  problem  with  this
tradition, he added, was that it  was  a tradition: “The fact that we renew these wishes
every  year  shows  that  they  are  perfectly  useless.”  And  yet,  Camus  offered  a  wish:
“We  must  not  forget.  If   it  is  true  that  forgetting  is  a  bit  like  consenting,  than  we
must not sleep. Let us remain vigilant and never turn our eyes away from this bitter
reality that overwhelms and crushes us. . . . But our sole greatness is in this struggle
against  forces  greater  than  us.  It  is  not  our  happiness  we  should  now  seek,  but
64
instead  this  sort  of   desperate  greatness.”   Little  more  than  a  week  later,  the
authorities shut down  Alger-Républicain.
° ° °
At  the  end  of   Playboy  of   the  Western  World,   a  young  man,  hesitant  and
uncertain,  with  an  uncertain  past  and  an  unpromising  background,  blossoms  into
self-confident maturity. At the end of  a physically taxing visit to Kab ylia, a twenty-
six-year old  pied noir,  with but a handful of  published essays to his credit and the
first steady job of  his life, as a journalist, blossomed into the confident observer and
writer  who,  with  a  few  colleagues,  refused  to  submit  to  government  pressure  when
not to do so bordered on treason.
But  confident  though  he  had  become,  Camus  remained  mal  dans  sa  peau —
uneasy  in  his  skin.  As  he  stood  inside  the  Kabylian  hovel  at  Adni,  Cam us  felt  the

same  shame  he  had  known  on  the  prison  ship:  “I  must  say  I  wasn’t  proud  of
myself.” The  journalist  was  so  uneasy  that  he  asked  the  woman  just  one  question:
Where did she and her children sleep? This kind of  moral discomfort, this unease
in the face of  suffering, this malaise that pushes you to silence, hindered as much as
it  helped  Camus.  He  wrote  quickly,  he  wrote  well,  but  he  would  have  preferred
writing on dogs flattened by cars in Algiers than on dogs fighting over bones with
children in Tizi-Ouzou.
But  his  life  as  a  journalist  helped  make  Camus  a  moralist.  A  moralist,  unlike  a
professional philosopher, is ill at ease in the world. He is a truth teller, one whose
truths make not only others feel uneasy but oneself  as well: “To be a moralist was to
lead  an  unquiet  life—which  is  precisely  what  distinguished  a  moralist  from  an
intellectual,   whose   public   anguish   over   affairs   of    ethics   or   state   normally
65
acco mpanied an easy and confident private conscience.”
Did  the  young  Camus  welcome  such  a  vocation? What  would  he  have  made  of
the other reason for the Dublin riots over  The Playboy of  the Western World  ? The
reference  to  Irishwomen  in  their  undergarments,  it  turns  out,  was  just  part  of   the
problem. The rioters were also Irish chauvinists who were outraged by Synge’s comic
depiction of  an Ireland inhabited by foul-mouthed and superstitious villagers who
give  a  hero’s  welcome  to  a  parricide.  Synge  hardly  knew  what  to  say  in  reply:  “I
66
wrote the play becau se it pleased me.”  In an increasingly nationalistic era, however,
Synge’s cau stic depiction of  Ireland, or his justification, just did not sit well.
Camus  would  have  sympathized,  torn  as  he  was  between  art  and  politics,  the
sensual  beauty  of   the  world  and  the  heart-sickening  misery  of   its  human
inhabitants. As he himself  noted,  “In everything I’ve done or said so far, I seem to
recognize these two forces, even when they contradict one another. I have not been
able to deny the light into which I was born and yet I have not wished to reject the
67
responsibilities of  our time.”  With these two imperatives balanced uneasily on his
shoulders, Camus left for Paris in 1939. The government had helped ensure that no
one in Algiers would hire him.

A   M O R A L I S T   O N   T H E   B A R R I C A D E S
Paris-Algiers. The airplane as one of the elements of modern
negation and abstraction. There is no more nature; the deep gorge,
true relief, the impassable mountain stream, everything disappears. There
remains a  diagram —a map. Man, in short, looks through the eyes
of God. And he perceives then that God can have but an
abstract view. This is not a good thing.
Liberated  six  months  earlier,  Paris  in  January  1945  was  still  burdened  by  the
same shortages that had existed when it was ruled by the Germans. Heating fuel was
scarce,  food  was  even  scarcer,  and  the  black  market  flourished. The  daily  Parisian
calorie  intake  hovered  at  one  thousand,  and  the  Provisional  Government  under
General  Charles  de  Gaulle  was  unable  to  retire  the  ration  cards  introduced  by  the
Vichy regime. A three hundred–gram loaf  of  bread perhaps tasted sweeter in a free
city  than  in  an  occu pied  one,  but  it  still  weighed  only  three  hundred  grams. That
winter,  the  New Yorker   journalist  Janet  Flanner  wrote  from  Paris,  “Nourished  by
liberation, warmed by the country’s return to active battle, France is still physically
1
living largely on vegetables and mostly without heat.”
One  of   the  few  things  the  straitened  and  shivering  cap ital  had  in  excess  that
winter  was  moral  righteousness. The  confidence  to  identify  right  and  wrong,  the
assurance to distinguish innocence from guilt, and the strength to reward and punish
was  not  just  the  grim  yield  of   war  against  a  foreign  enemy.  It  was  also  the  bitter

harvest  of   a  civil  war  waged  between  those  who  had  resisted  and  those  who  had
collaborated.  As  Camus  asked,  “Since  the  spirit  finally  understood  that  a  sword  is
needed  to  conquer  a  sword,  and  since  the  spirit  took  up  the  sword  and  attained
2
victory, who would ask it to forget?”  Camus had asked the question in the wake of
liberation. But less than half  a year passed before he began to question the rhetorical
flourish. The  problem  was  not  that  liberated  France  had  been  asked  to  forget  the
past. Instead, for Camus, the problem was what it had chosen to remember.
° ° °
After  its  shocking  military  victory  over  France  in  1940,  Germany  occu pied  the
northern,  mostly  urban  and  industrialized,  half   of   the  country,  establishing  its
headquarters  in  Paris.  France’s  southern  half,  largely  rural  and  agricultural,  was
placed  under  the  rule  of   the  new  French  regime  that  had  overthrown  the  defeated
and discredited Third Republic. Unable to return to Paris, France’s new rulers set up
shop  in  the  spa  town  of  Vichy,  whose  many  hotels  and  resorts  were  transformed
into government ministries, and whose name has ever since been associated with this
regime.
It   soon   becam e   clear   that   “Vichy”   was   shorthand   for   the   politics   of
collaboration. Rather than confining themselves to the essentials of  administration,
Vichy’s  leaders—most  notably  Philippe  Pétain  and  Pierre  Laval—w ere  determined
to  earn  a  prominent  place  in  Hitler’s  new  European  order.  As  Pétain  declared
shortly after meeting Hitler in October 1940, France had  “entered on the path of
collaboration.” The path was paved by reactionary intentions: Vichy’s ambition was
to  undo  the  egalitarian  and  enlightened  legacy  of   France’s  republican   past.  The
French Revolution’s trinity of  values—liberty, fraternity, equality—was replaced by
Vichy’s trilogy of  work, family, and fatherland. The republic was buried and its place
taken  by  an  authoritarian  state  dedicated  to  the  proposition  that  all  men  are  not
created equal: France would no longer welcome what one of  the regime’s heroes, the
writer  Charles  Maurras,  called  les  anti-Frances.   The  most  vulnerable  of   these
“foreign” bodies was French Jewry.
The German occu pation and Vichy’s collaborationist policies spurred the growth
of   the  Resistance,  a  term  of   convenience  for  a  complex  phenomenon  that
encompassed   a   dizzying   array   of    rebels   and   revolutionaries.   Ranging   from

Communists to progressive Catholics, trade unionists to priests, nationalist military
officers to Jewish acad emics, the Resistance was united by the desire to rid France of
its German occu piers and bring French collaborators to justice. They generally used
the  “weapons  of   the  weak”—spying  and  sabotage—and  published  underground
newspapers, tracts, poems, and novels that nurtured the spirit of  resistance.
These  otherwise  diverse  and  contradictory  resistance  movements  were  united  as
much  in  their  distaste  for Vichy’s  agenda  as  in  their  belief   that  France’s  liberation
was just the first step. Of  course, France had to rid itself  of  the German occu piers,
but  also  of   the  tainted  and  unsavory  politics  practiced  before  the  war. The  young
men  and  women  of   the  Resistance  did  not  risk  their  lives  to  resurrect  the Third
Republic. Instead, they demanded politics in a new key, cleansed of  the political and
ideological  compromises  practiced  by  their  fathers,  freed  of   their  era’s  glaring
economic  and  social  disparities.  Rebellion  against  Germany  was  the  necessary
prelude to a revolution against France’s own recent history, a revolution based on a
humanistic and universalist conception of  man. Me re  politique  was shunned; there
now was an overwhelming desire to live a certain kind of   mystique.
This  sentiment  was  broadcast  in  the  first  issue  of   the  Resistance  newspaper
Combat   to  be  published  openly,  on  August  21,  1944. That  day,  Paris,  no  longer
occu pied,  was  still  not  yet  free.  The  streets  echoed  with  the  clatter  of   gunfire
exchanged between German soldiers and French resistance fighters, ending an uneasy
truce  concluded  between  the  two  sides  the  day  before. Yet  paperboys  ran  past  the
barricad es  and  the  shuttered  storefronts,  carrying  copies  of   Combat   emblazoned
with its motto, “From Resistance to Revolution.” The readers were told to brace for
an even more difficult struggle in the coming months—one fought not against the
Germans  but  among  themselves.  “The  liberation  of   Paris  is  only  one  step  toward
the  liberation  of   France,  and  here  the  word  LIBERATION  must  be  taken  in  its
broadest sense. . . . It will not be enough to return to the mere appearance of  liberty
with  which  the  France  of   1939  had  to  be  content.  .  .  . The  Allies  have  made  our
3
liberation  possible.  But  our  freedom  is  our  own;  it  is  we  who  must  shape  it.”
Though  the  editorial  was  unsigned,  its  author  was  the  newspaper’s  thirty-year  old
editor, Albert Camus.
° ° °

War-scarred  Paris  was  far  removed  from  Le  Panelier,  a  farm  in  the Vivarais,  a
mountainous region of  southeastern France. The soil was rocky and unforgiving, the
villages far-flung and isolated, the inhabitants closed and stern. It was to Le Panelier
that Camus and his wife, Francine, moved in early 1942. They had pressing reasons
to do so: Camus had been stricken with a brutal recurrence of  tuberculosis; the dry
mountain  air,  doctors  counseled,  was  vastly  preferable  to  Algeria’s  humidity  and
heat.  In  the  midst  of   occu pation  and  war,  such  voyages  required  a  good  deal  of
paperwork; it was only in August that they were able to board a steamer to France.
During his first few months in Le Panelier, Cam us appreciated the severe beauty of
the  region;  he  compared  the  sweep  of   fir  trees  cascad ing  along  the  mountainous
slopes  to  a  “barbarian  army”  that,  he  hoped,  would  “drive  out  the  fragile  army  of
4
nocturnal  thoughts.”  The  land,  seamed  by  deep  valleys  strewn  with  boulders  and
dotted  with  hamlets  built  by  lean  and  laco nic  villagers,  resembled  the  region  of
Kabylia on which Camus had reported just a few years before.
But it was difficult to keep dark thoughts at bay in October. Just as the weather
was  turning  wet  and  cold,  Francine  returned  to  Oran  and  her  teaching  position.
Alone  and  weak,  Camus  noted  how  the  pinecones  in  his  fireplace  seemed  like
“infernal diamonds” with the  “wind moaning about the house.” From the window
of   the  train  he  rode  to  the  nearby  city  Saint-Etienne,  where  he  went  for  lung
treatment, Camus watched the peasants walking “bent forward, against the wind and
rain.”  But  far  better  these  sights  than  what  he  found  in  Saint-Etienne,  a  grim
industrial town that filled Camus with disgust and despair. As the train pulled into
the station one morning, Camus glimpsed the “jumble of  towers, buildings, and tall
chimneys  belching  toward  a  darkened  sky  their  deposit  of   cinders”:  the  billowing
5
cloud of  ashes, he thought, looked “like a monstrous artificial cak e.”
Worse  was  to  come,  however.  On  November  11,  1942,  the  Germans  replied  to
the  Allied  landings  in  North  Africa  by  crossing  the  Demarcation  Line,  which
divided the Free and Occu pied Zones established in 1940, and laying claim to the
rest of  France. That same day, Camus jotted in his notebook:  “Caught like rats!” A
wall  had  unexpectedly  been  thrown  up  between  Camus  and  Algeria:  he  could  no
longer  return  to  his  family,  friends,  and  familiar  landscap es.  At  the  same  time,  the
turn   of    events—his   sudden   and   unexpected   exile   to   an   obscure   village—
concentrated  his  mind. The  author  of   the  recently  published  novel  The  Stranger

now  becam e  his  own  most  severe  critic  and  revisited  his  first  novel’s  portrayal  of
man’s “absurd” lot.
Gallimard, the most prestigious publisher in Paris,, had brought out the book in
1942. On reading Camus’s manuscript, André Mal raux had immediately sent it to
Jean Paulhan, the éminence grise at Gallimard. At the next editorial board meeting,
Paulhan read aloud the novel’s first lines—“Mama died today. Or yesterday maybe, I
don’t know. I got a telegram from the home: ‘Mo ther deceased. Funeral tomorrow.
Faithfully yours.’ That doesn’t mean anything. Maybe it was yesterday.” Putting down
the  manuscript,  he  then  looked  at  his  fellow  editors:  “Recommendation  one,
naturally.”  Acco rding  to  the  house  code,  this  meant  that  the  book  ought  to  be
6
published.  The  gathered  writers  agreed  that  they  had  just  been  introduced  to  a
stunning new voice in French literature.
Camus  had  worked  on  what  he  called  “the  three  absurds”— The  Stranger, The
Myth  of   Sisyphus,   and  Caligula —during  his  years  with  Alger-Républicain,   the
Théâtre  du Travail,  and  the Théâtre  de  l’Equipe. The  austerity  of   the  language  in
these  works  cam e,  in  part,  from  the  discipline  he  had  learned  as  a  director  and
reporter.  Soon  after  joining  Alger-Républicain,   Camus  wrote  in  his  notebooks:
7
“The  true  work  of   art  is  one  which  says  least.”   (Not  surprisingly,  a  draft  of   the
opening paragraph of   The Stranger  appears a few entries later.) The spare prose of
his dispatches from Kabylia echoed the telegraphic language—w hat Roland Barthes
famously described as the “zero degree of  writing”—o f   The Stranger.  Many critics
discern  in  Camus’s  later  work  a  shift  away  from  the  ethical  perspective  of   The
Stranger  to a new focus Camus acq uired during the war. They argue that from the
place  of   individual  revolt  against  an  absurd  world  staked  out  by  The  Stranger,   he
moves to the high moral ground of  collective resistance in  The Plagu e.  But the high
ground  was  already  reached  in  the  earlier  novel.  The  Stranger   is,  indeed,  a  strange
book—stranger than usually thought, for reasons rarely discussed.
° ° °
He came, he saw, he shot an Arab: this not only describes the pivotal moment of
The Stranger,  it serves as an epitaph for its protagonist, Patrice Meursault. He is a
young man who grows up poor, raised by a mother with whom he shares few words

and  fewer  expectations,  and  over  whom  he  does  not  shed  a  tear  when  she  dies.
Unburdened  by  memories,  Meursault  is  also  untroubled  by  hopes  for  the  future.
Though  he  is  bright,  Meursault’s  straitened  financial  situation  forces  him  to  quit
school. He works at an Algiers shipping company; when he is not shuffling papers,
he  escap es  to  the  sea,  seduces  the  occas ional  woman,  sits  on  his  balcony  and,
savoring  a  cigarette,  gazes  out  at  an  utterly  indifferent  world.  But  for  the  grace  of
Louis Germain went Camus perhaps, in the guise of  Meursault.
Meursault’s  lot  is  not  unique:  many  others  have  lived  equally  drab  lives;  many
more have known far worse. What makes Me ursault’s life different is his refusal or
inability to hew it into a meaningful narrative. The traditional, comforting formulas
we impose on our life stories are absent here. Instead, Meursault’s life is one damn
thing after another. There is no logic, no hierarchy of  importance, and no effort at
synthesis. Like the clatter rising from the street below Meursault’s terrace, it signifies
nothing. When Meursault’s boss offers him a promotion and the chance to move to
Paris,  Meursault  turns  him  down:  “I  couldn’t  see  any  reason  to  change  my  life.
8
Looking back on it, I wasn’t unhappy.”  The problem for the rest of  us, if  not for
Meursault, is that he isn’t happy either—h e simply is.
One day, Meursault goes to the beach with a woman he has recently met, Mar ie,
and  a  shady  individual,  Raymond,  who  had  recently  befriended  him.  A  pair  of
Arabs acc osts the men, keen on avenging Raymond’s rough treatment of  one of  the
men’s sisters. A scuffle ensues near a cluster of  rocks on the beach; one of  the Arabs
draws a knife, slightly wounding Raymond. The two groups separate; the bloodshed
should  have  gone  no  further.  Shortly  thereafter,  however,  Me ursault  returns  to  the
same  spot,  where  he  finds  the  Arab  who  had  knifed  Raymond.  Blinded  by  the
merciless  light,  pounded  by  the  intense  heat,  his  entire  body  coils—as  does  his
finger on the trigger of  a gun Raymond had given him to hold. “The trigger gave; I
felt the smooth underside of  the butt; and there, in that noise, sharp and deafening
9
at the same time, is where it all started.”
“It” for Meursault is what was, is, and will be for most of  us: life measured by an
artificial  conception  of   time.  From  a  kind  of   timeless  existence—h e  is  uncertain
about  the  date  of   his  mother’s  death,  as  he  is  about  her  age  when  she  died—an
inexorable  and  steady  justice  overtakes  Me ursault’s  life.  Until  the  moment  he  pulls
the trigger, Meursault is as indifferent to the future as he is to the past. He does not

puzzle over his life—events, indeed, are not pieces to a puzzle, for there is no puzzle
to piece together. Instead,  “life” is a word for the waves of  physical sensations that
wash  over  him  as  constantly  as  the  sunlight  and  sea.  Shortly  before  the  murder,
Meursault  stops  “paying  attention”  to  one  of   his  companions  becau se  he  is
10
“absorbed by the feeling that the sun was doing me a lot of  good.”  This describes
the  particular  moment  but  also  his  life  until  then.  In  a  number  of   important
respects,  Meursault  becomes  for  our  century  what  Jean-Jacq ues  Rousseau’s  “noble
savage”  was  for  the  eighteenth  century:  man  before  the  advent  of   society.  Like
Rousseau’s savage, Meursault also becomes the yardstick by which that same society
can  be measured and inevitably found wanting.
Once arrested, Meursault realizes he is not on trial for what he has done—k illed
the  Arab—but  for  what  he  is:  someone  who  rejects  society’s  norms  and  language.
His lawyer, as Meursault sees it, “didn’t understand me, and he was sort of  holding
11
it  against  me.”  The  presiding  judge  is  equally  perplexed:  Meursault’s  inability  to
answer the judge’s questions and to believe in God makes his inquisitor shout:  “Do
12
you want my life to be meaningless?”  Incap able of  following the script that shapes
their world, Meursault turns into a pariah. This status is reinforced when the jurors
learn that Meursault did not cry at his mother’s funeral, that he smoked a cigarette
and drank coffee while he kept vigil over her body, and that back home in Algiers he
took  a  date  to  the  cinema  before  the  dirt  on  his  mother’s  coffin  had  settled.
Through his bare and steely prose, Cam us’s profile of  the  “stranger” grows darker
and more menacing.
Critics  have  long  accu sed  Camus  of   dehumanizing  the  Arab  population  in  his
novel, giving them neither distinct personalities, individual names, nor, indeed, any
recognizably human traits. Instead, they are little more than features of  the Algerian
landscap e, as inscrutable and harsh as the summer sky or desert. As Conor Cruise
O’Brien puts it, “the reader does not quite feel that Meursault has killed a man. He
13
has  killed  an  Arab.”   But  is  it  so  simple?  Is  it  instead  possible  that  Me ursault
himself   has  been  turned  into  an  “Arab”—namely,  a  character  deprived  of   his
humanity? As David Carroll suggests, Me ursault is gradually stripped of  everything
14
that  identifies  him  as  an  individual  human  being.   Looked  on  with  growing
incomprehension  by  the  state  and  its  institutions,  Meursault  drifts  further  away

from  our  world,  from  the  shores  of   familiarity. When  the  judge  addresses  him  as
“Monsieur  Antichrist,”  it  is  hardly  a  joke:  Meursault  has  been  expelled  from  the
human race. He has, in fact, become the Other.
° ° °
Driven by the desire to cleanse France of  its dubious elements, Vichy quickly set
about  the  task  of   identifying  and  isolating  “others.”  It  pursued  many  real  and
imagined  enemies,  most  notably  Communists,  Socialists,  Freemasons,  even  the
zazous,   young  men  and  women  who  wore  zoot  suits  and  danced  to  jazz.  But  the
label was most infamously applied to French Jewry: beginning in October 1940, the
regime, which had scarcely finished occu pying the hotel rooms in Vichy, announced
a series of  laws that revoked the legal and civil rights of  citizens who happened to
have at least three Jewish grandparents. Two years later, in the summer of  1942, the
regime  launched  the  first  of   many  roundups  of   French  and  refugee  Jews;  in  Paris,
gendarmes  herded  more  than  twelve  thousand  men,  women,  and  children  into  a
sports stadium. Nearly all of  them were eventually deported to Auschwitz. By 1944,
the French police had arrested and deported there more than seventy-five thousand
Jews,  refugees  and  citizens  alike.  By  war’s  end,  fewer  than  two  thousand  were  still
alive.
Unlike  most  French  citizens  in  1940,  Cam us  had  few  illusions  about  Pétain’s
character or the nature of  the regime. Far from a shield to protect the nation and all
of   its  citizens,  it  represented  abject  surrender  to  the  occu pier’s  demands.  In  July
1940,  he  wrote  to  Francine  from  France  that  Pétain  offered  only  “cowardice  and
senility”  to  the  defeated  nation.  As  for  the  regime  over  which  the  elderly  marshal
reigned,  Camus  saw  “pro-German  policies,  a  totalitarian-like  constitution,  an
overwhelming fear of  an impossible revolution: all of  this to soothe an enemy who
will  crush  us  nevertheless  and  to  save  privileges  which  will  not  be  threatened.  .  .  .
15
Terrible  days  are  in  store  for  us.”  Vichy’s  anti-Semitism  reinforced  Cam us’s  grim
forecast.  After  the  publication  in  October  1940  of   the  first  anti-Semitic  statute,
Camus wrote to a Jewish friend, Irène Djian:  “All of  this is particularly unjust and
despicab le  .  .  .  but  you  need  to  know  that  those  untouched  by  the  law  are  not

indifferent. I vow to hold fast to everything we hold in common. I will never tire of
16
saying this as long as it remains necessary.”
Is it possible that Camus made use of  Me ursault to say  “this” earlier than most
others in France? Meursault’s transformation into the “Other” mirrors in unsettling
ways  the  transformation  of   the  French  Jewish  community  under Vichy. With  the
Nazi occu pation of  the southern zone, any remaining pretense of  independence for
the Vichy regime was demolished, along with what little protection still remained for
French  Jewry.  In  the  case  of   refugees,  their  lot  grew  even  bleaker  than  before;  the
citizenship  of   those  whom  France  had  naturalized  was  revoked;  as  for  those  born
French, their status meant little to regimes intent on cleansing the world of  Jewry.
Ultimately, their crime was to have been born Jews rather than non-Jews. The same
logic, it has been suggested, drives Meursault’s trial. Indeed, unlike French Jewry, he
is guilty of  a terrible crime: he has killed a man. But as the reader soon understands,
Meursault is tried and found guilty not of  this particular crime but instead of  the
“crime” of  not being French. In fact, the prosecution insists that Me ursault is  “not
even  human—not  in  legal  terms,  but  more  importantly,  in  moral,  religious  and
metaphysical  terms.”  Perhaps  as  horrifying  as  Me ursault’s  crime  is  the  state’s
17
reaction: “He is judged not for what he did, but for what he is.”
Camus’s deepening horror at Vichy’s efforts to wrench Jews from society parallels
the  reader’s  growing  realization  that  Meursault  has  also  been  expelled  from  our
world.  Underscoring  his  personal  and  moral  stake  in  both  contexts,  Cam us
introduces a journalist, nameless like the murdered Arab, into  The Stranger.  On the
first day of  the trial, Meursault notices him. This particular reporter is younger than
his colleagues and, unlike them, looks intently at Me ursault.  “All I could see in his
slightly lopsided face were his two very bright eyes, which were examining me closely
without  betraying  any  definable  emotion.  And  I  had  the  odd  impression  of   being
18
watched by myself.”  When the court sentences Meursault to death, the journalist
again appears: this time he turns away, unable to look at Meursault. The shame we
feel  at  a  fellow  human  being’s  undoing,  reflected  in  the  reporter’s  averted  gaze,
matches  what  the  young  pied  noir   reporter  had  felt  on  the  prison  ship  docked  at
Algiers a few years before.
But  in  1942,  averting  one’s  gaze  or  simply  “watching  oneself ”  was  no  longer
appropriate.  Instead,  attending  to  others   was  now  called  for.  Camus’s  notebooks

reveal  that  he  grew  increasingly  dissatisfied  with  the  austere  conception  of   the
absurd expressed in  The Stranger.  In the silence of  Le Panelier, he reminded himself
that  to  revise  or  reject  what  one  had  previously  believed  was  not  a  weakness.  For
example, he asked himself, what should we make of  the philosopher who announces,
“Up to now I was going in the wrong direction. I am going to begin all over”? The
public  would  ridicule  him,  of   course:  but  what  of   it?  Especially  when,  as  Cam us
insists,  the  philosopher  would  thus  be  “giving  proof   that  he  is  worthy  of
19
thought.”   A  different  order  of   understanding  and  ethics  was  necessary,  one  that
encompassed  others  rather  than  isolating  the  individual  subject.  Society,  not  the
individual,  was  now  the  measure  of   meaning.  As  Camus  scribbled,  the  absurd
20
“ teaches  nothing.”  How are we to act—what are we to do—i n a world shorn of
God  or  meaning? The  answer,  Camus  concluded,  lay  in  the  solidarity  of   human
beings.
Remarkably,  Camus  cam e  to  this  answer  at  the  very  moment  when  the
inhabitants of  Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, a Protestant village a few kilometers from
Le Panelier, were acting on the same insight. The villagers of  Le Chambon created a
refuge  for  Jews,  in  particular  children,  fleeing  the  gestapo  as  well  as  the  Vichy
paramilitary forces. By the end of  the war, these few hundred Huguenots had saved
the lives of  several thousand men, women, and children, most of  whom had already
21
lost their parents at Auschwitz.  Was Camus aware of  these activities? Perhaps. On
the one hand, he left no record of  such knowledge in his notebooks or in acco unts
to  friends  and  colleagues;  on  the  other  hand,  this  was  precisely  the  sort  of
knowledge one would deliberately keep from friends and out of  notebooks.
Nevertheless,  the  simultaneity  of   Camus’s  discovery  and  the  activity  in  Le
Chambon is striking. The  pied noir  novelist and the farmers of  the Cévennes found
common ground in their insistence on the dignity of  each and every human being.
As  André Trocmé,  the  village  minister,  told  the  police  officer  who  demanded  to
know  the  whereabouts  of   the  refugee  Jews:  “We  do  not  know  what  a  Jew  is. We
22
know  only  men.”   In  “Summer  in  Algiers,”  an  essay  published  on  the  eve  of   the
war,  Camus  declared:  “I  am  learning  that  there  is  no  superhuman  happiness,  no
eternity  outside  the  curve  of   the  days. These  ridiculous  and  essential  assets,  these
23
relative  truths  are  the  only  ones  that  move  me.”   Even  closer  to Trocmé’s  blunt

assertion  is  the  observation  Camus  made  in  his  notebook  during  the  same  period:
“The  misery  and  greatness  of   this  world:  it  offers  no  truths,  but  only  objects  for
24
love. Absurdity is king, but love saves us from it.”
° ° °
The  question  now  becam e  how  best  to  serve  this  love. The  answer  for  Cam us
arrived  in  1943  when  Pascal  Pia,  the  former  editor  in  chief   of   Alger-Républicain,
who  had  assumed  the  same  function  at  Combat,   invited  Camus  to  join  the  paper.
Working  at  first  from  nearby  Lyons,  then  soon  after  in  Paris,  where  he  moved
toward the end of  1943, Camus helped lay out the pages for the paper, while also
editing  and  writing.  In  early  June  1944,  when  Pia  left  the  paper  to  take  on  new
responsibilities in the Resistance, Camus replaced him. By then, more than 300,000
copies  of   a  single  issue  were  being  printed,  reaching  a  far  greater  audience  than
Alger-Républicain  ever did.
When  France  was  liberated,  Combat   was  widely  seen  as  the  voice  of   the
Resistance. Yet  that  voice  grew  hesitant  during  the  confused  and  complex  period
called  the  épuration,   or  purge.  Four  years  of   increasingly  brutal  occu pation  had
sowed  the  seeds  for  revenge.  But  the  nature  of   the  harvest  remained  unclear.  In
1944,  the  various  resistance  movements,  brought  together  as  the  Conseil  National
de la Résistance (CNR), had vowed punishment for all those who collaborated with
the  Germans.  But  the  CNR—an  uneasy  coalition  of   fractious  and  mutually
suspicious movements—failed to spell out the details.
The  devil,  it  now  becam e  clear,  was  in  those  details.  Had  the  Provisional
Government  under  Charles  de  Gaulle  applied  the  criteria  for  collaboration  in  a
consistent  manner,  France’s  industrial,  financial,  legal,  and  administrative  ranks
would  have  been  decimated.  This  policy  would  not  only  have  undermined  the
nation’s  economic  recovery  but  would  also  have  contradicted  the  Gaullist  myth  of
France as a nation of  resisters. As a result, most professions were largely untouched
by the official purge. Ultimately, the courts convicted and imprisoned about 32,000
individuals,  most  of   whom  were  freed  by  the  early  1950s.  Another  7,000  were
sentenced  to  death  for  treason  or  collaboration,  but  in  most  cases  their  sentences
were commuted.

Those who reaped the nation’s collective wrath were the most vulnerable, like the
women accu sed of  “horizontal collaboration”—sleeping with the enemy. They were
subject  to  the  humiliation  of   having  their  heads  shaved,  then  were  frequently
marched  naked  or  with  a  swastika  sewn  on  their  clothes  through  a  city’s  central
square. Then  there  were  the  collaborationist  artists,  writers,  and  journalists. These
men were targeted for many reasons. First, there was their peculiar place in French
history: as far back as Voltaire, the intellectual had widely been seen as the nation’s
conscience  and  the  defender  of   justice.  Second,  unlike  the  work  of   bankers  or
bureaucrats,  the  intellectual’s  activities  were  necessarily  public  and  the  paper  trail
clear  and  indisputable.  But  the  purge  of   intellectuals  was  most  severe  becau se
intellectuals themselves supported it:  “If  collaborating intellectuals were important
persons who deserved to be judged for their words, then intellectual resisters could
make  the  same  claim,  both  for  their  role  in  the  war  years  and  for  their  place  in
25
postwar society.”
Camus had no doubt about the political and moral tasks the intellectual—m ore
specifically, the journalist—was expected to assume. Just weeks before the liberation
of   Paris,  he  aimed  a  cutting  riposte  at  Mar cel  Déat.  A  collaborationist  politician
and  journalist,  Déat  had  declared  that  under Vichy  the  métier  of   journalism  had
finally  become  respectable.  Indeed  it  had,  Cam us  replied,  thanks  to  the  journalists
who  risked  their  lives  with  the  underground  papers:  it  was  the  independence  and
26
dangers  of   the  clandestine  life  that  made  journalism  honorable.   Under Vichy,  he
declared  in  another  issue,  he  and  his  peers  “wrote  articles  knowing  that  their  only
remuneration  could  well  be  prison  or  death.  Such  men  know  the  value  of   words;
27
they know that words must be chosen carefully.”
To  be  sure,  while  Camus  escap ed  arrest,  several  others  on  the  staff   of   Combat
were not as fortunate. His colleague Jacq ueline Bernard was arrested and deported
to Ravensbruck, but returned alive to France. Less fortunate was the paper’s printer
in  Lyons,  André  Bollier,  who  committed  suicide  soon  after  his  arrest  by  the
Germans.   One   of   Combat’s    founders,   Claude   Bourdet,   survived   several
concentration cam ps, while journalist and poet René Leynaud, who served as leader
of   one  of   Combat ’s  regional  intelligence  networks,  was  cap tured  and  executed  by
28
the Germans in May 1944.

The impact of  Leynaud’s death on Camus was particularly great: the two young
men  had  often  met  in  Lyons  or  Saint-Etienne,  discussing  the  thought  of   Mar tin
Buber one moment, the sport of  boxing the next, as they strolled from one sad and
29
deserted  café  to  the  next.   Leynaud,  a  devout  Catholic,  also  helped  Cam us  work
through  the  ethical  complexities  of   resistance.  Cam us  struggled  with  these  same
issues  in  one  of   his  major  contributions  to  the  intellectual  resistance,  a  series  of
letters, three of  which were published clandestinely between 1943 and mid-1944. A
fourth  letter  was  added  to  the  collection,  published  after  the  liberation  and  titled
Letters to a German Friend.
Dedicated  to  the  memory  of   Leynaud,  Cam us’s  “letters”  were  addressed  to  an
imaginary  German  friend,  with  whom  Camus  shares  a  Nietzschean  outlook  and
nihilist predilections. Given this common starting point, Camus wonders, how can
he  justify  the  resistance  activities  for  which  Leynaud  had  given  his  life?  Can   one
establish  a  moral  case  for  resistance  if,  as  Nietzscheans,  they  both  believed
transcendental meaning to be a dodge and religion a hoax?
Yes,  Camus  concluded.  It  required  time  and  thought—indeed,  it  required  the
“detour”  of   war  and  occu pation—but  Cam us  was  now  certain  that  justice  was  on
his  side. The  absence  of   meaning  is  not  a  call  to  despair  or  an  invitation  to  leap
joyfully into the abyss. Instead, the world’s stubborn silence leads us to acknowledge
our common predicam ent and spurs us to rebel against it. In response to both the
German nihilist and the Christian believer, Camus still refuses a  “greater meaning”
to the world. But, he continues, something  in  the world does have meaning: namely,
man. We  alone,  Camus  observes,  “demand  that  meaning  exist.”  Our  dignity  and
everyday  nobility  reside  precisely  in  that  insistence.  Rather  than  “mutilating”  man,
as the Nazis did, we must safeguard the ideal of  justice that man alone is cap able of
30
conceiving.
In a way, everything and nothing changed between Meursault’s imprisonment and
that of  France. The same pitiless heavens, the same relentless sun span the short and
absurd human lives unfolding in both places. As Cam us confesses in his last letter,
“I  know  that  the  sky,  which  was  indifferent  to  your  appalling  victories,  will  be
equally indifferent to your just defeat. I expect nothing from it, even today.” What
has changed, however, is the nature of  our response. Rather than act alone, we must

act in the company of  others. As Camus concludes, the Resistance “will have at least
31
helped save man from the solitude you sought to send him.”
As  philosophy,  Letters  to  a  German  Friend   falls  short.  The  pieces  contain  a
number of  dubious or inconsistent claims—Cam us’s insistence on the necessity of
the  experience  of   the  Occu pation  to  guarantee  the  purity  of   the  Resistance,  for
example,  is  historically  and  logically  nonsensical.  The  Resistance  was  guilty  of
morally  questionable  actions—actions  occluded  or  overlooked  in  the  years  after
liberation. Also, if  resisters acted justly only after the  “detour” of  the Occu pation
what  must  we  conclude  about  the  prescient  and  brave  few  who  resisted  from  the
very start? Were they hasty or misguided?
But the reader should not judge the  Letters  in such narrow terms. Rather than a
philosophical  essay,  it  is  an  essay  in  a  broader  and  different  sense:  a  testing  and
questioning of  propositions that Camus had once held to be true. As with so much
else in his intellectual career, Camus carried out this self-questioning in public. And
he did so at a time when  “hesitation”—the activity that he casts in heroic terms—
was a rare and threatened commodity. This becam e brutally clear during the postwar
trial of  Robert Brasillach.
° ° °
In  Paris  on  the  night  of   January  25,  1945,  sleep  did  not  come  easily  to  either
Camus  or  Brasillach.  Notorious  for  his  defense  of   fascism  before  and  during  the
war,  Brasillach  had  just  weeks  before  been  sentenced  to  death  for  the  crime  of
treason. In his fiction as well as in editorials for the anti-Semitic newspaper  Je Suis
Partout,  Brasillach praised the Nazis and the Italian Fascists as models for a French
national revival. After France’s defeat in 1940, he becam e the occu pied nation’s most
eloquent  voice  on  behalf   of   collaboration  with  Germany.  He  also  becam e  one  of
the most feared voices for those groups—r epublican s, Communists, Socialists, and
especially French Jews—threatened by that same policy of  collaboration. Acco rding
to  Brasillach’s  taxonomy  of   national  enemies,  Communists  and  Jews  ranked  at  the
very top. In 1941, his column in  Je Suis Partout  asked: “What are we waiting for to
shoot the Communist leaders already imprisoned? . . . Against those who want the
32
death of  peace and the death of  France, EVERYTHING is legitimate.”

Brasillach also aimed this horrifying imperative at French Jewry: just months after
the July 1942 roundup, Brasillach wrote that a purified France must  “separate from
the Jews en bloc and not keep any little ones.” As a peculiar sign of  independence,
he  insisted  on  a  specifically  French  form  of   fascism—“ in  the  same  way  that
Falangism  is  Spanish  and  Fascism  is  Italian”—yet,  toward  the  end  of   the  war,  he
reminisced about the Occu pation: “It seems to me that I’ve contracted a liaison with
German genius, one that I will never forget. Whether we like it or not, we will have
lived together. Frenchmen given to reflection, during these years, will have more or
less slept with Germany—not without quarrels—and the memory of  it will remain
33
sweet for them.”  Inconsistent, perhaps; appalling, certainly.
On  January  25,  Camus  received  a  letter  from  Mar cel  Aymé.  A  writer  of   great
talent  and  unpredictable  political  sympathies,  Aymé  had  contributed  articles  to  Je
Suis  Partout   during  the  Occu pation.  But  they  were  literary,  not  political—an d  it
was  precisely  on  literary  grounds  that  Aymé  felt  Brasillach  should  be  saved. The
former editor of   Je Suis Partout  was too great a literary talent to be executed for his
unfortunate  flirtation  with  fascism.  In  his  letter,  Aymé  asked  Cam us  to  sign  a
petition  addressed  to  Charles  de  Gaulle,  the  head  of   the  Provisional  Government,
requesting the commutation of  Brasillach’s sentence.
Aymé  was  not  alone. Weeks  before,  François  Mauriac  had  already  spoken  on
Brasillach’s behalf. In a letter read in court, Mau riac declared that the accu sed writer
had created a literary oeuvre that we “can  certainly dislike, but which commands our
attention.” It would be  “a loss for French letters if  this brilliant mind were forever
34
extinguished.”   Mauriac’s  testimony  was  powerful  for  a  number  of   reasons.  Not
only  was  he  one  of   France’s  greatest  living  authors—a  status  underscored  by  his
membership in the Acad émie Française—but he had also been a founding member
in  1941  of   the  Comité  National  des  Ecrivains  (CN E),  a  group  of   writers
committed  to  the  Resistance. Two  years  later,  the  underground  publishing  house
Editions  de  Minuit  published  Mauriac’s  Le  Cahier  Noir,   a  journal  in  which  the
novelist, under the pseudonym of  Forez, denounced Vichy’s policy of  collaboration.
Justice  in  France  would  be  reestablished,  he  wrote  in  a  typical  passage,  once  the
country “breaks away from [fascism’s] embrace, tears its hands away from her throat
35
and its knee from her chest.”

Mauriac’s  resistance  writings  required  great  courage:  other  writers  had  been
arrested or killed for expressing similar sentiments. Police rifled through Mau riac’s
apartment, while a gang of  fascist thugs threatened Mau riac on a Paris street.  Je Suis
Partout,   and  Brasillach  in  particular,  added  to  the  atmosphere  heavy  with  menace.
Time and again in the pages of  his newspaper, Brasillach derided the older writer’s
bourgeois  aesthetic  and  Catholic  faith—cr iticism  easier  to  ignore  than  the  young
critic’s  taunts  that  Mauriac  was  an  antifascist  and  a  leader  of   the  “Acad emy  of
Dissidence.”
Just  days  passed  between  the  liberation  of   Paris  and  Mauriac’s  warnings  against
the excesses of  the Resistance. Repelled by the explosions of  vengeance in the courts
and  in  the  streets,  Mauriac  feared  that  the  newly  reborn  republic  would  prove  no
better than Vichy:  “We aspire to be something better than a nation trading off  the
roles  of   executioner  and  victim.  At  no  price  must  the  Fourth  Republic  wear  the
36
Gestapo’s boots.”  The frail novelist held so stubbornly to his call for cau tion and
clemency that he was soon given the moniker  “Saint François des Assises,” a witty
play on the birthplace of  the Christian saint Francis of  Assisi and on the term for
the French criminal courts,  les assises.
Scornful  of   Mauriac’s  Catholic  and  bourgeois  values,  the  great  majority  of
résistants  dismissed his calls for mercy. Mauriac was equally skeptical of  his critics,
especially the Communists, with whom he was in an uneasy alliance. Yet Mau riac’s
doubts did not at first extend to Camus. The young French Algerian’s editorials had
won  Mauriac’s  respect  in  the  days  following  the  city’s  liberation. Yet  by  autumn,
Mauriac’s  admiration  had  soured:  he  found  Camus  to  be  no  less  unbending  than
others in his calls for rapid and rigorous justice. However, Mauriac should not have
been  surprised.  In  March,  de  Gaulle  had  refused  to  pardon  Pierre  Pucheu,  who  as
minister  of   interior  under  Vichy  had  been  responsible  for  selecting  Communist
prisoners  to  be  held  as  hostages,  then  executed  by  the  Nazis.  In  an  essay  in  the
underground journal  Les Lettres françaises —to which Mauriac was a contributor—
Camus  agreed  that  Pucheu  had  to  die.  “Too  many  men  have  died  whom  we  loved
and  respected,”  he  declared,  “too  many  splendors  betrayed,  too  many  values
humiliated . . . even for those of  us in the midst of  this battle who would otherwise
37
be tempted to pardon him.”

This  marked  a  dramatic  reversal  on  Cam us’s  part.  He  had  long  been  a  fervent
opponent  of   the  death  penalty. Though  he  cited  legal,  moral,  and  philosophical
reasons  for  his  opposition,  Camus’s  hatred  of   cap ital  punishment  was  first  and
foremost visceral. In  The Stranger,  he introduced for the first time one of  the few
stories his mother had ever told him about his father. Lucien Camus rose early one
morning  to  attend  the  public  execution  of   a  man  who  had  murdered  an  entire
family. The  reason  was  simple:  the  elder  Cam us  thought  it  his  duty  to  witness  the
event. When he returned to the house, he said nothing. Instead, he went to bed and
vomited. In  The Stranger,  Meursault remembers “feeling a little disgusted by him at
the  time.  But  now  I  understood,  it  was  perfectly  normal.” What  “it”  is  remains
vague: Was  the  son  disgusted  by  the  fact  that  his  father  went  to  see  the  execution?
Or was he disgusted by his father’s gut response to his experience? It is impossible to
say.  Still,  it  is  clear  that  Meursault  now  understood  something  he  had  previously
failed to grasp: “How had I not seen that there was nothing more important than an
execution,  and  that  when  you  come  right  down  to  it,  it  was  the  only  thing  a  man
38
could truly be interested in?”  Under the blazing sun of  liberated France, Camus
was  not  unlike  Meursault  standing  on  the  beach  in  Algiers.  Pushed  by  the
overwhelming  pressures  of   justice,  Cam us  condemned  a  man  to  death.  It  was  a
decision that clashed with all the values he had once held and a decision he would
soon regret.
Camus’s unusual reasoning reflects his moral uneasiness. Pucheu’s greatest crime,
the young editorialist argues, was neither his treason nor the deaths for which he was
responsible; instead, it was his “lack of  imagination”—by which Camus seems to be
suggesting his lack of  humankind’s most fundamental trait, empathy. In his cap acity
as  minister,  Pucheu  believed  that  nothing  had  changed  with  France’s  defeat  and
occu pation:  he  remained  a  creature  of   the  “abstract  and  administrative  system  he
had always known.” Signing these laws in the comfort of  his office, Pucheu failed to
see they would be “transformed into dawns of  terror for innocent Frenchmen led to
their deaths.”
Pucheu’s particular crime forced Camus to measure fully his own words:  “It is in
the full light of  our imagination that we are learning to acce pt without flinching . . .
39
that  a  man’s  life  can  be  removed  from  this  world.”   Camus’s  expression  “lack  of
imagination” anticipated what Hannah Arendt, more than a decad e later, would call

40
the “banality of  evil.”  In his postliberation editorials, Camus focused on this same
“banal”  flaw.  At  the  end  of   August,  reacting  to  the  torture  and  murder  of   thirty-
four  Frenchmen,  he  exclaimed:  “Who  would  dare  speak  here  of   forgiveness?”  But,
once again, his outrage focused on the torturer’s lack of  imagination. After depicting
the  scene  where  the  bodies  were  found,  Cam us  concludes:  “Two  men  face  to  face,
one of  whom prepares to tear off  the fingernails of  the other who watches him do
41
it.”
For Mauriac, someone who would make such an argument was cap able of  signing
the  Brasillach  petition.  Must  we  not  exercise  the  full  extent  of   our  moral
imagination,  Mauriac  asked,  in  the  cases  of   treason  we  now  confront?  If   Mau riac
had  hoped  to  persuade  his  younger  colleague,  he  was  disappointed:  at  the  end  of
October, Camus opened his column in  Combat  bluntly:  “We do not agree with M.
François Mauriac.” Yes, excesses had occu rred during the purge, but Cam us insisted
they did not drown out the call for justice: “It is our conviction that there are times
when we must silence our feelings and renounce our peace of  mind. Ours is such a
time, and its terrible law, with which it is futile to argue, forces us to destroy a living
42
part of  this country in order that we may save its very soul.”
To Mauriac’s ears, Camus’s reasoning sounded like that of  the Inquisition. Even
if   one  could  somehow  maintain  purity,  he  thought,  that  goal  itself   remained
undesirable.  The  climb  toward  absolute  justice  could  only  lead  to  a  fall  into
barbarism.  At  the  same  time,  the  Cat holic  novelist  rightly  sensed  Cam us’s
unanswered  need  for  absolutes.  “My  young  colleague  is  more  religious  than  I  had
thought,”  Mauriac  replied  two  days  later.  “More  than  I  am,  in  any  case.  The
43
inquisitors also burned bodies in order to save souls.”
With this exchange of  editorials, the united front of  the Resistance was revealed
to  be  little  more  than  a  facad e.  But  Mauriac  and  Camus,  though  from  different
generations and backgrounds and harboring different beliefs, had more in common
with  each  other  than  with  the  rest  of   the  Resistance.  Both  men  were  preoccu pied
with  the  issue  of   justice,  both  were  acu tely  aware  of   humankind’s  flaws,  both
insisted  on  placing  the  events  of   the  Liberation  against  a  greater  and  richer
background.  The  inequitable  and  cap ricious  character  of   the  purge  persuaded
Mauriac that France had to adopt a policy of  national reconciliation. The time had
come, he wrote, for a  “return to the politics of  Henry IV”—the French king who

quelled,  if   only  temporarily,  France’s  wars  of   religion  by  imposing  the  Edict  of
Nantes.  Camus,  however,  dismissed  Mau riac’s  call  for  toleration  on  both  religious
and  pragmatic  grounds.  Christian  mercy,  he  declared,  is  irrelevant  to  those  “who
know no divine justice, but who nonetheless continue to believe in man and hope to
achieve  his  greatness.  For  such  men  the  choice  is  between  eternal  silence  and  the
pursuit  of   human  justice.  .  .  .  We  choose  human  justice  with  all  its  terrible
imperfections;  we  can   hope  to  make  it  better  only  by  holding  desperately  to  our
44
honesty.”
Mauriac’s  debate  with  Camus  echoed  earlier  religious  controversies.  During  the
wars  of   religion  in  sixteenth-century  France,  there  were  two  philosophical  cam ps.
There were the  dévôts,  committed to the absolute truth of  their religion and utterly
opposed  to  compromise. Then  there  were  the  so-called  politiques:   like  Henry  IV,
these  Catholics  and  Protestants  (Henry  IV  moved  easily  between  the  two)
understood  that  the  alternative  to  mutual  toleration  was  mutual  destruction.  In
postwar  France,  Mauriac  and  Camus  took  up  the  roles  of   politique   and  dévôt,
respectively.  Yet  a  contemporary  of   Henry  IV  would  understandably  have  been
confused  had  he  witnessed  the  debate:  here  was  Mauriac,  the  devout  Cat holic,
posing  as  a  politique,   while  Camus,  the  unwavering  atheist,  espoused  the  purist’s
position.
Camus  was  aware  of   this  odd  reversal  of   roles.  In  a  column  published  the  day
after  Christmas  1944,  he  declared  that  moderation,  at  least  in  the  present
circumstances, was not a virtue. Restraint risks “serving those who want to conserve
everything, those who have failed to understand that some things must be changed.
Our world does not need tepid souls. It needs burning hearts that know how to put
moderation in its proper place.” No doubt with his thoughts focused on Mau riac,
45
he  added:  “The  Christians  of   the  first  century  were  not  moderates.”  Though  he
remained  forever  alien  to  Augustine’s  faith,  Camus  had  the  same  passion  for
salvation, if  only profane, as that “other North African .”
Just weeks later, though, Camus had come to doubt the logic of  uncompromising
justice. Moderation might lead to the freedom of  some of  the guilty, but better that
than the death of  innocents—or, at the very least, those whose guilt was no greater
than those who escap ed similar punishment. The purge had destroyed the illusions
of   most  idealists:  not  only  were  certain  professional  categories  untouched  while

others  bore  the  brunt  of   the  restored  republic,  but  republican   justice  itself   often
seemed  to  give  way  to  personal  vengeance.  Shortly  after  New  Year’s  Day  1945,
Camus  announced  that  he  had  had  his  fill.  In  an  editorial  titled  “The  Purge  Has
Gone  Awry,”  he  quoted  a  Catholic  commentator  who  had  concluded  that  justice
existed  only  in  hell.  The  French  courts,  Cam us  found,  were  doing  everything
possible  to  prove  him  true.  “News  writers  and  editorialists  thus  have  to  choose
between  writing  about  absurd  condemnations  and  ridiculous  acts  of   forgiveness.
Meanwhile  prisoners  are  dragged  out  of   their  cells  and  shot  [by  lynch  mobs]
becau se they have been pardoned.”
At this point, Camus still refused to acce pt that his initial premise was wrong: if
justice had been carried out swiftly and fairly, he insisted, it would have been terrible
but  essential.  It  had  instead  been  belated  and  inconsistent.  Too  much  time  had
passed,  too  much  damage  had  been  done:  “People  get  used  to  everything,  even
shame and stupidity. And where could they ask for more shame and stupidity than
from  their  Ministry  of   Justice?”  Camus  had  been  right  to  insist  on  justice  half   a
year  ago,  but  he  would  be  wrong  to  insist  on  it  now.  His  column  ended  with  a
striking confession:  “We now see that M. Mau riac was right: we are going to need
46
charity.”
Yet  Mauriac  was  less  than  charitable  in  his  reply:  he  disdainfully  thanked  “our
young  master”  for  having  spoken  from  the  “heights  of   the  works  he  has  yet  to
47
write.”   Stung,  Camus  insisted  that  Mauriac  had  misrepresented  his  views:  “Each
time  the  purge  has  been  discussed,  I  have  spoken  of   justice  while  M.  Mau riac  has
spoken of  charity. And the virtue of  charity is so unassailable that when I demand
justice, I seem to be asking for hate.” Though the trials had become squalid affairs,
the  need  for  justice  remained.  But  what  had  been  a  public  issue  now  becam e
personal: underscoring the false choice Mau riac had imposed on him, Cam us then
did the very same to his antagonist:  “As a man, I can  perhaps admire M. Mau riac
for knowing how to love traitors; but as a citizen, I deplore it, for this love will turn
us  into  a  nation  of   betrayal  and  mediocrity.”  Camus  thus  returned  to  the
fundamental  divide  between  the  two  men:  religious  faith.  Yes,  Camus  allowed,
Christianity has a kind of  greatness. But it has an even greater irrelevance for “those
in this tormented world who believe that Christ may have died to save others, but

that he did not die to save us.” As a result,  “we will forever refuse a divine charity
48
which frustrates the justice of  men.”
Days after this bitter exchange, Camus took a leave of  absence from  Combat.  His
sudden prominence as an intellectual, his editorial responsibilities at the paper, his
duties  at  Gallimard—the  prestigious  publishing  house  where  he  had  joined
Paulhan’s cab al of  readers—and his weakened lungs in the wet chill of  Paris had all
weighed greatly on the young provincial. On January 18, Camus addressed a short
message to the readers of   Combat,  in which he cited poor health as the reason for
his temporary leave. Acco rding to one friend, Camus’s physical state seemed so grave
49
that he described it as “terminal.”
The clash with Mauriac, followed by the Brasillach petition, did little to improve
Camus’s physical and emotional health. Though he left no record of  his reflections,
acco rding  to  Camus’s  family,  he  spent  the  night  of   January  25  pacing  the  floor  of
his studio, wondering how to reply to the request. He perhaps recalled the story of
his  father’s  experience  of   an  execution,  and  perhaps  as  well,  Meursault’s  reflection
that execution is the only thing that can  interest us. By the end of  his deliberations,
Camus  returned  to  his  prewar  conviction:  we  must  never  kill  a  human  being  on
behalf   of   an  abstract  principle. The  fog  of   language  and  abstractions  blinds  us  to
the reality of  the men and women and children whom the state condemns to death.
As  Camus  later  wrote,  his  father  had  “discovered  the  reality  hidden  behind  our
majestic  phrases.”  Instead  of   recalling  the  criminal’s  victims  as  he  witnessed  the
execution, all he could think of  “was this breathing body that had just been thrown
50
across  a  board  in  order  to  chop  off   its  head.”   Camus  fully  retreats  from  the
position  he  had  held  during  the  early  phase  of   the  purge.  His  case  for  Pucheu’s
execution—the man deserved to die becau se of  his lack of  moral imagination—w as
now applied to the question of  Brasillach’s petition: it is essential that we, at least,
exercise our moral imagination, even, perhaps especially, for a man like Brasillach.
This belief  was at the heart of  the letter Camus wrote two days later to Jacq ues
Isorni, Brasillach’s lawyer, informing him that he had signed the petition becau se of
his  opposition  to  the  death  penalty. That  same  day,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Aymé  in
which  he  explained  his  decision  at  greater  length:  “I  have  always  held  the  death
sentence in horror and judged that, at least as an individual, I couldn’t participate in
it,  even  by  abstention. That’s  all.  And  this  is  a  scruple  that  I  suppose  would  make

Brasillach’s friends laugh. It is not for him that I join my signature to yours. It is not
for the writer, whom I consider of  no significan ce. Nor for the individual, whom I
disdain with all my might. If  I had even been tempted to be interested in him, the
memory of  two or three friends who were mutilated or gunned down by Brasillach’s
51
friends while his newspaper encouraged them to do it would have prevented me.”
Though  he  sent  his  reply  to  Aymé,  Camus  must  have  had  Mauriac  in  mind  as
well.  The  same  concerns  and  the  same  critical  jabs  from  their  public  exchanges
carried over to the letter. But the debate’s most important issue—w hether the world
is  ultimately  meaningful—received  Cam us’s  greatest  attention.  Not  only  did  he
dismiss the notion that the future of  French literature rode on Brasillach’s pardon,
he  also  rejected  the  notion  that  the  future  of   his  own  soul  depended  on  it.  It  is
precisely becau se there is no world after this—precisely becau se, like Brasillach, he is
condemned to live in this world—that Cam us signed the petition. In his notebook,
he raised once again the question that divided him from Mau riac: How can  one live
without grace? His answer was brutal:  “One has to try it and do what Christianity
52
never did: be concerned with the damned.”  In a world stripped of  absolute truths,
the  most  absolute  of   acts,  the  killing  of   a  fellow  human  being,  must  not  be
committed in the absence of  overwhelming reasons.  “We must not condemn others
53
to  death  becau se  we   have  been  given  the  death  sentence.”   A  man  of   imagination
could  not  say  or  do  otherwise:  “The  writer  condemned  to  understanding, ”  he
54
concluded, “can not be a killer.”
Nor,  as  it  turned  out,  could  such  a  writer  always  stop  others  intent  on  killing.
After  reviewing  Brasillach’s  file,  including  the  petition  signed  by  Cam us  and
Mauriac, de Gaulle refused the request for a pardon. On February 6, Brasillach was
executed  by  firing  squad.  In  his  memoirs,  de  Gaulle  pauses  over  this  event.  His
principle  in  cap ital  cases,  he  writes,  was  to  commute  death  sentences  if   the  guilty
party  had  not  served  the  enemy  directly.  But  in  Brasillach’s  case,  he  continues,  “I
didn’t feel I had the right to pardon. For in literature as in everything, talent confers
55
responsibility.”
Camus did not disagree with de Gaulle, but he also dismissed such a justification
as  irrelevant. Talent  certainly  confers  a  degree  of   responsibility,  but  our  common
predicam ent  imposes  an  even  greater  form  of   responsibility:  never  to  lose  sight  of

our common humanity. This marks the true and lasting difference between Cam us
and de Gaulle—or, for that matter, between Camus and Mau riac. When one of  his
subordinates suggested at the time of  Brasillach’s trial that he turn over the power of
pardon  to  one  of   his  ministers,  de  Gaulle  refused:  “It  is  the  royal  prerogative  par
excellence, the highest responsibility of  a head of  state, the only one that he can not
56
delegate.  For  that,  and  for  nothing  else,  do  I  have  to  acco unt  only  to  God.”
Though  Mauriac  drew  a  very  different  conclusion,  he  shared  the  otherworldly
premise with de Gaulle. For the novelist, God led to clemency, while for the general,
God led to severity. But where does this lead a man for whom God does not exist?
How can  it help a man who, in Camus’s phrase, is a “stranger to God”?
° ° °
Most immediately, it led Camus away from political debate and back to writing.
In a notebook entry made toward the end of  1946, Camus wrote:  “Prepare a book
57
of  political texts around Brasillach.”  Tellingly, the plan was never realized. It is as
if  Camus understood that the answers would not be found in tracts and treatises but
instead in narrative, specifically novels. It is during this period that he was trying to
complete  the  book  he  started  at  Le  Panelier:  The  Plague.   But  shortly  before  the
quarrel  with  Mauriac,  and  with  himself,  over  the  nature  of   justice,  Cam us  had
already published a defense of  novel writing as a moral activity.
“Our greatest moralists are not makers of  maxims—they are novelists.” In 1944,
Camus  thus  reintroduced  the  French  to  the  eighteenth-century  writer  Sébastien-
58
Roch Nicolas Chamfort.  It was a small book printed by a small publisher based in
Monaco ,  but  the  autobiographical  element  in  Camus’s  introduction  is  extensive.  A
commoner  from  the  provinces,  Chamfort  went  to  Paris  where,  by  virtue  of   much
talent, ambition, and good looks, he becam e a fixture in court and society. Once he
becam e  a  celebrated  writer,  however,  Chamfort  maintained  a  clear  and  disabused
gaze on a world where he always felt like an outsider. Come 1789, he was an ardent
supporter of  the Revolution: few men were better prepared to embrace the call for
liberty.  In  1793,  when  the  Reign  of  Terror  was  instituted,  he  becam e  one  of   the
Revolution’s most hostile critics: few men were more clear-eyed about the excesses of
freedom. Threatened with arrest by the Jaco bin authorities, he tried to kill himself:

first with a gun (succeeding only in shattering his nose and an eye), next with a knife
(cutting  his  throat,  but  not  deeply  enough),  then  with  a  letter  opener,  which  he
plunged into his chest. The third time was not the charm: he was found still alive in
a  pool  of   blood.  Chamfort’s  extraordinary  and  extraordinarily  botched  effort  left
him maimed and weakened until his death in 1794.
Camus seized on the parallels between his own life and Chamfort’s. This is clear
in  his  presentation  of   Chamfort’s  great  literary  work,  his  Maxims  and Thoughts.
There  are  few  things  in  the  world  less  general  or  abstract  than  the  human  heart,
Camus  notes.  As  a  result,  there  is  little  we  learn  of   true  value  from  the  most
celebrated  maker  of   maxims,  La  Rochefoucau ld.  Camus  argues  that  the  taut  logic
and polished rigor of  La Rochefoucau ld’s phrases disguise the particularities of  our
lives. One might as well read Euclid for insights into human nature. True moralists
do not turn phrases; they turn to look at others and within themselves. They do not
codify our behavior but instead describe it. Unlike La Rochefoucau ld, Chamfort did
not chisel maxims from the recalcitrant stuff  of  our lives. Instead, like a painter, he
worked  in  sharp  strokes  and  sudden  bursts  of   light.  Camus  writes  that  though
Chamfort was not thought of  as a novelist, his anecdotes and maxims are  “hidden
novels,” a sort of  human comedy shaped by a plot and led by a hero. And this is as
it should be: “Only the novel is faithful to the specific: it does not offer conclusions
59
about life but instead reveals its unfolding.”
For  Camus,  Chamfort’s  story  is  one  of   loneliness  and,  ultimately,  defeat. To  be
sure, Chamfort was successful: but “social success only means something in a society
60
one believes in.”  What is a man of  character to do when condemned to live in a
world he scorns? Camus’s Chamfort, it turns out, offers the same answer as Cam us’s
Sisyphus: he must “take on the demands this world can not meet. Not in order to be
an example to others, but instead by the simple desire for coherence.” He died as he
lived:  equal  to  himself.  “This  novel  of   a  superior  soul  ends  in  a  bloodbath,  in  the
midst of  a world turned upside down where dozens of  heads were lopped off  every
61
day, bouncing into the bottoms of  baskets.”
For Camus, this violent end furnishes a clearer idea of  both Chamfort’s life and
of  morality itself. But it also furnishes a clear idea of  Cam us’s expectations of  art.
With  a  consistency  as  merciless  as  Chamfort’s,  some  philosophers  now  claim  that
philosophy   is   not   well   suited   for   treating   questions   of    ethics   and   moral

responsibility. Through the practice of  their craft, novelists lead us to moral insights
missed  by  professional  philosophers.  Iris  Mu rdoch,  who  practiced  in  both  fields,
argues  that  novelists  alone  reveal  the  evaluative  and  experiential  nature  of   moral
activity.  By  means  of   a  complex  narrative,  the  evolution  of   characters,  and  the
development  of   perspectives,  the  novel  provides  an  apprenticeship  in  life.  For
Murdoch,  the  sharpening  of   our  imagination  and  the  deepening  of   our  sensitivity
to life’s intricaci es make us better people. Moral philosophy, she writes,  “should be
62
inhabited.”  And literature permits us to relive our lives—to  inhabit  the histories in
our  wake.  Taking  her  cue  from  life,  the  novelist  rebuilds  the  set,  recasts  the
characters,  and  re-creates  life:  Good  art  reveals  what  we  are  usually  too  selfish  and
too timid to recognize, the minute and absolutely random detail of  the world, and
reveals  it  together  with  a  sense  of   unity  and  form.  .  .  . We  are  presented  with  a
truthful  image  of   the  human  condition  in  a  form  which  can   be  steadily
contemplated; and indeed this is the only context in which many of  us are cap able
63
of  contemplating it at all.
Murdoch’s  artist  works  in  a  world  torn  from  the  “permanent  background  to
human  activity  .  .  .  whether  provided  by  God,  by  Reason,  by  History,  or  by  the
64
self.”   In  this  fallen  world,  literature  serves  as  our  map  or  our  moral  compass,
guarding  us  from  the  bogs  of   fantasy  and  ideology.  For  Murdoch,  Cam us  is  an
exemplary guide: as she said of  one of  his characters, he is “forever conscious of  the
65
possibility of  the absurd, but does not relax his grip nevertheless.”  Grappling with
the terrible issues raised by the occu pation and liberation of  France, Cam us for the
most part did not relax his grip. He faltered for a moment during the early stages of
the  purge,  but  paradoxically  did  so  in  the  name  of   moral  imagination.  But  the
contradictions  of   his  stance  quickly  becam e  clear  to  him—s o  clear  that,  by  1945,
Camus  declared  that  the  “word  purge   is  painful  enough  in  itself. That  which  it
66
describes  has  become  hateful.”   The  power  of   abstraction  had  carried  away  so
many others, but Camus, as novelist and moralist, held fast to the particularities of
the human situation.
During a lecture to an audience of  Catholics at the convent of  Latour-Mau bourg
shortly after the war, Camus looked back on his disagreement with Mau riac. He had
been guilty, he recognized, of  a lapse of  moral attention. The “feverish nature of  the

time, the memory of  two or three assassinated friends,” Cam us confessed, led to his
“pretentious” claims on behalf  of  justice. But he had never stopped thinking about
those events: his dialogue with Mauriac carried over into his fiction.  The Plague  is a
continuation  of   that  dialogue  by  other  means.  And  by  dialogue  Cam us  does  not
mean  the  exchange  of   commonplaces  and  the  effort  to  avoid  disagreement.  It  is,
instead, the frank, often brutal and bruising clash of  worldviews. As he warned his
audience at Latour-Maubourg,  “I will not try to modify any of  my convictions or
any  of   your  convictions  so  as  to  obtain  a  mutually  agreeable  solution.  On  the
contrary, I am here to tell you that the world needs true dialogue. This has nothing
to do with either lies or silence. Dialogue is possible only between those who insist
67
on remaining who they are and on speaking their minds.”  But remaining who you
are  does  not  mean  holding  fast  to  illusions  or  mistakes.  And  speaking  your  mind
means speaking to errors you have made, no less than to truths you have tested. In
his  speech,  Camus  announced  that  “Mo nsieur  Mau riac  was  right  and  I  was
68
wrong.”   For  many,  this  confession  reveals  great  can dor  and  self-discipline;  for
others, it smacks of  grandstanding and theatrical excess. Both sides miss the point,
however.  Camus’s  admission  is  nothing  more  than  an  insistence  that  the  dialogue
must continue:  “I share your horror of  evil,” as he told his listeners,  “but I do not
share your hope.”

F R E N C H   T R A G E D I E S
T r a g e d y   i s   n o t   a   s o l u t i o n .
In  December  1951,  Camus  confided  to  his  journal:  “I  await  with  patience  a
1
catastrophe that is slow in coming.”  Perhaps he was referring to his physical health:
despite  a  new  regimen  for  his  battered  lungs,  Cam us  still  had  difficulty  breathing.
Or perhaps he meant his writing. His long essay  The Rebel  had been published less
than two months before. Many years in the making, the book needed just weeks for
its unmaking in the press. While  The Rebel  drew praise as well as criticism, Camus
was  at  times  as  suspicious  of   the  one  as  of   the  other:  the  conservative  Le  Figaro
applauded  it,  as  did  the  reactionary  newspaper  Action  Française.   He  was  also
dismayed by criticism from friends. Even Mau rice Nadeau, Camus’s old colleague at
Combat,  was of  two minds. While he thought the book a lucid analysis of  their era,
Nadeau felt it lacked a clear prescription. Nadeau feared that, at worst, Cam us had
written  a  plea  on  behalf   of   quietism.  He  was  not  alone  to  wonder  if   Cam us  was
2
justifying political conservatism and warning against progressive ideals.
If   the  book’s  mixed  reception  was  part  of   the  catastrophe  Cam us  expected,  the
other  part  was  the  silence  of   Les Temps  Modernes.   Founded  by  Jean-Paul  Sartre
shortly after the war, the literary monthly had quickly become the leading voice of
the  nation’s  intellectual  elite.  Its  board  of   editors,  including  Sartre,  Simone  de
Beauvoir,  and  Maurice  Merleau-Ponty,  prided  itself   on  its  democratic  decision-
making.  The  journal  also  embodied  the  newly  founded  Sartrean  imperative  of

political  commitment:  the  editors  cast  themselves  as  advocates  for  the  oppressed
workers  at  home  and  the  colonized  peoples  abroad.  While  often  critical  of   the
Soviet  Union,  the  journal’s  great  bête  noire  was  the  United  States.  For  these
intellectuals the two countries pointed to two very different futures: the first, despite
its  current  problems,  worked  for  most  of   humankind;  the  second,  becau se   of   its
current success, failed most of  humankind. For  Les Temps Modernes,  the cultural
and political ends of  Western liberalism were as toxic as the means, whereas the ends
of  communism ultimately justified the means, no matter how appalling those means
might be. Sartre and his colleagues had set themselves a formidable task: to depict as
honestly  as  possible  the  horrors  of   communism,  yet  frame  them  so  as  “to  be  left
with an experience and a project worthy of  their dreams and defensible in their own
3
philosophical and ethical language.”
In August 1951, the journal had published an excerpt dealing with Nietzsche and
nihilism from Camus’s still-unpublished book. But more than six months after the
publication  of   The  Rebel,   the  journal  had  not  reviewed  it.  Lack  of   attention  was
not the issue—on the contrary,  The Rebel  was the perennial subject at the biweekly
meetings  of   the  editorial  staff   at  Sartre’s  apartment. While  bagpipes  blared  next
door—Sartre’s neighbors were Breton musicians—the editors drank framboise and
smoked pipes and Gauloise cigarettes, the acrid smoke settling over the intellectual
scrum as they debated the great issues of  the day. At each meeting, Sartre would ask
for  volunteers  to  review  the  book.  No  one  stepped  forward.  On  the  one  hand,
everyone  dismissed  the  book  as  a  superficial  and  reactionary  pastiche  of   Mar xist
theory  and  practice.  On  the  other  hand,  Sartre,  though  he  shared  this  opinion,
would not allow anyone, including himself, to say so in public. Though relations had
cooled  between  the  two  writers,  Sartre  remained  attached  to  the  memory  of   a
remarkable  friendship.  How,  Beauvoir  wondered,  would  they  “get  out  of   this
4
dilemma”?  As tragedy would have it, there was no  “getting out” of  the situation, a
truth the antagonists themselves probably sensed.
°  °  °
Few  individuals  were  more  familiar  with  tragedy  than  the  mythological  Greek
hero Orestes. Standing in front of  a frenzied mob calling for his death, he recalled

that  fifteen  years  before,  another  murderer,  Aegisthus,  had  stood  before  them  and
becam e  king.  He  had  killed  Orestes’  father  Agamemnon,  then  wed  Agamemnon’s
widow, Clytemnestra, an acco mplice to the murder. Yet Aegisthus lacked the courage
to proclaim his deed—a cowardice no different from that displayed by those he now
ruled. Orestes rebelled against such behavior.  “I claim my crime,” he shouts,  “which
is  why  I  make  you  tremble.”  Rather  than  taking  the  throne,  however,  he  takes  the
crimes  of   others  on  himself,  represented  by  the  great  swarm  of   flies  plaguing  the
city ever since the regicide. “Farewell, my fellows: try to live. Everything here is new,
everything to be begun. For me, as well, life begins—a strange life.” Striding through
the stunned crowd, flies in close pursuit, he recites a story: rats had infested another
city  until  a  flute  player  appeared  and  led  them  away.  “Step  aside,”  he  commands.
Exit stage left.
On June 3, 1943, eight years before the controversy surrounding  The Rebel,  the
House of  Atreus had opened for business in German-occu pied Paris. The curtain at
the Théâtre  de  la  Cité  was  raised  that  day  on  The  Flies,   Sartre’s  retelling  of   the
tormented story of  Orestes and his family. As in Aeschylus’s trilogy  The Oresteia,
Sartre’s  version  of   the  family  was  a  marvel  of   dysfunction:  murder,  matricide,  and
mayhem  mark  the  descendants  of   Atreus.  Also,  as  in  ancient  Greece,  the  play  was
performed  during  the  day.  Aeschylus  exploited  the  course  of   the  sun:  the  trilogy
begins  with  literal  and  metaphorical  darkness  in  occu pied  Argos;  the  dawning  of
Orestes’ understanding parallels the sun’s rise; and the climax of  the final play,  The
Eumenides,   unfolds  at  high  noon.  Admittedly,  Sartre  and  the  director,  Charles
Dullin, did not have the same motive: power shortages were so common in occu pied
Paris  that  they  did  not  want  to  risk  darkness  falling  at  the  wrong  moment  during
their production.
But  the  similarities  ended  there.  In  Aeschylus,  Orestes  flees  Argos  for  Athens,
pursued by the Furies, the avenging gods who demand compensation for the murder
of  his mother, Clytemnestra. A political refugee, Orestes is defended by Apollo in
front  of   a  jury  of   Athenian  citizens.  After  Apollo  and  the  Furies  make  their
arguments,  the  jury  votes:  half   the  jurors  condemn  Orestes  for  killing  his  mother,
the  other  half   justify  his  act.  Athena  steps  in  and  makes  the  Furies  an  offer  they
can not  refuse:  in  return  for  releasing  Orestes,  Athena  will  turn  them  into  the
Eumenides,  or  Kindly  Ones.  They  will  defend  the  liberty  and  independence  of
Athens, and in return will be worshipped by the citizens of  the youthful polis. As

the  play  ends,  the  Kindly  Ones,  followed  by  the  audience  of   Athenian  citizens,
march solemnly down the aisles and out of  the amphitheater. Gods and mortals join
hands,  democracy  and  reason  triumph,  and  the  demands  of   justice  and  mercy
dovetail.
A  swastika-draped  Paris  and  a  divided  France  were  much  harsher  ground  than
ancient Athens and a united Greece for such a founding myth. At the end of   The
Flies,   Sartre  does  not  bring  the  characters  together,  united  by  a  common  goal,  but
leaves them isolated and hostile. The Furies’ desire for vengeance is not slaked, the
mob’s  rage  is  not  calmed,  and  Orestes  abandons  the  city,  flies  in  pursuit.  In
Aeschylus,  Orestes  hesitates  before  he  murders  his  mother;  in  Sartre,  Orestes
celebrates the act: violence, it seems, makes the  résistant.
Violence,  however,  seemed  alien  to  Sartre,  a  bookish  and  unprepossessing  man
who,  before  the  curtain  rose,  stood  nervously  by  the  ticket  window.  One  of   the
spectators, though he had never before met Sartre, recognized him as he entered the
foyer.  Dapper  and  tanned,  the  young  man  walked  up  to  the  young  playwright  and
5
introduced  himself   as  Albert  Camus.  The  men  exchanged  little  else  apart  from
pleasantries:  all  in  all,  a  banal  first  encounter  for  what  would  become  the  most
significan t  friendship  in  both  their  lives. The  play  raised  questions  that  joined  the
two  writers  and  led  to  answers  that  drove  them  apart  nearly  a  decad e  later.  Come
1952, the public quarrel between Camus and Sartre did not rival the tragic scale of
their  Greek  models,  but  it  revealed  that  abiding  lesson  of   Aeschylean  tragedy:  the
law demands that we suffer into truth.
°  °  °
During  the  war,  a  number  of   French  writers  viewed  their  predicam ent  through
the  prism  of   ancient  Greek  literature.  This  was  as  true  for  collaborators  as  for
resisters,  for  reactionaries  as  for  revolutionaries. The  ideologue  Charles  Mau rras,
convicted of  treason in 1945, had long presented France as the inheritor of  ancient
Greek  values—values  that  happened  to  exclude  from  the  nation  those  he  called
métèques  (from the Greek  “metic,” or foreigner), most notoriously the Jews. In the
days leading up to his arrest and imprisonment, the virulently anti-Semitic Robert
Brasillach  was  finishing  an  anthology  of   Greek  poets  ranging  from  Sappho  to
Theocritus.

The Left was equally under the spell of  ancient Greece. In 1943, the same year
The  Flies   was  panned  by  Brasillach’s  Je  Suis  Partout   for  its  moral  decadence,  Jean
Anouilh’s   adaptation   of    Sophocles’  Antigone    opened   in   Paris.   Anouilh’s
presentation  of   the  conflict  between  Creon,  the  defender  of   secular  order  and
political  realism,  and  Antigone,  the  guardian  of   eternal  laws  and  ethical  idealism,
found partisans in both ideological cam ps. The Resistance embraced Antigone, who
defies  the  demands  of   the  state,  while  collaborationists  cheered  Creon,  whose
responsibility to a battered city obliges him to punish Antigone for her resistance.
Camus  had  long  been  interested  in  the  Greeks:  in  1937,  he  staged  Aeschylus’s
Prometheus  Bound   for  the  Théâtre  du  Travail.  For  Camus,  meaning,  from
Aeschylus’s  merciless  perspective  and  in  his  enigmatic  universe,  was  “difficult  to
6
decipher becau se it dazzles us.”  Bound by the gods for all eternity to a rock in hell
for having brought fire to mortals, Prometheus does not regret his act. Mo cked by
Hermes  for  not  having  foreseen  his  punishment,  Prometheus,  in  Cam us’s  play,
7
contradicts  him:  “I  did   see  it.”   As  his  Letters  to  a  German  Friend   already
announced,  the  true  rebel  acts  in  full  knowledge  that  there  will  be  no  ultimate
vindication or justification. The Promethean individual, Cam us declared, knows “all
too well that blind justice does not exist, that history has no eyes, and that we must
therefore reject its justice in order to replace it as much as possible with the justice
8
conceived  by  the  mind.”   Camus  clung  to  this  understanding  of   the  Promethean
myth for the rest of  his life.
°  °  °
During  the  performance  in  1943  of   Sartre’s  The  Flies,   Camus  must  have  been
struck by Orestes’ parting story of  a vermin-besieged city. He, too, was working on
a story about plague, with a cast of  characters that included thousands of  rats. But
as he labored over the early drafts, Cam us was not sure what kind of  story it would
be.  It  was,  he  told  Jean  Grenier,  “a  sort  of   novel.”  A  sort  of   novel,  moreover,  in
search  of   a  title:  at  various  moments,  Camus  plumped  for  The  Prisoners,  The
Exiles,  and  The Separated.  Eventually he chose the name under which the novel was
published  in  1947,  two  short  years  after  France’s  liberation:  The  Plague.  Yet,  even
on the eve of  its publication, Camus was mined by doubts: “In my whole life, never

such  a  feeling  of   failure.  I  am  not  even  sure  of   reaching  the  end.  At  certain
9
moments, however . . .”
Camus’s  fears  were  unfounded:  The  Plague   immediately  becam e  a  best-seller
translated  into  dozens  of   languages. The  novel  follows  a  group  of   men  who  share
nothing  except  their  location—the  Algerian  city  of   Oran—w hen  an  outbreak  of
bubonic plague occu rs. The city is placed under quarantine and the men join forces
to  resist  the  plague’s  onslaught.  Though  the  impact  of   their  “resistance”  seems
trivial—the number of  plague victims mounts inexorably—its moral significan ce is
great:  the  act  of   rebellion,  the  insistence  on  lucidity  and  understanding,  defines  a
new form of  heroism. When the plague eventually recedes, it leaves behind both the
wreckage of  human lives and a record of  human dignity and courage.
Most of  the novel’s characters are ne’er-do-wells whose social marginality reflects
ethical  centeredness.  There  is  Rambert,  a  journalist  who  does  not  write  and  a
thinker  who  dislikes  ideas;  Joseph  Grand,  a  petty  bureaucrat  who  spends  his  life
endlessly  rewriting  the  first  line  to  an  otherwise  unwritten  novel;  Tarrou,  a
mysterious  figure  whose  private  journal  becomes  the  basis  for  a  public  history;
Father  Paneloux,  a  priest  whose  faith  proves  too  austere  for  his  parishioners  and
perhaps  for  himself;  and  Bernard  Rieux,  a  doctor  who  battles  the  plague  with  the
knowledge that his efforts are futile.
Early  in  the  novel,  Rambert  visits  Rieux:  sent  to  Algeria  by  his  newspaper,  the
reporter  suddenly  finds  himself   separated  from  his  girlfriend  when  Oran  is
quarantined.  An  enraged,  uncomprehending  Rambert  tells  Rieux  that  he  does  not
belong in Oran: his situation is too absurd for words. A sympathetic Rieux agrees:
“Oh,  I  know  it’s  an  absurd  situation,  but  we’re  all  involved  in  it,  and  we’ve  got  to
acce pt  it  as  it  is.” When  Rambert  persists—“I  don’t  belong  here”—Rieux  replies:
“Unfortunately,  from  now  on  you’ll  belong  here,  like  everybody  else.”  Rambert
nevertheless  makes  plans  to  escap e  the  city. The  planning  turns  out  to  be  more
complex  than  anticipated;  while  waiting  for  his  opportunity,  Rambert  joins  Rieux
and the others on the sanitation teams created to keep the plague at bay. When the
chance  to  escap e  finally  presents  itself,  Rambert  has  changed  his  mind.  He  tells
10
Rieux he can not leave Oran “now that I have seen what I have seen.”
The  other  characters  also  embody  the  ethics  of   attention. The  narrator,  Rieux,
declares that his approach is simple: he must gather all relevant evidence. The most

valuable,  he  announces,  “is  what  he  saw  himself,”  followed  by  other  eyewitness
acco unts. As the number of  deaths rises in Oran, Rieux tells others what he sees—
namely,  growing  signs  of   plague—while  his  colleagues  refuse  to  see  these  same
signs. Though at times he desperately wants to close his eyes to events, he reminds
himself   that  he  “must  fix  his  mind  .  .  .  on  observed  facts.”  An  empiricist,  Rieux
insists  that  a  life  well  lived  is  “a  matter  of   lucidly  recognizing  what  had  to  be
11
recognized.”
But  seeing  is  not  always  believing,  just  as  believing  often  has  little  to  do  with
seeing. Sight demands not just eyes but imagination: without this facu lty, we can not
acce pt  and  act  on  what  we  see. When  Rieux  confronts  the  city’s  prefect  with  the
latest mortality statistics, the official admits they are “perturbing.” Rieux blurts out:
“They’re more than perturbing; they’re conclusive.” Yet the prefect can not see what
Rieux  has  placed  under  his  eyes,  promising  only  that  he  will  “ask  the  government
for  orders.”  Echoing  Camus’s  criticism  of   Pierre  Pucheu,  Rieux  can   no  longer
12
contain himself:  “Orders! When what’s needed is imagination.”  A special kind of
sight is called for: one in which we describe others faithfully. This kind of  attention
necessarily entails that we treat them with consideration.
Even more so than Rieux, Tarrou lives acco rding to this severe imperative. He and
Rieux form not just the city’s sanitation teams but a friendship as well. One night,
after  they  have  completed  their  rounds,  they  find  themselves  sitting  alone  on  a
terrace. Despite this perspective, one that overlooks the city, their eyes can  see very
little: the absence of  lighting in the quarantined city leaves the harbor and cliffs in
darkness. Only the stars pierce a soupy grayness so thick that Rieux sees little else
than Tarrou’s stout profile in the chair beside him.
But we learn that there are other and deeper kinds of  sight. Agreeing to “take an
hour  off   for  friendship,” Tarrou  tells  Rieux  about  his  past.  His  father  was  a  state
prosecutor,  a  man Tarrou  admired  during  his  childhood.  One  day, Tarrou  went  to
court  to  watch  his  father  argue  a  cap ital  crime  case.  It  was  an  epiphany,  but  one
rooted  in  this  world.  Just  like  Camus’s  father  at  the  public  execution,  or  Cam us
himself  aboard the prison ship in Algiers or in his Paris apartment agonizing over
Brasillach’s pardon, the young Tarrou could not see the abstract monster his father
was  busy  portraying  but  only  a  man  of   flesh  and  blood  sitting  in  the  dock.  He
describes the prisoner to Rieux in great detail, noting that his tie was askew and that

he bit the fingers of  only his right hand. Then he breaks off: “I needn’t go on, need
I? You’ve  understood—he  was  a  living  human  being.” Yet  his  father,  a  kind  and
easygoing man, was transformed by the court’s traditional red gown he had donned.
He spewed out  “long, turgid phrases like an endless stream of  snakes. I realized he
was  clamoring  for  the  prisoner’s  death.  .  .  .  ‘He  must  pay  the  supreme  penalty.’”
Stunned by the clash between this human being gnawing at his nails and his father’s
flow of  abstract phrases, Tarrou was changed forever. Unable to face his father again,
he  fled  his  home  for  a  life  of   exile.  Each  of   us  has  the  plague, Tarrou  tells  Rieux,
and each of  us  “must keep endless watch on ourselves lest in a careless moment we
breathe  in  somebody’s  face  and  fasten  the  infection  on  him.” The  good  man,  he
continues,  “is  the  man  who  has  the  fewest  lapses  of   attention.  And  it  needs
tremendous  will-power,  a  never  ending  tension  of   the  mind,  to  avoid  such  lapses.”
Ultimately,  it  comes  down  to  seeing  and  speaking  clearly.  “All  of   our  troubles,”
13
Tarrou concludes, “spring from our failure to use plain, clear-cut language.”
For  Rieux  as  for Tarrou,  plain  speaking  is  more  than  just  an  issue  of   public
policy or scientific study; it is a question of  ethical rigor. But Cam us knew that this
claim is as slippery as it is compelling. On the one hand, he has Rieux assert that, in
his  written  acco unt  of   the  plague,  “so  as  not  to  play  false  to  the  facts,  and,  still
more, so as not to play false to himself, [he] has aimed at objectivity. He has made
14
hardly  any  changes  for  the  sake  of   artistic  effect.”   On  the  other  hand,  as  Camus
well  knew,  you  can not  put  pen  to  paper  without  committing  an  “artistic  effect.”
This is true for the simplest of  texts; how much truer it is for a masterwork such as
The Plague.
Rieux nevertheless presents his book as a “chronicle” of  the plague, suggesting it
is  more  objective  than  even  historical  writing. Yet  it  is  oddly  unlike  a  chronicle:  it
does  not  even  provide  precise  dates.  Mo reover,  chronicles  simply  string  together
events with no concern for plot or meaning—the very last thing Cam us wished to
write or that we might wish to read. Instead, the narrator’s insistence on objectivity
reflects less a method than a style, one that points to the writer’s relationship not to
his material but with his reader.
Here  and  elsewhere,  Camus  took  a  page  not  from  the  Greek  tragedians  or
philosophers   but   from   the   historian  Thucydides.   Commentators   have   long
recognized  Camus’s  debt  to  the  ancient  historian’s  description  of   the  plague  that

swept through Athens shortly after the beginning of  the Peloponnesian War in 431
BC. The  parallels  are  many  and  striking:  the  swings  between  hope  and  despair  in
Athens,  the  gradual  collapse  of   traditions  and  institutions,  the  festering  of
superstition  and  resentment,  even  the  author’s  claims  of   objectivity.  In  all  these
15
respects, Camus closely follows Thucydides.
It is telling that just months after France’s defeat, Cam us committed himself  to a
16
course  of   study:  “The  Greeks.  History—L iterature—Ar t—P hilosophy.”  These
various genres, while they differed in form, offered the same urgent wisdom. Cam us
made this clear when he created a fictional character, Stephan, in early sketches for
The Plague.  Stephan is a classics teacher trapped in an unnamed, plague-ridden city.
“He  realizes,”  Camus  observed,  “that  he  had  not  understood  Thucydides  and
17
Lucretius until then.”
Until  1940,  neither  had  Camus.  Only  now  did  he  see  that  he  and Thucydides
had  many  things  in  common,  beginning  with  the  experiences  of   exile  and  defeat.
Thucydides started to write his history after being expelled from his native city of
Athens  (his  fellow  citizens  were  unfairly  angry  over  Thucydides’  command  of   a
failed  naval  battle).  As  for  Camus,  he  undertook  The  Plague   only  after  the
authorities  in  Algiers  closed  his  newspaper,  forcing  him  to  move  to  France  for
employment. In both cases, exile provided physical and emotional distance to reflect
on events.
More intriguing is the common claim to objectivity of  Thucydides and Cam us.
No doubt Camus was attracted to the traditional understanding of  objectivity as an
ideal. Shortly after the war, he told a friend:  “One thing seems to me greater than
18
justice: if  not truth itself, at least the  effort  toward truthfulness.”  But Camus also
used objectivity as a narrative technique—t he rhetoric of  antirhetoric. If  objectivity
is  a  strategy,  not  just  a  goal,  Camus  could  find  no  better  model  than Thucydides.
Through the simple juxtaposition of  events, Thucydides forces us to consider what
we  otherwise  might  have  overlooked.  Early  in  his  acco unt,  he  re-creates  Pericles’
funeral oration, in which the Athenian leader praises the power of  human reason to
foresee all eventualities. An outbreak of  plague immediately follows—an  unforeseen
disaster, Thucydides notes, that claimed Pericles as one of  its victims. By combining
the  events,  he  makes  clear  what  pages  of   emotive  prose  never  could:  the  hubris  of
Pericles’ claims on behalf  of  reason. The case against hubris also arises for Rieux’s

opponent, Dr. Richard. After long denying the plague’s reality, Richard finally and
grudgingly acknowledges it. He nevertheless predicts its demise based on statistical
trends.  Hours  before  a  meeting  with  city  officials  where  he  plans  to  deliver  his
19
optimistic assessment, however, he too is “carried off  by the plague.”
Equally important, both narratives remind us of  the limits of  narrative. Before he
launches  into  his  acco unt  of   the  plague, Thucydides  hesitates:  “Words  indeed  fail
20
when one tries to give a general picture of  this disease.”  Rieux is equally diffident:
like  his  Greek  predecessor,  he  dislikes  the  sort  of   writing  that  sways  emotions  but
distorts  the  truth.  Instead,  he  will  use  “conventional  language,”  though  it  was
21
“incap able  of   describing”  the  experience  of   the  plague.  Yet  neither Thucydides
nor  Camus  was  satisfied  with  this  initial  paradox:  both  of   them  double  the  knot.
Confronting an angry city after the plague strikes, Pericles defends himself: he had
“at least as much ability as anyone else to see what ought to be done and to explain
what he sees. A man who has the knowledge but lacks the power clearly to express it
22
is no better off  than if  he never had any ideas at all.”  Clarity and transparency are
equally  indispensable  to  history  writing:  shunning  literary  flourishes, Thucydides
wants  only  that  “these  words  of   mine  be  judged  useful  by  those  who  want  to
23
understand clearly the events which happened in the past.”  Similarly, Tarrou insists
upon  “plain, clear-cut language”; Grand believes  “in calling things by their name”;
and Rieux uses only “impartial” and “restrained” language to convey the events that
have befallen Oran.
Yet this insistence on light in turn dims meanings already obscure. Two millennia
after he wrote, Thucydides remains inscrutable  becau se,  not despite, the forcefulness
of  his language. The  History of  the Peloponnesian War,  which, Thucydides declares,
“used only the plainest evidence and . . . reached conclusions which are reasonably
accu rate,”  has  divided  readers  ever  since:  we  still  argue  over  the  character  of   those
24
“reasonably  accu rate  conclusions.”   His  use  of   sources,  contradictory  assertions,
and  refusal  to  take  sides  all  make  for  a  story  whose  words  are  clear  but  whose
meaning is opaque.
So,  too,  with  Camus:  all  his  characters  insist  on  simple  language,  yet  all  are
condemned to degrees of  silence. Grand spends his life rewriting the first line of  his
novel;  Rambert  quits  his  job  as  a  reporter;  Tarrou  confides  only  in  his  private

journal;  and  Rieux  is  unable  to  speak  truth  to  bureaucratic  power.  Accu racy  and
clarity  are  paramount  concerns,  but  at  the  end  of   both Thucydides’  and  Cam us’s
works these values appear useless. For Thucydides, history  “does not teach us how
to  control  human  events,  nor  enable  us  to  cure  plagues  or  prevent  potential
tyrannies, but it reminds us how easily men move from the illusion of  control over
25
events  to  being  controlled  by  them.”  This  resembles  Rieux’s  final  words:  “The
plague  bacillus  never  dies  or  disappears  for  good;  .  .  .  it  can   lie  dormant  for  years
and  years  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  perhaps  the  day  would  come  when,  for  the  bane  and  the
enlightening of  men, it would rouse up its rats again and send them forth to die in a
26
happy city.”
Why  write,  then?  Both  authors  offer  the  same  grim  answer. Thucydides  asserts
his work would be “useful to those who want to understand clearly the events which
happened in the past and which (human nature being what it is) will, at some time
27
or other and in much the same ways, be repeated in the future.”  As for Rieux, he
writes to offer a record “of  what had to be done, and what assuredly would have to
28
be  done  again.”   The  implications  are  tragic:  both  men  seem  to  ask  us  to
understand a process we can not change. This certainly seems to be Tarrou’s position.
When  Rieux  asks  him  why  he  joined  the  sanitation  squad,  Tarrou  replies:
29
“Comprehension.”  Of  course, Tarrou, Rieux, and the others also act as if  they are
cap able  of   more  than  comprehension  or  diagnosis:  they  act  in  the  belief   they  can
influence events for the better. Rieux tells Tarrou it is all quite simple:  “There are
30
sick  people  and  they  need  curing.”  Yet  when Tarrou  replies  that  these  “victories
will  never  be  lasting,”  Rieux  responds:  “Yes,  I  know  that.  But  it’s  no  reason  for
31
giving up the struggle.”
This  is  not  simple  bravado.  While  the  “struggle”  is  unending,  it  does  not
preclude choice. Rather, it makes choice more important: for Rieux no less than for
Thucydides,  we  are  fully  human  only  when  we  act  freely.  But  freedom,  in  turn,
imposes  duties—or,  in  Camus’s  phrase,  “exigencies.”  As  he  had  already  argued  in
Letters to a German Friend,  the recognition of  the world’s absurdity is not license
to add to it. Instead, recognition must lead to resistance. But now, with Thucydides
at  his  side,  Camus  tries  to  explain  why  this  is  so.  Along  with  the  ancient  Greek
historian,  Camus  asserts  that  when  we  act,  we  must  do  so  fully  aware  of   our

limitations:  we  must  act  with  just  measure,  basing  our  actions  on  concrete  and
immediate goods instead of  abstract and distant ends.
For  Rieux,  “the  most  incorrigible  vice  [is]  that  of   an  ignorance  that  fancies  it
knows everything.” The conviction that one is right, Rieux continues, has disastrous
32
consequences:  it  “claims  for  itself   the  right  to  kill.”   It  so  happens  that  the
Athenians  claimed  this  right,  leading  to  their  downfall.  In  book  5  of   his  History,
Thucydides devotes a great deal of  space to what seems like a minor event. In 416
BC, an Athenian force besieged Melos, a small island trying to remain neutral in the
war  between  Athens  and  Sparta.  The  Athenian  envoys  told  the  Me lians  that
neutrality  was  not  an  option:  you  were  either  with  or  against  Athens. When  the
Melians protested the injustice of  the ultimatum, the Athenians cut them off: “The
standard of  justice,” they proclaimed, “depends on the equality of  power to compel
and . . . in fact the strong do what they have the power to do and the weak acce pt
33
what they have to acce pt.”  The Athenians also dismissed the Melian warning that
either  the  gods  or  the  Spartans  might  come  to  their  rescue.  Hope,  the  Athenians
observed, is an expensive commodity. Still, the Me lians refused to surrender, leaving
the bemused Athenians to observe:  “You seem to us quite unique in your ability to
consider the future as something more certain than what is before your eyes, and to
34
see  uncertainties  as  realities,  simply  becau se  you  would  like  them  to  be  so.”  The
siege began, Athens defeated Melos and, as Thucydides concludes, the victors killed
all the men and enslaved the women and children.
Following the  “Melian Dialogue,” Thucydides immediately takes up Athen’s fatal
decision  to  invade  Sicily—a  decision  based  on  the  same  illusions  harbored  by  the
Melians. They confused desire with reality, ignorance with confidence, in attacking
an island whose strength and will to resist they had greatly underestimated. Here as
elsewhere, Thucydides is “objective”: he does not comment on the events he reports.
But the order in which he gives the events, rapidly taking the reader from Me los to
Sicily, makes all commentary superfluous. Blinded by confidence, Athens took one
step too many: its fall would be as great as its hubris.
While  Camus  never  cited  this  or  related  passages  from  The  History  of   the
Peloponnesian  War,   we  know  he  read  Thucydides,  and  his  writings  give  every
impression that he was familiar with the story. Cam us certainly had time enough in
Le  Panelier  to  read  the  work;  and  like Thucydides,  he  had  “the  leisure  to  observe

affairs  more  closely.”  Both  men  were  removed  from  the  immediate  pressures  that
35
create   “unfounded  hopes  and  gratuitous  fears.”   Their  experiences  of   exile
ultimately led them both to emphasize the importance of  balance and moderation
in politics. In an editorial published the same year as  The Plagu e,  Camus declared
that  democracy  was  an  exercise  in  humility.  “When  parties  and  peoples  are  so
convinced  by  their  own  arguments  that  they  are  willing  to  resort  to  violence  to
silence those who disagree with them, democracy no longer exists. Mo desty is thus
36
salutary in republics at all times.”
This is a thoroughly Periclean sentiment: though the Athenian leader ultimately
fell to hubris, for most of  his life he embodied the principle of  moderation. In his
funeral  oration,  he  reminded  Athenians  that  their  city  was  open  and  law-abiding,
committed  to  balance  and  dialogue:  it  was  a  lesson  for  all  Greece.  No  less  telling,
Pericles  recalled  that  in  Athens  citizens  did  not  “say  that  a  man  who  takes  no
interest  in  politics  is  a  man  who  minds  his  own  business;  we  say  that  he  has  no
37
business here at all.”  Similarly, Rieux, Tarrou, and Rambert all declare, at various
38
moments,  that  the  “plague  was  everybody’s  business.”  The  difficulty,  of   course,
whether in ancient Athens, fictitious Oran, or postwar France, was to persuade the
individual citizen to acce pt these constraints on their private lives and activities.
°  °  °
Sartre admired  The Plague.  In 1945, he told an audience in New York that the
novel, which he had read in manuscript, embodied the new spirit of  resistance and
engagement  in  French  letters.  And  Camus  himself,  Sartre  added,  heralded  a  new
kind of  artist, committed to bettering society, as well as a new kind of  literature—
one  “without  illusions,  but  full  of   confidence  in  the  grandeur  of   humanity;  hard
but without useless violence, passionate yet restrained.” This young writer’s courage
in  dark  times  and  his  obstinate  belief   in  the  possibilities  of   humankind  offered
hope  to  a  generation  formed  in  the  crucible  of   war,  occu pation,  and  liberation:
“The constant pressure of  death, the perpetual threat of  torture, made such writers
39
as Camus measure the powers and the limits of  man.”

By then, the two men had become close friends: Camus had in fact asked Sartre
to  go  to  New York  as  Combat ’s  special  envoy. The  relationship  formed  quickly  in
the  tumult  of   the  events  of   1944,  when  Cam us  brought  Sartre  into  the  fold  of
Combat,   tasking  him  with  writing  a  series  of   articles  on  the  city’s  liberation.  On
August 21, while the retreating German forces and the French Resistance were still
exchanging  gunfire  in  Paris,  Sartre  and  Beauvoir  went  to  the  newspaper’s  office  to
deliver his copy. The scene they found there was electrifying: the building was a hive
of   excitement  and  fear,  with  Camus  and  his  colleagues  “working  with  guns  at  the
ready.” The  doors  were  locked  shut  and  the  staff   worried  that  “at  any  moment
40
German soldiers could come and it would have been a bad mess.”
Under  the  headline  “A  Stroller  in  Paris  Unbound!”  Sartre’s  name  was  the  first
byline to appear in the newly public newspaper. Yet Sartre’s byline was sheer fiction:
Beauvoir,  in  fact,  wrote  the  eyewitness  reports.  As  she  confessed  late  in  life,  Sartre
41
was himself   “too busy” to do so.  And in a separate incident, Sartre appeared too
tired to take care of  Resistance business. During a meeting, he was assigned the task
of   protecting  the  vacat ed  Comédie  Française  in  the  confusion  of   half-liberated,
half-occu pied  Paris.  Sartre  acce pted  the  mission  and  made  his  way  across  the
alternately  chaotic  and  empty  city  to  the  venerable  theater.  Once  he  reached  the
building,  however,  he  promptly  fell  asleep  in  one  of   the  orchestra  seats.  When
Camus found his friend napping, he burst out laughing: “You’ve placed your seat in
42
the  direction  of   history!”   It  seemed,  as  Camus’s  lighthearted  jest  suggested,  that
Sartre was doomed to be forever a spectator, not a participant. But Camus’s friendly
joke would subsequently take on a far darker hue.
By  1945,  Camus’s  and  Sartre’s  reputations  in  France  and  abroad  had  grown  in
tandem.  The  French  and  foreign  press  portrayed  the  two  friends  as  a  kind  of
philosophical  tag  team,  advocates  of   a  new  school  of   thought,  existentialism,  and
practitioners of  the new vocation of  political engagement. Yet almost nothing could
be further from the truth. In 1945, just days after Sartre’s celebrated lecture in Paris,
“Existentialism  Is  a  Humanism,”  which  launched  the  movement  as  France’s  most
prestigious  cultural  export,  Camus  gave  an  interview  to  a  French  magazine. When
the interviewer referred to the two friends as  “existentialists,” Cam us took issue not
with  his  friendship  with  Sartre  but  with  the  label  “existentialist.”  He  and  Sartre,

Camus   joked,   had   considered   “publishing   a   short   statement   in   which   the
43
undersigned declare they have nothing in common with each other.”
Camus’s tongue was only partly in cheek. Even as the public imagination drew the
two  men  together,  their  private  reflections  were  pulling  them  apart.  At  the  very
moment  Camus  was  turning  away  from  political  engagement  and  had  deepening
doubts  about  the  legitimacy  of   violence  for  any  political  end,  Sartre  was  turning
toward  engagement  and  increasingly  certain  of   the  need  for  violence  to  achieve
political  goals.  The  movement  by  each  man  toward  the  position  the  other  had
previously held was not coincidental, particularly in Sartre’s case. Spending the war
years as an observer—as a  “writer who resisted, not a resister who wrote”—S artre
was  overwhelmed  by  the  dashing  action  figure  cut  by  Cam us.  Ronald  Aronson
suggests  that  Sartre  “seemed  to  assimilate  Camus  to  himself ”  in  his  newfound
emphasis on engagement: “This young man was already the person Sartre was trying
44
to become.”  Several years later, while sifting through the wreckage of  their quarrel,
Sartre  recalled  that  his  former  friend  lived  this  era  “more  deeply  and  fully  than
many of  us (myself  included).” He was, Sartre declared, “the admirable conjunction
45
of  a person, an action, and a work.”  Camus’s most remarkable literary creation, in
the  end,  was  not  Meursault  or  Rieux  but  Jean-Paul  Sartre  in  his  postwar
reincarnation as the point man for  littérature engagée.
Yet  did  Sartre  fully  understand  how  early  Cam us  had  distanced  himself   from
existentialism?  Five  years  before  they  met,  the  young  French  Algerian  writer  had
already  encountered  Sartre  through  the  medium  of   his  first  novel,  Nausea.   In  a
review  of   the  book  for  Alger-Républicain,   Camus  expressed  his  misgivings.  He
began with an axiom:  “A novel is nothing more than philosophy expressed through
images.” The  balance  between  the  two  elements  is  critical:  allow  the  philosophical
ideas to overwhelm the characters and action and the novel becomes lifeless. Cam us
praised Sartre’s  “vigor and confidence” in depicting the collapse of  the stage set on
which  we  live  our  lives,  forcing  us  to  confront  our  absurd  condition.  But,  Cam us
continued, Sartre failed to mesh the narrative and philosophical elements, a gap that
hindered  the  reader  from  throwing  himself   fully  into  the  work.  Mo re  important,
Camus worried over the abuse of  the absurd: “A certain kind of  literature makes the
mistake of  believing life is tragic becau se it is miserable.” Nothing could be further
from the truth: “Life is tragic precisely becau se it is overwhelming and magnificent.”

It  is  for  this  reason,  Camus  concluded,  that  the  “affirmation  of   life’s  absurdity
46
can not be an end, but only a beginning.”
During the war, Camus grew more convinced than ever that existentialism was a
diagnosis mistaken by many for a cure. By itself, it was, quite simply, “zero point,” a
47
datum  of   existence  that  “teaches  nothing.”   The  experience  of   liberation  only
confirmed  this  belief:  the  existentialist  was  right  to  affirm  the  existence  of   the
absurd  but  wrong  to  propose  that  we  remain  there.  “Acce pting  the  absurdity  of
everything around us is one step, a necessary experience,” he insisted, but  “it should
48
not become a dead end.”  Just as recognizing a physical illness leads to the search
for  a  cure,  recognizing  the  absurdity  of   our  lives  leads  to  revolt.  And  the  idea  of
revolt,  Camus  concluded,  “could  help  us  to  discover  ideas  cap able  of   restoring  a
49
relative meaning to existence.”
°  °  °
Camus’s  idea  of   revolt  proved  too  frail  to  weather  the  cold  war,  which  by  then
had  settled  over  Europe  and  much  of   the  world. The  Soviet  Union  had  recently
tested  its  first  atomic  bomb,  had  sponsored  the  North  Korean  invasion  of   South
Korea, and had launched a series of  show trials in its Eastern European client states.
In  France,  the  Communist  Party,  loyal  to  Mo scow,  was  the  dominant  opposition
party,  claiming  the  allegiance  of   the  working  class  and  intellectuals. The  prophecy
made  in  1950  by  the  prominent  Communist  philosopher  Roger  Garaudy  seemed
utterly  reasonable  to  friends  and  foes  alike:  “Without  any  doubt,  the  twentieth
50
century  will  go  down  in  history  as  the  century  of   the  victory  of   Communism.”
Garaudy’s  counterpart,  the  political  scientist  Raymond  Aron,  ridiculed  such
predictions. Still, he allowed that every action in the West “presupposes and involves
51
the adoption of  an attitude with regard to the Soviet enterprise.”
The “Soviet enterprise” seemed on the verge of  establishing a franchise in France.
At  the  very  moment  U.S.  and  Chinese  forces  were  about  to  collide  on  the  Korean
peninsula,  panic  set  in  around  Paris:  rumors  flared  that  France  was  about  to  be
invaded  by  the  Soviet  Union.  Bumping  into  Sartre  and  Beauvoir  at  a  café,  Cam us
asked  about  their  plans  should  the  Russians  attack.  Before  they  could  reply,  he

quickly added: “You mustn’t stay!” An argument quickly erupted: Cam us insisted on
the  need  to  resist  the  Soviet  invasion,  while  Sartre  answered  that  the  Soviet  Union
remained the best hope for French workers. Nonsense, Cam us replied angrily: these
same French workers had never protested the existence of  Soviet labor cam ps. Sartre
would  not  budge:  French  workers,  he  said,  already  had  “troubles  enough  without
worrying about what’s going on in Siberia.” Cam us persisted:  “If  you stay it won’t
52
only be your life they’ll take, but your honor as well.”
Yet for many Parisians, it seemed, the fear of  seeing a red flag flying over city hall
was no greater than seeing a  “Buvez Coca-Cola” sign blinking above Notre Dame.
While the Red Army seemed poised to invade France, the United States had already
launched  a  more  subtle  kind  of   invasion,  one  whose  weapons  were  cultural  and
commercial  exports.  These  fears  cam e  to  a  head  with  the  battle  over  Coca-
Colonization,  fought  at  the  same  time  as  the  war  engulfing  the  Korean  peninsula.
Many  on  the  Right  and  Left,  Gaullists  and   Communists,  saw  the  Coca-Cola
Company’s  efforts  in  the  early  1950s  to  open  bottling  plants  in  France  as  the
beginning  of   the  end  of   French  culture.  Doomsayers  across  the  ideological
spectrum predicted catastrophe: the eclipse of  the wine industry, youth’s addiction
to  the  drink’s  mysterious  ingredients,  the  collapse  of   social  traditions,  and  the
extinction  of   la  vie  douce.   Even  the  usually  sober  Le  Monde   declared  in  1950,
53
“Coca-Cola  is  the  Danzig  of   European  culture.”   Allow  the  American s  this
bridgehead, in short, and they would go on to colonize the rest of  the Old World.
But the fear went well beyond Coke. As blunt as always, Beauvoir expressed this
widespread  anxiety.  Already  disenchanted  with  the  “arrogant  condescension”  and
social conformism she encountered during her visit to the United States a few years
before, her attitude toward the U.S. presence in France had darkened. She had come
to see the U.S. soldiers in France as no better than the Germans they had forced out:
“What their uniforms meant to us now was our dependence and a mortal threat.”
When she confided to Camus her conviction that France suffered under a new kind
of  occu pation, he was jolted:  “Really?” After a short pause, he continued:  “Wait a
54
while. You’ll see a real Occu pation soon—a  different sort altogether.”
Could a third way be found? In the late 1940s, a small group of  non-Communist
intellectuals  tried  to  blaze  such  a  path,  creating  the  Rassemblement  Démocratique
Révolutionnaire  (RDR).  Sartre  and  Camus  joined  the  movement,  attracted  to  its

effort to tack between Soviet communism and American  cap italism. For Cam us, at
least,  the  RDR  was  poised  to  challenge  all  extremisms.  Speaking  at  an  RDR
convention, Camus affirmed that it was better  “to be wrong and to have killed no
55
one than to be right and to have contributed to the digging of  mass graves.”  Such
prudential declarations failed to stir a mass movement, however. The RDR died an
early death, incap able of  taking root in the polarized soil of  postwar France.
By  then,  Camus  had  already  left  a  foundering  Combat,   no  less  a  victim  of   the
times. Like the RDR, the newspaper was an equal opportunity skeptic: it distrusted
cap italism as much as communism, the Gaullist RPF as much as the PCF. Proud of
its internal debates, the newspaper carried not just Sartre’s highly critical dispatches
from the United States but pro-American  assessments by Raymond Aron.  Combat
was  fiercely  independent,  refusing  financial  support  from  political  parties  and
wealthy individuals, but it was penniless. During a printers’ strike in early 1947, the
paper bled the last of  its financial reserves. Cam us tried to mask the dire situation.
Once  the  strike  had  ended,  he  wrote:  “Poor  but  free  before  the  strike,  Combat   is
56
back,  poorer  than  ever  but  still  free  and  determined  to  stay  that  way.”  Yet  the
editorial  board’s  deepening  ideological  conflicts—s ome  members,  like  Aron  and
Albert Ollivier were moving toward the Gaullists, while others looked to the PCF —
combined  with  the  paper’s  financial  hemorrhage,  led  Camus  to  resign  just  a  few
months  later.  His  parting  words  were  grim:  “The  conditions  under  which  daily
newspapers operate have evolved to the point where only large circulation papers can
break even. I leave it to readers to ponder what this law of  economics portends for
57
freedom of  thought.”
These same ideological pressures wrenched at Cam us and Sartre. It may well be
that Sartre’s failure to join the Resistance during the war, coupled with the postwar
failure of  the RDR, made him more determined than ever to plunge into politics.
He  was  already  warming  up  for  his  leap  in  The  Flies.   When  Orestes  murders
Aegisthus  and  Clytemnestra,  then  quits  the  city  he  has  just  liberated,  many  in  the
audience heard the call for violent rebellion against Vichy and Germany. Yet violence
was more than a means to liberate France. Sartre has Orestes embrace violence not
just  as  a  political  necessity  but  as  an  ethical  imperative  as  well:  only  when  he  kills
58
Aegisthus and Clytemnestra does he become fully himself.

Violence was not committed merely for the sake of  self-actualization; it was also
the  sole  means  to  create  a  classless  and  just  society.  As  Sartre’s  friend  and  mentor
Maurice Merleau-Ponty had just argued in his book  Humanism and Terror,  we do
not  have  a  choice  between  violence  and  nonviolence.  Rather,  we  have  to  choose
between  different  kinds  of   violence.  Either  we  acce pt  the  brutal  exploitation  of
workers  and  colonized  peoples  under  liberalism,  Merleau-Ponty  states,  whose  sole
end is the continued suppression of  entire social classes and continents, or we make
the violence of  communism our own: there, at least, violence is employed to achieve
a future where violence will no longer exist and where all human beings will be free
and equal. As Merleau-Ponty argues, “Violence is the common origin of  all regimes.
Life,  discussion,  and  political  choice  occu r  only  against  a  background  of   violence.
59
What we have to discuss is not violence, but its sense or its future.”
The  one  party  in  France  geared  for  this  battle,  promising  a  better  world  of
“singing tomorrows,” was the PCF. Sartre was not blind to Stalin’s crimes—t o the
PCF’s  great  displeasure,  he  had  denounced  the  existence  of   the  labor  cam ps—b ut
by the early 1950s he had rallied to the Soviet Union as the great remaining hope of
the  working  class.  For  any  committed  humanist,  Sartre  believed,  communism  was
the only game in town. It may well have created a hell on earth in Russia, but it was
through this hell that humanity had to pass in order to achieve a better tomorrow.
Speaking for Sartre, Beauvoir declared that while far from the “dream of  a socialism
60
without defect, Russian socialism had the immense advantage of  existing.”
Camus  despised  this  logic.  The  compromises  he  had  made  with  communism
during  the  war  now  left  him  shaken.  A  chance  meeting  on  a  Paris  street  between
Camus  and  a  fellow  member  of   the  Resistance  reflected  the  bleak  trajectory  of
politics  from  the  Occu pation  to  the  cold  war. When  the  friend  told  him  he  had
joined the PCF, Camus blurted out: “Then you’ll be a murderer.” The friend replied
that  the  war  had  already  made  him  a  murderer.  Cam us  answered  that  the  war  had
done so to him as well:  “But I don’t want to be any more.” As they parted, Cam us
told  him:  “This  is  the  real  problem:  whatever  happens,  I  shall  always  defend  you
against  the  firing  squad.  But  you  will  be  obliged  to  approve  my  being  shot. Think
61
about that.” The friend promised he would.
But at this point it was not clear, at least to Cam us, if  the friend could honor his
promise. Vast  and  opposing  forces  had  cau ght  the  world  in  a  great  vise;  individual

choices seemed limited and bleak. Camus feared Europeans faced a choice between
the  divine  and  the  “divinization  of   history”—namely,  Marxism’s  “scientific”
affirmation that the logic of  history led inevitably to a classless society.  “What to
do between the two?” he wondered. “Something in me tells me, convinces me that I
can not  detach  myself   from  my  era  without  cowardice,  without  acce pting  slavery,
without denying my mother and my truth. . . . Not a Christian, I must go on to the
end.  But  going  on  to  the  end  means  choosing  history  absolutely,  and  with  it  the
murder of  man if  the murder of  man is necessary to history. Otherwise, I am but a
62
witness.”
Camus  decided  that  provisional  claims  and  clear  speaking  are  our  only
alternatives.  He  made  Rieux’s  ethics  his  own:  he  would  call  things  by  their  name.
Like Rieux, Camus rejected abstraction. Both men insisted on describing the world
as  it  was,  whether  by  identifying  the  buboes  erupting  on  a  patient’s  body  or  the
linguistic  subterfuges  and  cognitive  strategies  we  use  to  acce pt  our  lot.  Rieux  was
scan dalized  by  the  deaths  of   his  patients  when  he  first  began  his  practice:  “I  was
outraged by the whole scheme of  things,” he tells Tarrou. Though the outrage slowly
faded  over  time,  it  never  disappeared:  “I’ve  never  managed  to  get  used  to  seeing
63
people die. That’s all I know.”  As he shouts at Paneloux, who tried to justify God’s
ways following a child’s death:  “Until my dying day I shall refuse to love a scheme
64
of  things in which children are put to torture.”
Rieux’s confrontation with Paneloux echoes a row between Cam us and Me rleau-
Ponty.  During  a  party  hosted  by  the  writer  and  musician  Boris Vian,  the  guests,
including Sartre, Beauvoir, and Merleau-Ponty, had been drinking and debating for
several hours when Camus arrived late in the evening. As American  jazz blasted over
Vian’s  phonograph,  Camus  noticed  Me rleau-Ponty  and  walked  right  up  to  him.
Without  a  pause,  he  attacked  the  philosopher  for  his  claim  that  violence  was
inherent  to  politics  and,  as  a  result,  the  violence  of   communism  was  preferable  to
cap italism, for it at least promised a better future. As Me rleau-Ponty tried to reply,
Sartre  jumped  into  the  fray,  taking  Me rleau-Ponty’s  side.  Shocked  by  his  friend’s
attempt to defend the indefensible, Camus stalked out of  the apartment, slamming
the door behind him. Sartre ran after him but could not cajole him to return to the
65
party. Six months passed before the two friends spoke again to each other.  Camus
had no regrets: “Today things are clear and what belongs to the concentration cam p,

even socialism, must be called a concentration cam p. In a sense, I shall never again
66
be polite.”
°  °  °
The Rebel  is an essay on the necessity of  being impolite. Published in 1951, the
book  surveyed  a  modern  landscap e  pocked  with  “slave  cam ps  under  the  flag  of
freedom, massacres justified by philanthropy or by a taste for the superhuman.” On
the   day   “when   crime   dons   the   apparel   of    innocence—t hrough   a   curious
transposition  peculiar  to  our  times—i t  is  innocence  that  is  called  upon  to  justify
67
itself.”   Here,  for  Camus,  was  the  crux  of   the  problem:  innocence,  or  perhaps
blamelessness,  was  at  risk.  Camus  set  out  to  justify  not  innocence  but  revolt;  to
praise not the revolutionary but the rebel. Rebellion alone is the proper response to
the  betrayal  of   innocence.  It  is  “born  of   the  spectacle  of   irrationality  confronted
with an unjust and incomprehensible condition. . . . It protests, it demands, it insists
that the outrage be brought to an end, and that what has up to now been built upon
68
shifting sands should henceforth be founded on rock.”
During  the  winter  of   1946–1947,  Camus  spent  several  weeks  of   convalescence
for his tuberculosis in an otherwise empty Alpine hotel. Alone and isolated, Cam us
worked  on  The  Rebel   during  the  day—a  project  that  often  left  him  in  despair:
“After  a  week  of   solitude,  again  keen  awareness  of   my  inadequacy  for  the  work  I
have begun with the maddest of  ambitions. Temptation to give it up.” At night, he
turned  to  Montaigne’s  essays.  The  choice  could  not  have  been  coincidental.
Montaigne wrote in the midst of  the wars of  religion, when France was divided as it
was  during  Camus’s  own  day;  his  essays  lambaste  both  sides  for  their  common
conviction  that  each  alone  holds  the  truth.  In  his  longest  essay,  Apology  for
Raymond  Sebond,   Montaigne  declares  a  plague  on  both  houses:  “See  the  horrible
impudence with which we bandy divine reasons about, and how irreligiously we have
both  rejected  them  and  taken  them  again,  acco rding  as  fortune  has  changed  our
69
place  in  these  public  storms.”   Man  can not  rise,  Montaigne  concludes,  “above
himself  and humanity; for he can  see only with his own eyes, and seize only with his
70
own grasp.”  While his contemporaries assumed that this implied the necessity of

faith,  Camus  (and  Montaigne)  disagreed:  it  implied,  instead,  the  recognition  of
limits.
The  spirit  of   Thucydides  also  hovers  over  The  Rebel.   In  his  essay,  Camus
explores the Thucydidean insights he had earlier used in  The Plague.  The two works
offer stunningly similar portrayals of  the human predicam ent, dwelling not just on
man’s impulse to overreach but also on his reflex to resist when he is the victim of
such  overreaching. The  Athenians  overreached  at  Me los,  and  the  Melians  resisted,
just  as  two  generations  before  the  Persians  had  overreached  against  the  Athenians,
and the Athenians had in turn resisted. Of  course, the Athenian gamble succeeded
while  the  Melian  gamble  failed—but  this  is  irrelevant.  What  is  relevant  is  the
conviction, shared by Thucydides and Camus, that the desire to resist—t o revolt—
is no less inherent a human trait than is the drive to dominate. Equally important,
revolt  creates  unity  where  disunity  had  once  existed. The  Greek  city-states  warred
among  themselves  prior  to  the  Persian  invasion,  just  as  the  city-states  in  Sicily  did
before the Athenians tried to conquer them. So, too, with the resistance movements
in  France:  historical  and  ideological  differences  meant  little  when  the  nation  itself
was in danger.
When,  at  the  start  of   The  Rebel,   Camus  declares  that  the  “astonishing  history
evoked  here  is  the  history  of   European  pride,”  he  takes  a  page  from Thucydides’
71
work.  At the beginning of  his history, Thucydides states that he will recount the
“greatest disturbance in the history of  the Hellenes.” By book’s end, his meaning is
clear: it was the “greatest disturbance” becau se it was the most tragic. Not only was
the  war  fratricidal,  pitting  Greek  against  Greek,  but  it  also  resulted  from  man’s
misplaced confidence in human reason and power. Just like the Athenians at Me los,
modern revolutionaries believe they grasp the logic of  human nature. The terrorists
of  the French Revolution, or the Communists of  the Russian Revolution, sacrificed
others  in  their  belief   in  historical  determinism  and  the  general  will.  Whoever
disagreed was, by definition, a traitor to the nation and to history. With the events
of  1789 and 1917, abstractions eclipsed individuals, dreams of  totality suppressed
the  inevitability  of   differences.  Modern  revolution,  Cam us  contended,  ushered
humankind  into  “the  reign  of   history.” While  our  eyes  are  fixed  on  a  future  of
universal brotherhood, our hands stifle and kill others in the present. The ends, no
matter  how  horrific,  justify  the  means. The  logic  of   historical  events,  “from  the

moment it is totally acce pted, gradually leads it . . . to mutilate man more and more
72
and to transform itself  into objective crime.”
For Camus, our present predicam ent could not be grimmer: on the one hand, we
submit  to  a  divine  being  or  a  divinized  history;  on  the  other  hand,  we  reconcile
ourselves  to  an  indifferent  sky  and  an  impassible  world. While  Camus  refused  the
former, he was uncertain if  the latter was a basis for an ethics. On the contrary, did
it  not  lay  the  foundation  for  the  nihilism  into  which  his  “German  friend”  had
plunged? Did he not admit that both he and his friend  “started out from the same
solitude”?  Camus  of   course  refused  to  follow:  he  never  yielded  to  metaphysical
despair.  But  why  choose  the  path  of   justice  rather  than  the  path  of   despair?  On
what  ethical  grounds  did  Camus  stand,  refusing  to  leap  into  the  void  with  the
nihilist?  Even  more  crucial:  Are  those  grounds  strong  enough  to  include  others  in
that same refusal? How can  we move from individual to collective revolt?
In  The Myth of  Sisyphus,  Camus had insisted that the absurd “does not liberate;
it  binds.  It  does  not  authorize  all  actions.” Though  modest,  this  claim  offered  a
starting point. While the nihilist rejects the very possibility of  values, the absurdist
thinker  insists  on  their  necessity.  At  first,  this  sounds  like  whistling  in  the  dark:  if
we couch our hope in terms lyrical and desperate enough, we can  simply make it so.
But  it  is  more  than  simple  whistling—or,  rather,  the  whistling  itself   points  to  the
possibility  of  harmony. In a way, Camus’s claim reflects the belief  that if  we truly
73
“want an ethical order, [we] are cap able of  creating one.”
From  the  recognition  of   absurdity  comes  revolt;  and  from  revolt  comes  the
recognition that we are not alone. So insistent was Cam us on the truth of  this claim
that he cast it in Cartesian language: “In our daily trials rebellion plays the same role
as does the ‘cogito’ in the realm of  thought: it is the first piece of  evidence. But this
evidence lures the individual from his solitude. It founds its first value on the whole
74
human  race.  I  rebel—therefore  we  exist.”  While  Camus’s  statement  lacks  the  a
priori  rigor  of   Descartes’s  cogito,  it  nevertheless  points  to  an  a  posteriori  truth:
across time and place, the act of  rebellion reveals certain moral limits common to all
human  beings.  The  slave  rebels  when  he  has  “come  to  the  conclusion  that  a
command has infringed on something in him which does not belong to him alone,
but  which  is  common  ground  where  all  men—e ven  the  man  who  insults  and
75
oppresses him—have a natural community.”

The Melians rebelled for the same reason. They embodied Camus’s ethical cogito,
as  the  Athenians  had  before  them  and  the  Sicilians  would  after.  Told  by  the
Athenians  to  submit,  the  Melians  refused:  “We  are  not  prepared  to  give  up  in  a
short  moment  the  liberty  which  our  city  has  enjoyed  from  its  foundation  for  700
76
years.”   Did  Camus  have  this  episode  in  mind  while  drafting  The  Rebel   ? The
possibility is intriguing: the dialogue at Melos could certainly have provided Cam us
with the bridge from solitary to collective rebellion. The anonymous Melians spoke
with  one  voice,  united  in  their  act  of   rebellion.  Equally  important,  their  revolt
contained its own limits. As the Athenians walked back to their ships, the Me lians
asked one last time that the two peoples might remain friends. Thucydides reports
this  remark,  or  invents  it,  to  underscore  a  deeper  truth.  By  invoking  the  theme  of
friendship, the Melians insisted on the humanity they shared with their enemies,  and
that their enemies shared with them.  But the Athenians did not share this sentiment:
masters for so long, they saw others as slaves or inferiors.
The Melian offer of  friendship to Athens exemplifies the core of  Cam us’s ethical
thought: the slave does not deny his master as a fellow human being; he denies him
only as his master. The recognition of  the master’s humanity reminds the slave, no
less than the master, of  the limits they must observe. This, for Camus, is the  “real
drama of  revolutionary thought”: in order to exist,  “man must rebel, but rebellion
must  respect  the  limits  it  discovers  in  itself—a  limit  where  minds  meet  and,  in
77
meeting, begin to exist.”
This  kind  of   drama,  however,  always  veers  toward  tragedy:  humankind  is
incap able  of   acce pting  its  limits.  Camus  turned  to  ancient  history  for  his
illustration: Xerxes’ whipping of  the Bosphorus when a storm delayed his invasion
of  Greece. “The acm e of  excess to the Greek mind was to beat the sea with rods—
78
an act of  insanity worthy only of  barbarians.”  This gesture shocked the Athenians,
yet  their  descendants  were  no  better  than  the  Persians.  Forgetful  of   their  own
rebellious  past,  indifferent  to  their  foes’  humanity,  convinced  they  were  history’s
agents,  the  Athenians  at  Melos  were  blindsided  by  reason  and  confidence.  So  too
with modern revolutionaries: they were once rebels, resisting others who sought to
oppress them. But the oppressed eventually forgot their origins and becam e in their
turn the oppressor.

Could  a  balance  have  been  found  between  the  daring  of   the  Athenians  at
Marathon,  when  they  rebelled  against  the  Persian  threat,  and  their  presumption  at
Melos,  when  they  led  others  to  rebel  against  them?  Between  the  claims  of   justice
that  marked  Athens’  rise  and  the  dangers  of   limitless  liberty  that  made  for  its
decline?  Thucydides  raised  these  questions  but  offered  no  answer,  for  the  tragic
reason that no answer exists. The same tragic situation frames  The Rebel.  Rebellious
thought,  Camus  wrote,  “can not  dispense  with  memory:  it  is  a  perpetual  state  of
tension.  In  studying  its  actions  and  its  results,  we  shall  have  to  say  .  .  .  whether  it
remains faithful to its noble promise or if, through indolence or folly, it forgets its
79
original  purpose  and  plunges  into  a  mire  of   tyranny  or  servitude.”   Like
Thucydides, Camus affirmed the necessity of  balance or measure yet concluded that
measure  must  sooner  or  later  falter.  By  la  mesure,   Camus  did  not  mean  a  simple
reconciliation  of   contraries.  Instead,  it  was  “nothing  other  than  the  willing
acce ptance of  contradiction.” We must live our lives with this tension. If  we ignore
or  dismiss  it,  we  will  lurch  “beyond  the  frontier  where  opposites  balance  each
80
other.”
°  °  °
This tragic tension exists not just among peoples but also between individuals. By
1952, Sartre had ended his long-standing ambivalence towards communism, finally
siding with Moscow. He was convinced that “circumstances can  sometimes steal our
transcendence  from  us;  in  that  case  no  individual  salvation  is  possible,  only  a
81
collective struggle.”  As if  he were exhorting himself, he wrote: “Like it or not, the
construction of  socialism is privileged in that to understand it one must espouse the
82
movement and adopt its goals.”  In his private journal, he added:  “After ten years
of   rumination,  I  had  reached  a  breaking  point:  one  light  tap  was  all  that  was
83
required.”
More precisely, it was a series of  taps: the trial of  Henri Mar tin, a Communist
French  sailor  arrested  for  opposing  the  war  in  Indochina;  the  government’s
harassment  of   PCF  leaders;  the  outlawing  of   a  planned  demonstration  protesting
France’s  participation  in  NATO;  and  the  publication  of   The  Rebel.   For  Sartre,  it

was too much to bear: “An anticommunist is a rat. I couldn’t see any way out of  that
one, and I never will. . . . In the name of  those principles that it had inculcated into
me,  in  the  name  of   humanism  and  of   its  ‘humanities,’  in  the  name  of   liberty,
equality and fraternity, I swore to the bourgeoisie a hatred that would die only with
84
me.”  Sartre had surrendered to a starkly simple interpretation of  political events:
one was either for communism, despite its flaws of  execution, or liberalism, flawed
in its very conception; either for the Soviet Union, despite its concentration cam ps,
or the United States, built by the sweat and labor of  slaves and immigrants. Sartre
concluded not only that he had no choice but the path of  communism but also that
all those who did not make the same choice were his objective enemies.
As a consequence, by April 1952, when Sartre and Camus met at a café on the
Place Saint-Sulpice, the author of   The Rebel  must have been a reactionary species
of  vermin in his friend’s eyes. While Sartre had not said as much to Camus, he now
felt  deeply  ill  at  ease  with  him. While  the  small  man  gripped  his  pipe,  Cam us  sat
across  the  table,  wanly  joking  about  the  reviews  his  book  had  gotten  since  its
publication nearly six months before—r eviews, Cam us confessed to another friend,
85
that had made him “nauseous and unsteady.”  Sartre did not know how to reply, in
part because of  his own attitude toward the book, an attitude he now aligned with
his new interpretation of  current events.
There  was  another  reason  for  his  discomfort:  Sartre  had  already  assigned  the
book  review  to  a  young  man  named  Francis  Jeanson.  Like  Camus,  Jeanson  had
tuberculosis; and like Camus, he disliked the PCF. But unlike Cam us, Jeanson owed
his  career  to  Sartre:  his  first  book  was  on  Sartre’s  work,  and  Sartre  thought  well
enough  of   Jeanson’s  ability  to  hire  him,  in  1951,  to  be  managing  editor  of   Les
Temps  Modernes.   Less  than  a  year  later,  Sartre  asked  Jeanson  to  write  the  review,
claiming he had done so becau se he believed Jeanson was less hostile to Cam us than
the other editors. Once he saw Jeanson’s draft, however, Sartre was shocked, shocked.
Jeanson had written the review, he later recalled,  “in the way I had not wanted, that
is to say, it was violent and slashing, and it pointed out the book’s faults, which was
86
not difficult to do.”
Yet as Sartre must have known, Jeanson’s review pointed less to the book’s faults
than  to  those  of   the  author:   real,  exaggerated,  or  imagined.  At  the  start,  he  noted
maliciously the applause given to the book by conservatives: “If  I were Cam us, I’d be

87
worried.”   He  then  doubled  down:  allowing  that  many  on  the  non-Communist
Left  also  admired  the  book,  Jeanson  wondered  if   this  universal  approbation  was  a
result of  the essay’s very vagueness. A Rorschach test for the bourgeois reader who
could  find  whatever  she  pleased—or,  more  accu rately,  whatever  pleased  her.  Mo st
telling  was  the  title  given  to  Jeanson’s  review:  “Albert  Cam us—Or  the  Revolted
Soul.”  In  casting  Camus,  the  author  of   L’homme  révolté,   as  l’âme  révolté,   Jeanson
punned on the French words “man” and “soul.” This was a pointed allusion, at least
for those acq uainted with German idealist philosophy, to G. W. F. Hegel’s notion of
the  “beautiful  soul.”  For  Hegel,  a  “beautiful  soul,”  in  its  futile  attempt  to  remain
pure in the churn of  History, inevitably undermines itself. No one, Jeanson lectured
Camus, can remain above the political fray. To think otherwise was proof  of   “that
Manichaeism which situates evil within history and good outside it”—n othing less
88
than  an  “objectively  reactionary”  choice.   In  a  word,  if   you  are  not  with  us,  you
must be against us.
The review stunned Camus. He was bruised by the derisive and mocking tone, as
he  was  by  the  fact  that  Sartre  himself   had  not  reviewed  the  book.  Instead,  he  had
given the task to a young unknown whose obscurity was for Cam us  “probably the
89
greatest  of   insults.”   Enraged  and  hurt,  Camus  concluded  that  Jeanson  was  little
more than a messenger, and that the message was, in fact, from Sartre. While Sartre
did not write the review, he must have agreed with it. Otherwise, Cam us believed, it
would never have seen the light of  day.
Acting on this conviction, Camus feverishly drafted a reply. He first addressed it
to Jeanson but then struck out the young critic’s name, replacing it with  “Mo nsieur
90
le  Directeur.”   He  had  no  doubt,  Camus  affirmed,  that  Sartre  was  solidaire   with
Jeanson’s  attack.  And  so  Camus  had  decided  to  call  out  Sartre,  ensuring  the
catastrophe for which he had long been waiting. He brushed aside Jeanson’s citations
of  positive critiques from the conservative press—“ If  the Right possessed the truth,
I’d join them”—and claimed the review misrepresented not just  The Rebel  but  The
Plague  as well. His aims in both works were so clear, Camus asserted, that one had
91
to  be  “lying  or  dreaming”  to  claim  otherwise.   Again  and  again,  he  accu sed  Les
Temps  Modernes —and,  ultimately,  Sartre  himself—of   bad  faith:  Why  bother
reviewing a book  “if  one is determined not to acknowledge what one reads there”?

When I “state that the sky is blue, yet you pretend that I said it was black, I have no
92
choice but to conclude that either I am mad or you are deaf.”
And  yet  the  sky’s  real  color  was  there  for  all  to  see.  Cam us  had  never  denied
history,  as  Les Temps  Modernes   claimed,  but  instead  denounced  the  exaltation  of
history  by  Marxism,  which  transformed  a  chance  series  of   events  into  an  absolute
value, an end that justifies any and all means. Mo re important,  Les Temps Modernes
never bothered to take up Camus’s fundamental question: If  we acce pt the historical
determinism  inherent  to  Marxist  theory,  must  we  not  also  acce pt  the  existence  of
political tyranny? The reality of  the labor cam ps and show trials and mass purges in
the  Soviet  Union,  Camus  concluded,  could  only  mean  the  answer  was  no. This  is
why, he affirmed, the  “article can not deal directly with the actual text and must, in
93
order to criticize it, replace it with another.”
In the letter’s closing lines, Camus shifted from the political to the personal.  “I
am growing rather tired of  seeing myself, and especially of  seeing veteran militants
who  never  ran  from  struggles  in  their  own  time,  receive  countless  lessons  in
effectiveness from critics who have done nothing more than point their seats in the
94
direction of  history.”  As Sartre must have known, this was aimed squarely at him:
the  joke  between  friends  had  now  become  a  barb  between  foes,  and  the  joyous
encounter at the Comédie Française had been eclipsed by an angry confrontation on
the stage of  public opinion.
°  °  °
“My dear Camus, our friendship was not an easy one, but I shall miss it. If  you
break it today, it is certainly becau se it had to break. . . . Unfortunately you singled
me  out  so  deliberately  and  in  so  unpleasant  a  tone  that  I  can not  remain  silent
95
without losing face.”  In his reply to Camus’s letter, also published in the August
1952 issue of   Les Temps Modernes,  Sartre took up where Camus had left off: he
turned  a  private  and  philosophical  disagreement  into  a  public  and  personal
confrontation. France had witnessed other clashes, notably the  “great noise” of  the
mid-eighteenth  century  sparked  by  the  publication  of   letters  between  Jean-Jacq ues
Rousseau  and  David  Hume. Then  as  now,  intimate  friends  becam e  fierce  foes  and
the  line  collapsed  between  private  concerns  and  public  affairs  becau se  the

antagonists were not just seminal thinkers but public celebrities. The brilliant, bitter
words exchanged between the two figures were broadcast across Europe. Mo reover,
in both the Age of  Enlightenment and the age of  existentialism, philosophy was a
profession  unlike  any  other:  it  was  a  way  of   life,  not  a  way  to  make  a  living.  It
96
entailed an acco rd between thought and action, books written and lives lived.
Sartre’s  letter  was,  in  a  way,  as  violent  and  dramatic  as  Orestes’  fatal  gestures  in
The  Flies.   He  lashed  out  at  his  old  friend,  ridiculing  his  vanity  and  self-
righteousness,  his  posturing  and  glibness.  “A  mixture  of   somber  self-conceit  and
vulnerability  has  always  discouraged  anyone  from  telling  you  whole  truths.  The
result  is  that  you  have  become  the  victim  of   a  bleak  immoderation  which  masks
your  internal  difficulties  and  which  you  call,  I  believe,  Me diterranean  measure.
97
Sooner or later someone would have told you; let it be me.”
Sartre  then  carried  Jeanson’s  harsh,  but  false,  either/or  critique  to  its  logical
conclusion: Camus, he declared, was himself  an obstacle to history’s progress.  “You
decided against history; and rather than interpret its course, you preferred to see it
only  as  one  more  absurdity.” This  would  not  do:  “To  merit  the  right  to  influence
men  who  are  struggling,  one  must  first  participate  in  their  struggle,  and  this  first
98
means  accepting  many  things  if   you  hope  to  change  a  few  of   them.”   By  “many
things,” Sartre must have meant Stalin’s crimes, which he had himself  denounced in
earlier  articles.  But  he  got  no  further  in  answering  Camus’s  fundamental  question:
Does  working  toward  a  future  paradise  justify  mass  murder  and  slavery  in  the
present?
Underlying  Sartre’s  twenty-page  response  was  a  sense  of   loss  and  betrayal.  He
believed that not only had history lost an ally in Camus but that he himself  had lost
the best of  friends. In this light, the letter was less the work of  a hostile critic than
that of  a spurned lover:  “You had been for us—and you could be again tomorrow
—the admirable conjunction of  a person, an action and a work. This was in 1945.
We  discovered  Camus,  the  Resistant,  as  we  discovered  Camus,  the  author  of   [ The
Stranger ]. . . . You were a real  person,  the most complex and the richest, the last and
the  most  gifted  heir  of   Chateaubriand  and  the  scrupulous  defender  of   the  social
99
cau se.”  Perhaps Sartre was not sincere in his wish that Cam us once again become
what  he  once  had  been:  he  had,  after  all,  condemned  Cam us  to  the  camp  of   anti-

Communists. But his portrait of  the younger Cam us was heartfelt:  “How we loved
100
you then!”
The August issue of   Les Temps Modernes  hit the newsstands at the onset of   la
rentrée,   when  vacat ioning  families  return  from  the  shores  and  mountains  to  their
classrooms  and  offices.  The  timing  swelled  public  fascination  with  the  quarrel.
Screaming  from  Samedi-Soir,   a  popular  tabloid,  was  the  headline:  “The  Sartre-
Camus  Break  Is  Consummated.”  Underneath  were  several  columns  of   particularly
juicy  quotations  from  the  literary  exchange,  while  on  the  opposite  page  were  racy
101
photos  of   scan tily  clad  women.  Though  Le  Monde   and  the  rest  of   the  serious
media latched onto the affair without acco mpanying pinup photos, they too were as
mesmerized  by  the  clash  of   personalities  as  by  the  collision  of   ideas.  How  could
they   not   be?  Yet   underlying   the   sensational   aspect   of    the   clash   was   the
understanding  that  more  was  at  stake  than  personal  reputations.  One  paper,
L’Observateur,   noted  that  the  antagonists  embodied  “two  attitudes  toward  the
world,” while  Combat  described it as a collision between “two ways of  dealing with
102
life.”
Camus  was  deeply  shaken  by  Sartre’s  letter  and  horrified  that  the  dispute  had
become a spectacle—a boxing match, acco rding to some observers, which Sartre had
clearly  won  on  points.  Camus  was  greeted  with  awkward  silence  or,  more  often,
silent satisfaction by those who felt he had been taken down a notch or two.
To  Francine,  Camus  expressed  his  greatest  insecurities  and  anguish.  Sartre  and
Jeanson’s replies, he told his wife, were insulting and vicious, a  “long discussion of
my pride which, moreover, has been deeply bruised. . . . I am paying a great price for
this  unfortunate  book. Today  I  doubt  everything  in  it  just  as  I  doubt  my  own  self
103
which so closely resembles it.”  A few days later, Camus was even gloomier:  “I’ve
been alone with bleak and numbing thoughts,” he confided to Francine. He was, he
wrote,  doing  his  best  to  come  to  terms  with  a  bad  situation,  much  “the  way  one
makes  do  in  an  uncomfortable  bed.”  While  his  book  was  of   course  open  to
discussion, it was his own character that instead was being attacked:  “Mo st striking
is this explosion of  long simmering hatred, proof  that these people were never my
friends  and  that  my  beliefs  have  always  bothered  them.”  He  refused  to  respond  to

the attacks and worried only about how to  “distinguish truth from falsehood in all
104
of  this muck.”
Camus  also  spilled  his  anguish  onto  the  pages  of   his  journal.  Even  before  the
publication of   The Rebel,  he had questioned the book and himself: he hated how
Paris  had  changed  him,  held  “the  most  dreadful  opinion”  of   himself,  repeatedly
quoted  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  and  Henry  David  Thoreau  on  self-reliance,  and
castigated  the  press  for  its  cruelty  and  glibness.  “In  France  today,”  he  wrote,  the
“simple  suspicion  of   intelligence  is  enough  to  sink  a  man.”  As  the  quarrel  gained
speed, Camus’s thoughts darkened:  “The one thing that has always saved me amid
all  my  prostrations  is  that  I  have  never  stopped  believing  in  what,  for  lack  of
anything better, I will call ‘my star.’ But today, I no longer believe in it.” Never had
he  felt  so  alone:  “Every  man  and  woman  against  me,  to  destroy  me,  seeking  their
share  without  respite,  without  ever,  ever  lending  a  hand,  coming  to  my  aid,  loving
105
me for what I am so that I may remain what I am.”
°  °  °
In  Aeschylus’s  Oresteia,   Orestes  makes  his  way  back  to  Argos,  uncertain  and
alone.  Describing  his  life  as  a  “trial,”  he  tells  his  sister  Electra:  For  such  as  us,  no
share in the wine-bowl no libations poured in love . . .
There is no refuge, none to take you in.
A pariah, reviled, at long last you die withered in the grip of  all this dying.
Camus’s  predicam ent  was  much  less  tragic  than  Orestes’.  He  was  not  alone:
expressions of  support and admiration were numerous, though, tellingly, many cam e
from expatriate writers such as Czeslaw Milosz, Witold Gombrowicz, and Hannah
Arendt.  And  lives  were  not  at  stake,  only  reputations  and  self-esteem,  small  beer
compared to the destiny thrust on Orestes.
Yet  Aeschylus’s  tragedy  illuminates  an  essential  element  of   the  confrontation
between  Camus  and  Sartre.  At  the  beginning  of   the  tragedy,  Agamemnon  finds
himself  caught in an impossible position: he must obey Zeus’s command and lead
his fleet to Troy; but the fleet can  sail only if, as Artemis demands, Agamemnon first
sacrifices his daughter Iphigenia. Agamemnon cries out,  “Pain both ways and what
is  worse?”  In  the  end,  he  sacrifices  his  child.  He  “slip[s]  his  neck  in  the  strap  of
Fate”  and  now  refers  to  Iphigenia  as  a  “yearling.” The  pitch  of   horror  reaches  its

height when he cuts her throat as if  she were an animal. The fleet sails, lands at Troy,
and the rest is the stuff  of  mythology.
But  the  rest  is  also  the  stuff   of   ethics.  Agamemnon’s  choices  are  limited  and
equally grim: he seems to have no option but to align himself  with necessity. But as
the philosopher Martha Nussbaum notes, from the moment Agamemnon makes his
terrifying  decision,  “he  strangely  turns  himself   into  a  collaborator,  a  willing
106
victim.”   He  transforms  himself   from  father  into  executioner,  human  being  into
instrument,  tormented  into  tormentor.  Even  more  than  his  own  re-creation  of
Orestes in  The Flies,  who relishes and realizes himself  through an act of  violence,
Sartre  resembled  Aeschylus’s  Agamemnon.  Like  Agamemnon,  who  bends  his  own
will in the direction of  destiny, Sartre decided he had no choice but to align himself
with the direction of  History. Like Agamemnon, who embraces perceived necessity
with  inhuman  fury,  Sartre  threw  himself   into  the  class  struggle  with  terrifying
ferocity.  And  like  Agamemnon,  who  broke  the  bonds  of   loyalty  and  expelled
Iphigenia  from  the  company  of   human  beings,  Sartre  betrayed  his  friendship  with
Camus, consigning him to the class of  anti-Communist rats.
The  most  crucial  moment  of   The  Libation  Bearers —the  second  play  in  the
Oresteia   trilogy—is  when  Orestes,  poised  to  kill  his  mother,  hesitates.  Knife  in
hand,  he  turns  to  his  friend  Pylades:  “What  will  I  do,  Pylades:  I  dread  to  kill  my
mother!”  Pylades  does  not  pause:  “Make  all  mankind  your  enemy,  not  the  gods.”
Sartre agreed: better to serve his gods—H istory—t han attend to individuals. As he
boasted to Camus, he had dirty hands:  “Right up to the elbows. I’ve plunged them
in  filth  and  blood.  But  what  do  you  hope?  Do  you  think  you  can   govern
innocently?” When he closed the books on his friendship with Cam us, Sartre thus
107
echoed Agamemnon’s cry: “Law is law! Let all go well . . .”
Sartre’s certitude appalled Camus: the  pied noir  refused to quit the space between
Orestes’  question  and  Pylades’  reply.  Instead,  Camus  claimed  the  sacred  ground  of
hesitation:  only  there  do  we  have  the  space  necessary  to  understand  the  tragic
complexities of  life. This is also the perspective of  Aeschylean tragedy, in which so-
called  solutions  do  not  solve  the  problem.  Instead,  they  “simply  underdescribe  or
misdescribe  it.” The  best  we  can   do,  the  closest  we  can   get  to  a  solution,  is  “to
108
describe and see the conflict clearly.”

Such a description deprives us of  metaphysical or ideological solace, but this is a
good, even great thing. A life empty of  transcendental guidance, a life that assumes
responsibility for its choices, a life that knows the importance of  clearly stating the
problem  is  a  life  alert  to  the  dangers  of   launching  oneself   blindly  into  a  solution.
We must live our lives, in the end, aware of  our language and our limits. In a reply
he  wrote  to  Sartre’s  letter,  Camus  affirmed  that  humankind,  if   it  hopes  to  remain
humane,  “must  maintain  itself   at  the  very  limits  of   revolt,  where  heartbreak  and
lucidity  are  one.  Short  of,  or  beyond  this  limit,  struggle  no  longer  exists. There  is
109
only  consent  and,  in  a  sense,  passivity.”   As  it  turned  out,  Camus  never  sent  the
letter. Lucid and heartbroken, he understood there was no need to do so.

S I L E N C E   F O L L O W S
The criticism of language cannot get around the fact that our words
commit us and that we should remain faithful to them. Naming an object
inaccurately means adding to the unhappiness of the world.
On  Sunday  afternoon,  January  22,  1956,  thousands  of   Algerians—European
and Arab—thronged the Place du Gouvernement in Algiers. Leading the  pieds noirs
was a local bar owner and brawler, Jo Ortiz. He was a die-hard  ultra,  the name given
to  those  for  whom  Algeria  would  always  be  part  of   France,  who  believed  that  the
privileges long enjoyed by the  pieds noirs  should never be taken away. On the other
side,  members  of   the  Front  de  Libération  Nationale  (FLN),  the  underground
movement  dedicated  to  Algeria’s  independence,  maintained  control  of   the  Arab
crowd.  Dividing  the  two  hostile  groups  was  a  thin  cordon  of   gendarmes,
commanded by the city’s prefect.
The  backdrop  to  the  event  was  the  grand  building  known  as  the  Cercle  du
Progrès.  Built  by  a  reformist  Muslim  organization  in  the  1930s,  this  meeting  hall
straddled  two  worlds.  Behind  it  spilled  the  Kasbah,  the  ancient  Mu slim  district
laced  with  alleys  and  passages;  in  front  sprawled  Bab  el-Oued,  a  working-class
neighborhood  dominated  by  Spanish  immigrants.  In  its  way,  the  building  was  a
fitting  site  for  that  day’s  event.  At  two  o’clock,  Albert  Camus  was  scheduled  to
appear.  He  had  just  flown  to  Algiers  to  urge  the  warring  peoples  to  acce pt  a  civil
truce. A few days before, he wrote in his journal that his decision to go home had
lifted  a  great  weight  from  his  shoulders:  “Only  risk  justifies  thought.  And  then

anything is better than this France of  resignation and brutality, this swamp where I
1
suffocate. Yes, I arose happy, for the first time in months. I’ve recovered the star.”
Camus now doubted this earlier élan. He looked around the mobbed hall, filled
with Europeans and Arabs who he believed were condemned to live together, while
outside those same peoples seemed destined to go on killing one another. Since his
arrival four days earlier, Camus had been bombarded with death threats, along with
appeals  from  friends  asking  him  to  leave  his  hotel  for  the  safety  of   their  homes.
Inside  the  hall,  brawny  friends  from  Cam us’s  old  neighborhood  of   Belcourt
surrounded him: with a wan smile, he referred to them as his “gorillas.” He had cast
himself   in  an  impossible  role—mediator  between  two  nations  at  war  with  each
other.  Gripping  the  text  of   his  speech,  his  face  pale,  Camus  faced  the  climax  of   a
tragedy worthy of  Aeschylus or Thucydides.
° ° °
Massacres  had  marked  the  evolution  of   the  war  in  Algeria.  It  cam e  to  life  in
1945  at  Sétif,  a  modest  town  in  Kab ylia  that  harbored  a  small  European
community.  On  May  8,  1945,  the  pieds  noirs   prepared  to  celebrate  the  end  of
World War  II.  So,  too,  did  the  Muslim  population,  but  for  very  different  reasons.
Poor harvests and a wartime rationing system favoring the  pieds noirs  had worsened
already  tense  relations  between  the  two  communities.  For  the  Mu slims, V-E  Day
provided  an  ideal  opportunity  to  call  for  national  independence. Were  not  France
and  the  rest  of   the  world  celebrating  their  own  liberation  after  years  of   brutal
occu pation? How could the French not see that the values for which they had fought
and  died  were  no  less  legitimate  for  those  who  considered  France  an  occu pier  in
their own land?
The  nationalist  demonstration  quickly  collapsed  into  a  bloodbath.  Somewhere,
someone fired a shot; guns and knives replaced banners and flags. By the end of  the
day,  the  rampaging  protesters  overwhelmed  the  small  police  force  and  murdered
more  than  one  hundred  French  residents. While  there  are  no  clean  massacres,  this
one  was  especially  horrific:  women’s  breasts  were  sliced  off,  men’s  genitals  were
stuffed into their mouths. The French state’s response was equally appalling: waves
of   organized  repression  and  vigilante  violence  washed  over  the  region  for  the  next
several  days.  Upwards  of   fifteen  thousand  Arabs  and  Berbers  were  killed,  often  in

grisly fashion. The enormity of  the repression bought a decad e of  uneasy peace, but
the price was high: clear-sighted observers understood that a line had been crossed
in 1945.
While the French press generally played down the violence at Sétif, the political
parties  lamented  the  pied  noir   deaths  and  ignored  the  subsequent  massacre  of
Muslims.  Even  the  Communists,  lulled  by  the  myth  of   assimilation,  were  shocked
by the religious and nationalist character of  the rebellion. Camus’s old friend Am ar
Ouzegane,  the  leader  of   the  Algerian  Communist  Party,  denounced  the  rebellion
2
and demanded that its ringleaders be “swiftly and pitilessly punished.”
Camus  had  flown  to  Algeria  shortly  before  the  bloody  events  of   May:  for  the
first time since the Occu pation he could see his family. But there was also a pressing
professional  reason:  he  was  determined  to  pick  up  where  he  had  left  off   in  1939
with his series of  reports on Kabylia. While he planned a similar  “investigation” of
conditions  among  the  Arab  and  Berber  populations,  Camus  was  no  longer  an
obscure journalist for Alger- Républicain.  He was editor of  France’s most prestigious
3
newspaper,  Combat,   and  one  of   the  country’s  most  prominent  intellectuals.
Equally  important,  Camus  was  about  to  discover  that  Algeria  was  no  longer  the
same  country  it  had  been  in  1939:  the  experiences  of   war  and  liberation  had
galvanized  the  political  expectations  of   its  Arab  and  Berber  populations,  while
hardening the resistance of  its European settlers.
Despite the volatile conditions, Camus spent most of  April crisscrossing Algeria,
traveling  the  length  of   the  coast  and  descending  more  than  five  hundred  miles
toward the desert. Though he returned to Paris on Ma y 8 or shortly before, Cam us
clearly  anticipated  the  nationalist  explosion  in  his  native  land.  Below  the  bold
headline  “Crisis  in  Algeria,”  his  first  article  appeared  in  the  Ma y  13  edition  of
Combat.  Warning of  the  “grave difficulties with which Algeria is grappling today,”
he  proceeded  to  give  his  readers  a  primer  in  geography,  demography,  and  history.
Little had changed in the conditions of  the rural population since his earlier visit to
Kabylia: too little food for too many mouths, too many republican  ideals given the
lie  by  selfish  pieds  noirs   and  feckless  French  administrators.  The  reality  of   the
rationing system was stark:  pieds noirs  were entitled to 300 grams of  bread per day,
while  Arabs  and  Berbers  usually  received  fewer  than  150  grams  per  day.  This
staggering inequality was being imposed on people who not only  “are not inferior

except in regard to the conditions in which they must live,” but who also “have spent
the past two years fighting for the liberation of  France.” France’s duty was clear: it
4
had to “quell the cruelest of  hungers and heal inflamed hearts.”
As he had in 1939, Camus insisted on the universal quality of  human dignity, all
the while holding on to the particularity of  individual human beings. All of  us, he
told his readers, were duty-bound to “understand [the Algerian Muslims] before we
5
judge  them.”  While  the  crisis  was  most  immediately  economic  and  material,  he
continued,  its  roots  were  political  and  historical.  For  more  than  a  century,  France
had  failed  to  apply  its  democratic  principles  to  Algeria’s  native  peoples.  For  this
6
reason, France would have to “conquer Algeria a second time.”  Camus’s provocative
declaration  underscored  a  prosaic  truth:  the  ideals  of   the  republic  extended  no
further  than  the  European  havens  in  Algeria.  If   Algeria  were  to  remain  part  of
France,  France  had  to  reconquer  it  not  by  force  of   arms  but  instead  by  the
systematic and sincere application of  the rights, duties, and benefits of  citizenship.
In his final editorial, Camus declared:  “Our feverish and unbridled desire for power
and  expansion  will  never  be  excused  unless  we  make  up  for  them  by  unwavering
attention  to  the  pursuit  of   justice  and  the  spirit  of   self-sacrifice.  Despite  the
repressive actions we have just taken in North Africa, I am convinced that the era of
7
Western imperialism is over.”
Camus rightly forecast the eclipse of  imperialism. France had been weakened by
the costs of  war, occu pation, and liberation; the nation no longer had the economic
or  material  means  to  maintain  its  empire.  Moreover,  its  political  and  moral  claims
had  been  undermined  not  just  by  France’s  unwillingness  to  implement  its  own
promises in Algeria but also by the growth of  pan-Arab nationalism. The problem,
8
Camus noted, was “quite simply that time marches on.”
He  grasped  far  better  than  most  of   his  contemporaries  that  Combat ’s  slogan,
“From  Resistance  to  Revolution,”  had  inspired  not  just  men  and  women  living
under  the  Nazi  occu pation  but  also  men  and  women  living  under  French  colonial
rule.  The  French  civilizing  mission  could  only  be  fulfilled,  he  announced,  by
bringing “more complete liberation to everyone it subjugates.” If  France failed to do
so,  it  would  “reap  hatred  like  all  vanquishers  who  prove  themselves  incap able  of
moving  beyond  victory.”  Camus’s  warning  not  to  repeat  the  experience  France  had

had  under  the  Nazi  occu pation  was  remarkable:  few  on  the  Left,  much  less  the
Right, cast French actions in such terms. Mo re remarkable, however, was his call for
justice,  despite  the  blood  that  had  just  been  shed.  “Unfortunate  and  innocent
French victims have lost their lives, and this crime in itself  is inexcusable. But I hope
that we will respond to murder with nothing other than justice, so as to avoid doing
9
irreparable harm.”  Here again, Camus’s allegiance to moderation—t he balance dear
to the ancient Greeks—was striking. Like Aeschylus’s Athena, who urges the Furies
to give up their desire for vengeance and to avoid any action that  “strikes a note of
brutal conquest,” Camus asked that all men embrace justice and, as Athena pleaded,
10
“revere the Mean.”
Yet  the  irreparable  had  already  been  done  in  Camus’s  Algeria,  if   not  in
Aeschylus’s  Athens.  Camus’s  belief   that  it  was  not  too  late  to  salvage  a  fully
democratic  and  egalitarian  French  Algeria,  while  well-founded  in  the  1930s,
bordered  on  nostalgia  by  the  mid-1950s.  The  sails  of   Arab  nationalism  were
beginning to fill—represented most notably by Gamal Abdel Nasser’s rise in Egypt
—and  most  pieds  noirs   were  growing  increasingly  fearful.  That  community  had
rejected  earlier  opportunities,  most  importantly  the  Blum-Viollette  proposal  in
1936, and continued to resist efforts at compromise after 1945. By then, however,
their  obstructionism  was  simply  worsening  a  situation  they  had  already  whipped
toward a violent end.
Still, Camus insisted that both sides, even after Sétif, could still be persuaded to
embrace  the  mean:  his  own  past  told  him  he  was  right.  His  childhood  experiences
were powerful testimony to the reality of  republican  egalitarianism. Taken in charge
by  teachers  such  as  Louis  Germain,  men  who  were  committed  to  the  ideal  of
republican   education,  a  fatherless  and  dirt-poor  Cam us  made  his  way  through  the
lycée  and university. The French republic had taken this working-class child’s native
intelligence and talent, drive and curiosity, and had turned him into a Frenchman. In
the novel he would never complete,  The First Man,  Camus recalls sitting at his desk
in the spare classroom in Algiers, where the students—w ho knew only  “the sirocco
and  the  dust”—read  “stories  that  to  them  were  mythical.”  They  were  based  in
“France,”  a  land  of   snow  and  smoking  chimneys,  mysterious  traditions  and  exotic
customs. These acco unts, of  course, were  “part of  the poetry of  school,” but they
were  also  part  of   a  curriculum  whose  ideal  was  based  on  the  universal  values  of

11
1789.  When  Camus  asked  if   France  “attributed  to  its  democratic  principles  a
value  universal  enough ”  to  extend  them  to  the  Muslim  peoples  of   Algeria,  he  was
12
utterly  sincere.   The  path  to  a  better  future  for  all  Algerians  depended  on
education—a  belief   that  spurred  Camus’s  outraged  observation  that  more  than  a
13
million Muslim children were without schools.
° ° °
The  young  Camus’s  education  cam e  not  only  from  French  republican   primers
and school exercises. There were also the lessons provided by a harsh life: as Cam us
told a critic who belittled his knowledge of  Mar xist theory, his teacher had been  la
14
misère,   not  Marx’s  books.   Tragicall y,  the  vast  majority  of   Mu slims  in  Algeria
could  make  the  same  claim.  Camus’s  belief   in  the  transformative  power  of
republican   education,  still  defensible  in  1945,  had  by  1956  been  irrevocab ly
overtaken  by  events:  European  and  Muslim  Algerians  had  learned  their  lessons  in
the misery of  civil war.
That education had begun little more than a year before in Philippeville, a port
on  Algeria’s  upper  coast.  Unlike  Sétif,  where  the  nightmarish  events  began
spontaneously, the FLN—not yet created in 1945—deliberately chose Philippeville
as the stage for its blood-spattered rebellion. Unable to defeat the French militarily,
the FLN leadership decided to terrorize French civilians. One FLN leader, Youssef
Zighout, told his men that in response to the  “collective repression” of  the French
state, they must “reply with collective reprisals against Europeans, military and civil,
who are all united behind the crimes committed on our people. For them, no pity,
15
no quarter.”
Zighout’s watchwords were applied meticulously in Philippeville. In early August
1955, FLN units descended on the  pied noir  communities in and around the town
and  systematically  slaughtered  more  than  one  hundred  men,  women,  and  children.
The  FLN  did  not  work  alone:  many  local  Mu slim  men,  who  had  worked  side  by
side with the  pieds noirs  for years, joined the massacre, while Muslim women lifted
their  voices  in  unearthly  chants  of   “you-you.”  As  at  Sétif,  the  French  reaction  was
indiscriminate  and  wildly  lopsided:  army  units  fired  at  will  into  crowds  in  which

rebels  were  indistinguishable  from  civilians,  and  vigilante  groups  formed  with  the
government’s  blessing  murdered  dozens  of   locals.  When  the  French  government
announced  the  body  count,  71  French  civilian  deaths  were  placed  on  the  scales
against 1,273 FLN deaths, acco rding to French authorities. Acco rding to the FLN,
however,  more  than  12,000  Muslim  men,  women,  and  children  were  killed  in  the
16
massive French reaction.
In  The Plague,  Tarrou does not distinguish among the dead.  “All I maintain,” he
tells Rieux,  “is that on this earth there are pestilences and there are victims, and it’s
up to us, so far as possible, not to join forces with the pestilences.” Anticipating the
cynical  shrug  of   realists,  he  adds:  “That  may  sound  simple  to  the  point  of
17
childishness; I can ’t judge if  it’s simple, but I know it’s true.”  For several months,
Camus  had  used  his  public  celebrity  to  apply Tarrou’s  ethic  to  Algeria’s  worsening
situation. In an open letter to an Algerian friend, the Socialist Aziz Kessous, Cam us
acknowledged  that  the  events  in  Philippeville  had  pushed  him  to  the  “verge  of
despair.”  How  could  it  be  otherwise?  “We  know  nothing  of   the  human  heart,”  he
wrote,  “if   we  imagine  that  the  Algerian  French  can   now  forget  the  massacres  at
Philippeville and elsewhere.” But he did not stop there:  “And it is another form of
madness  to  imagine  that  repression  can   make  the  Arab  masses  feel  confidence  and
esteem for France.”
And yet, neither the European nor the Arab community could will the other to
disappear. While Tarrou fears that his ethic will strike realists as  “childish,” Cam us
now argued that it was true childishness to believe that this truth could be washed
away  in  a  great  wave  of   blood. The  “French  fact,”  Camus  declared,  “can not  be
eliminated  in  Algeria,  and  the  dream  of   a  sudden  disappearance  of   France  is
childish.”  No  less  puerile,  however,  was  the  wish  of   some  French  Algerians  to
“can cel  out,  silence  and  subjugate”  9  million  Mu slims.  French  and  Mu slims,  he
insisted,  were  “condemned  to  live  together.” This,  Cam us  felt,  meant  that  men  of
goodwill on both sides had to risk death to secure a space where the  “exchange of
18
views is still possible.”
Camus  began  to  build  a  case  for  a  civil  truce  in  a  series  of   editorials  for  the
liberal French journal  L’Express.  In calling for a roundtable at which all the factions
would  sit  down  together,  Camus  showed  his  hand:  the  antagonists,  facing  one
another,  would  have  to  attend  to  one  another. This  might,  Cam us  thought,  give  a

19
“meaning  to  the  fighting—and  perhaps  render  it  pointless.”   It  was  the  same
ethical reflex that, in 1939, had prompted Camus to ask his paper’s readers to see
the humanity of  the shipbound Arab prisoners and to ask the governor general of
Algeria— a  man  hidden  behind  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of   his  office—t o  see
the humanity of  Michel Hodent, wrongly accu sed by the judicial system. It was this
same reflex, in 1945, that led Camus, after a sleepless night, to affirm the humanity
of   Robert  Brasillach.  Just  as  he  saw  that  his  whole  effort  then,  “whatever  the
situation, misfortune or disillusion, must be to make contact again,” so too did he
20
insist that the antagonists in 1955 make contact, if  only across a table.
The  cascad e  of   editorials  climaxed  in  early  January  1956  with  Camus’s  outline
for a civil truce. Deploring the deaths of  French and Muslim civilians, condemning
the habit on each side of  holding only the other responsible, Cam us declared: “Soon
only  the  dead  will  be  innocent.”  He  demanded  that  both  sides  denounce  the
violence aimed at all civilians. He urged the  pieds noirs  to “recognize what is just in
your adversary’s cau se, as well as what is not just in your own repressive measures.”
And  he  made  the  very  same  demand  of   the  FLN:  “Disavow  the  murder  of
innocents.”  Before  the  situation  becam e  yet  more  catastrophic,  both  sides  had  to
agree to spare civilians.  “We must all demand a truce—a  truce that will allow us to
21
arrive at solutions, a truce regarding the massacre of  civilians by both sides.”
In  the  last  lines,  Camus  called  on  his  readers  to  rally  behind  the  French  and
Algerian  moderates—“movements  [are]  taking  shape  everywhere”—dedicated  to
dialogue. Camus’s desperate lyricism got the better of  him: “everywhere” was limited
to  precious  few  places  in  Algeria,  while  there  was  only  one  movement,  singular  in
every sense of  the word. Camus was aware of  its fragility, for he had himself  been in
contact with it for several days. Its nucleus was the Association of  Friends of  Arabic
Theater,  pieds  noirs   and  Muslims  who  shared  a  common  love  of   theater.  Among
the members were Jean de Maisonseul, Charles Poncet, and Louis Miquel, veterans
of   the Théâtre  du Travail  and  the Théâtre  l’Equipe,  all  members  of   la  bande  à
Camus.    On   the   Muslim   side   were,   most   important,   Am ar   Ouzegane   and
Mohammed Lebjaoui. Twenty years earlier, Ouzegane had been Camus’s sympathetic
mentor  in  the  Algerian  Communist  Party;  like  Camus,  Ouzegane  was  eventually
expulsed from its ranks. By 1955, however, and unknown to Cam us, Ouzegane had,
like the other Muslim participants in the theater group, gone over to the FLN.

In  the  1930s,  moral  and  political  ideals  had  inspired  Camus  and  his  friends  to
take  to  the  stage;  as  their  manifesto  grandly  declared,  art  must  “descend  from  its
ivory tower” at times of  crisis. The necessity was even greater in 1956. And so, when
the  group  got  in  touch  with  Camus  with  the  idea  of   a  joint  political  action  in
Algiers,  he  agreed.  But  there  were  huge  question  marks.  Just  as  the  working-class
audience for the Travail and Equipe groups never materialized, it was not at all clear
if  the intended audience—moderate and liberal  pieds noirs  and Muslims—for this
different kind of  performance even existed. And if  they did, would they be willing
to turn out for this unprecedented performance?
Moreover, the group’s preparations for the public forum were hardly promising.
At a meeting on January 19, an Arab schoolteacher blurted out:  “To hell with the
civil truce! What we need is absolute and unconditional independence now.” Waxen-
faced, Camus turned to his friend Louis Miquel:  “What the hell am I doing here?
We’re screwed. Do they really expect us to drop our pants?” At a second meeting, a
young  Arab  insisted  that  terrorist  attacks  would  end  only  when  France  recognized
Algeria’s independence. When he heard this at the back of  the room where he was
22
standing, Camus fell silent and then walked out.
At the same time, Camus was receiving death threats from  pied noir  extremists.
As  the  Sunday  event  approached,  a  friendly  police  official  warned  the  group  that
extremists were busy forging tickets: they planned to mob the hall and disrupt the
proceedings. The  group  quickly  printed  new  tickets,  while  the  Arab  participants
assured Camus that they would guarantee security. Violence seemed inevitable; more
than once, Camus considered can celing the event.
Yet he persisted: despite his justified suspicions of  the FLN’s role in his public
appearance,  despite  his  shock  on  seeing  how  radicalized  both  sides  had  become,
despite  his  fear  that  Paris  was  willfully  blind  to  the  depth  of   the  problem,  Cam us
persisted. The same spirit that precipitated his writings during the Occupation now
sped  his  actions  in  Algiers. True  despair  is  not  born,  he  believed,  when  we  face  a
stubborn opponent or in the exhaustion of  unequal combat. Instead, despair comes
to  us  “when  we  no  longer  know  why  we  are  struggling—or,  indeed,  if   struggle  is
23
necessary.”
° ° °

The  political  situation  in  Paris,  even  at  this  late  date,  gave  Camus  reason  to
continue  his  fight.  President  René  Coty  had  dissolved  the  French  National
Assembly  the  previous  December,  and  expectations  ran  high  that  Pierre  Me ndès-
France would become the next prime minister. Mendès seemed to be a man apart.
He had escap ed from a Vichy prison during the war and had become an airman for
the  Free  French.  In  1945,  de  Gaulle  had  named  him  to  the  Ministry  of   the
Economy, from which he resigned a few months later. While the cau se was technical
—Mendès  had  unsuccessfully  argued  for  a  policy  of   financial  and  monetary
austerity  against  the  inflationary  policies  followed  by  de  Gaulle—t he  underlying
reason was ethical. As he told de Gaulle in his letter of  resignation:  “To distribute
money to everyone without taking any back is to foster a mirage . . . but the more we
grant nominal satisfactions, the less we are able to give real satisfactions. . . . I can not
24
acce pt solidarity for measures I consider nefarious.”
Mendès  applied  this  same  rigorous  and  blunt  approach  when  he  returned  to
political office ten years later. He cam e to power in the wake of  the Battle of  Dien
Bien  Phu,  when  a  French  military  garrison,  after  suffering  appalling  losses,
surrendered  to  the  nationalist  forces  of   the  Vietminh.  Mendès  becam e  prime
minister  in  mid-1954,  vowing  that  he  would  quickly  extricate  France  from
Indochina.  Within  a  month,  he  had  made  good  on  his  promise  and  turned  his
attention to other fissures in the splintering French empire. He flew to Tunisia and
set  in  motion  the  colony’s  peaceful  transition  to  independence;  the  same  model
would be applied shortly thereafter to Morocco .
Mendès  then  confronted  Algeria,  aware  that  it  was  a  different  case  altogether.
Among his first acts was to send Jacques Soustelle to Algiers as his governor general.
A hero of  the Resistance and a trained ethnologist, Soustelle was an inspired choice.
Equally  inspired  was  Soustelle’s  decision,  soon  after  arriving  in  Algeria,  to  name
Germaine  Tillion  to  his  administration.  Like  Soustelle,  Tillion  was  a  celebrated
member  of   the  Resistance;  more  important,  she  too  was  an  ethnologist  who  had
studied  the  tribes  of   the  Aurès,  a  barren  and  mountainous  region  in  southeastern
Algeria. Both Soustelle and Tillion were critical of  the historical wrongs done to the
Arab and Berber peoples and, like Cam us, both believed in the republican  ideal of
integration. But a powerful  pied noir  community determined to maintain the status
quo  repeatedly  stymied  Soustelle’s  efforts  at  liberalization.  Already  suspect  in  the
eyes of  many  pieds noirs,  Soustelle also failed to win the confidence of  the Mu slim

community.  Following  the  bloodbath  at  Philippeville,  and  spurred  by  the  FLN
policy  of   murdering  prominent  Mu slims  opposed  to  their  agenda,  moderate
Muslims  soon  began  to  denounce  Soustelle’s  policy  of   integration  and  to  rally
behind the FLN banner.
During  the  last  months  of   1954,  the  government’s  struggle  to  hold  the  middle
ground  was  undone  by  extremists  on  both  sides.  When  the  government  finally
collapsed  in  February  1955,  Mendès  delivered  a  prophetic  speech. While  deputies
on both the Left and Right tried to shout him down, Me ndès declared that France
faced  a  stark  choice:  either  build  “with  the  Mu slim  peoples  a  common  edifice,  or
else  the  legacy  of   a  century  of   history  will  crumble  in  hatred  and  bloodshed.”  As
heckling and catcalls drowned out his voice, Mendès remained at the podium. His
last  words  as  prime  minister  were  fateful:  France’s  politicians  must  ultimately  give
the country  “reasons to hope and to overcome the hatred which we have too often
25
made into a spectacle.  Vive la France !”
Many observers, including Camus, expected Mendès to return to office. It was a
realistic  expectation  but  also  a  fervent  hope:  he  was  the  one  individual,  many
believed,  who  could  prevent  France  and  Algeria  from  pulling  each  other  into  the
abyss. Mendès alone seemed able to master France’s unstable parliamentary system, a
recipe for public scorn in the best of  times and for despair in the worst. By 1955,
the worst of  the worst seemed to have arrived. The novelist Jean Dutourd described
France as a  “dying carcass on which her maggot-ministers prosper”—brutal words
26
that found wide acce ptance.
Camus  had  met  Mendès  just  once  many  years  before,  but  he  was  deeply
27
impressed:  he  told  a  friend,  “I  felt  I  had  met  a  true  statesman.”   It  was  with  the
hope  of   returning  Mendès  to  power  that  Camus  joined  L’Express:   the  newspaper
had gone from a weekly to a daily format with the express aim of  electing Me ndès.
Yet despite the paper’s efforts, the cam paign fell short of  victory. The elections in
December  1955  simply  moved  around  the  existing  political  chess  pieces,  all  of
which  had  to  make  room  for  the  sudden  arrival  of   the  Union  de  Défense  des
Commerçan ts  et  Artisans  (UDCA),  better  known  as  the  Poujadists.  Led  by  their
founder,  Pierre  Poujade,  the  UDCA  won  more  than  fifty  seats  in  the  assembly,
giving  national  prominence  to  their  antirepublican ,  anti-Semitic,  and  anti-Mu slim
rhetoric.  Not  surprisingly,  Poujade  threw  his  support  behind  the  ultras  in  Algeria,

thus  further  complicating  the  political  calculus  in  Paris.  Several  weeks  of   horse-
trading  followed;  as  late  as  January  18,  when  Camus  flew  to  Algiers,  a  new
government had still not taken office. Finally, on January 25, President René Coty
asked the Socialist leader Guy Mollet to form a new government. Mendès was given
the  position  of   minister  without  portfolio,  which  amounted  to  little  more  than
minister  without  influence.  His  political  career  had  come  to  an  end,  as  had  any
realistic hope for a diplomatic settlement in Algeria.
° ° °
As Algeria was unraveling in 1954, Camus reflected on  “action and writing” in
his notebooks. He wondered if   “engaged” writers write becau se they are uncertain
about  the  justness  of   their  engagement.  Burdened  with  a  guilty  conscience,  they
thrash  around  for  reasons  to  justify  their  engagement—a  reflex  mirrored  by  their
opponents:  “Thus,  the  positions  will  stiffen.  So  many  repeated  assertions  will  be
equivalent to actions. Will soon provoke them. Thus, the victorious party will have
enough  charges  on  the  day  of   victory.  By  means  of   continually  fleeing  their  guilty
consciences, the losers will have found true guilt and will answer for it, never having
wanted that. Another day, the victors, in turn, will be vanquished and will respond,
28
never having wanted that. History is a long crime perpetrated by the innocent.”
By  the  time  he  stood  at  the  podium  in  the  Cercle  de  Progrès,  Cam us  faced  the
real-life  consequences  of   this  infernal  logic.  He  believed  that  both  sides  were,  in  a
fundamental  sense,  right;  but  instead  of   acknowledging  this  quandary,  each  side
claimed sole possession of  the truth. They had lied about themselves, had lied about
their opponents, and were committing real crimes, drowning Algeria in one another’s
blood.
Behind Camus as he prepared to speak were three members of  Algeria’s quickly
disappearing  middle:  a  Catholic  priest,  a  Protestant  minister,  and  an  unofficial
representative  of   the  Muslim  community,  Abdelaziz  Khalid.  His  eyes  fastened  to
the text and his words softly spoken, Cam us invoked their presence:  “This meeting
had to take place to show at least that an exchange of  views is still possible.” All the
committee members were private, not public, figures. But with war now seeping into
the realm of  the private, these men had stepped forward. They had walked onto this

stage in the knowledge that  “building, teaching, creating [are] functions of  life and
of  generosity that could not be pursued in the realm of  hatred and bloodshed.”
We  must  not  deny,  Camus  continued,  fundamental  historical  and  demographic
facts. In Algeria  “there are a million Frenchmen who have been here for a century,
millions of  Muslims, either Arabs or Berbers, who have been here for centuries, and
several  rigorous  religious  communities.”  This  swath  of   North  African   coast,  he
announced,  was  the  “crossroads”  where  history  had  thrown  together  these  various
peoples. Yet extremists were trying to throttle this reality by terrorizing not just the
other side but also the moderate members of  their own ethnic groups. Fleshing out
the  abstract  thoughts  he  had  earlier  traced  in  his  notebook,  Cam us  pointed  to  the
spiral  of   lies  and  violence  sweeping  across  Algeria.  If   both  sides  did  not  open  a
dialogue, the Frenchman would make up his mind  “to know nothing of  the Arab,
even  though  he  feels  somewhere  within  him,  that  the  Arab’s  claim  to  dignity  is
justified,  and  the  Arab  [would  make]  up  his  mind  to  know  nothing  of   the
Frenchman,  even  though  he  feels,  somewhere  within  him,  that  the  Algerian  French
likewise have a right to security and dignity on our common soil.” And yet, Cam us
continued in dismay, each refuses to look at the other. If  each and every Frenchman
and Muslim did not make an honest  “effort to think over his adversary’s motives,”
29
the violent would carry Algeria away.
Early  in  his  speech,  Camus  paused  when  a  late-arriving  Ferhat  Abbas,  the  great
moderate  voice  of   Algerian  nationalism,  stepped  onto  the  stage.  As  the  two  men
embraced,  the  audience  cheered.  For  a  moment,  the  applause  calmed  the  gathering
storm  outside:  for  a  moment,  Camus’s  plea  for  a  civil  truce  seemed  possible.  But
stones began to break through the windows, acco mpanied by calls to lynch Cam us.
Ortiz had not been idle: he had helped work the  pied noir  protesters into a white
fury. Camus began to speak more quickly as he feared the mob was about to burst
into the hall and create a bloody ruckus. How absurd, he announced, to appear in
this tumult, asking for nothing more than that  “a handful of  innocent victims [i.e.,
civilians on both sides] be spared.” No less absurdly, his words were blurred by the
uproar  and  his  own  rushed  delivery. Though  the  committee  had  planned  a  public
discussion after the speech, Camus asked that it be can celed: it seemed clear as the
noise outside grew that the conference would soon give way to disorder and much
worse.  The  visitor  left  the  hall  as  he  had  arrived,  surrounded  by  a  cordon  of
childhood friends. Could he have known that his last words—t hat both sides must

refuse  to  practice  and  to  suffer  terror—w ere  as  stirring,  and  futile,  as  the  Me lian
30
warnings to the Athenians two millennia before?
The  next  day,  Camus  succeeded  in  meeting  with  Soustelle  on  his  way  to  the
airport.  The  conversation  was  short  and  unsatisfying.  Soustelle  was  unbending,
refusing to allow noncombatant status to men who were civilians by day, terrorists
31
by night.  His remark seemed to underscore one of  the impracticalities of  Cam us’s
appeal: the FLN’s strategy dictated precisely the kind of  war Soustelle—an d Cam us
—found  reprehensible.  Given  the  overwhelming  force  of   the  French  military,  the
FLN leaders had deliberately launched a terror cam paign aimed at French civilians
in  the  expectation  that  France  would  respond  with  disproportionate  force  against
Muslim  civilians.  Terror  was  clearly  the  order  of   the  day  for  the  Algerian
revolutionaries  and,  seen  through  the  blood-dimmed  prism  of   Philippeville,  it
seemed to be working.
Camus flew back to Paris later that day, filled with more despair than hope. He
had  gained  a  deeper  appreciation  of   the  many  inequities  forced  on  the  Mu slim
majority and of  the iniquities committed by the ultras. He was also unsettled by the
isolation  of   moderates  like  Abbas,  too  long  disdained  by  the  French  and  now
scorned  by  a  new  generation  of   Algerian  militants.  (Abbas’s  nephew  had  been
murdered by the FLN at Philippeville, and Abbas himself  joined the organization a
few  months  after  Camus’s  public  speech.)  Cam us  tried  to  maintain  an  air  of
determined  optimism,  insisting  he  would  “sacrifice  everything  to  the  truce.”  In
L’Express,   he  declared  that  his  meeting  represented  a  “step  forward.”  But  he  also
confessed he did not know  how  to take the next step: instead of  a durable solution,
32
“I have only doubts.”
Subsequent  events  in  Paris  and  Algiers  deepened  those  doubts.  Soustelle  was
recalled to Paris by the Mollet government, which was convinced he had become too
beholden to the  pieds noirs.  Georges Catroux, a former military officer and liberal
reformer, was named as his replacement. This announcement was the spark that set
ablaze  the  great  mass  of   pied  noir   tinder. When  Mollet  arrived  in  Algiers  for  an
official visit on February 5, the fire scorched and nearly killed him. Greeted at the
airport  by  just  a  few  local  officials,  Mollet  was  driven  into  town  along  deserted
roads  lined  by  security  forces.  His  uneasiness  grew  when  he  arrived  in  Algiers:  the
city was silent and shuttered. It was only when Mollet went to lay a wreath at the

city’s  war  memorial  that  he  confronted  an  even  greater  mob  than  had  greeted
Camus. Once again led by Ortiz, the crowd threatened to hang Mollet. This time,
however, they underscored their threats by heaving volleys of  rotten vegetables at the
official  delegation.  A  great  wave  of   demonstrators  surged  toward  the  statue  where
Mollet  stood,  splattered  and  shocked.  They  crashed  against  the  cordon  of   riot
police; had it not been for additional forces brought from France, they might have
burst  through  and  murdered  Mollet.  Stunned  and  frightened,  the  prime  minister
was hustled away by the police behind a wall of  tear gas.
From the safety of  the governmental residence, Mollet announced that Cat roux
had resigned. A deafening cheer rose from the great crush of  victorious  pieds noirs.
Mollet thus did what Camus had refused to do two weeks earlier: he abandoned the
middle  ground  of   reason  and  dialogue.  In  his  notebooks,  he  scrawled  a  prophetic
line: “It seems that in this country no party can  sustain the patriotic effort for long.
33
So  the  right  gives  up  in  1940  and  then  the  left  sixteen  years  later.”   Already  a
desperate  affair,  the  cau se  of   a  civil  truce  was  buried  the  next  day  when  Cat roux’s
replacement, Robert Laco ste, refused to meet with Camus’s committee.
° ° °
In  The Rebel,  Camus discusses a group of  remarkable men and women he calls
the  “fastidious assassins.” They were early twentieth-century Russian revolutionaries
who  tried  to  overthrow  the  Czarist  regime.  For  Cam us,  they  were  the  last  of   their
kind: never again would history see the  “spirit of  rebellion encountering the spirit
34
of  compassion.”  They were revolutionaries in spite of  themselves, dedicated to a
cau se  whose  price  left  them  sleepless,  haunted  by  the  unforeseen  consequences  for
the innocent. For Camus, the greatest tribute we could pay these men and women is
“that we would not be able, in 1950, to ask them one question that they themselves
had not already asked and that, in their life or by their death, they had not partially
35
answered.”
Such introspection seemed positively quaint in 1956. Yet Cam us held fast to this
ideal  and  never  abandoned  the  memory  of   Ivan  Kal iayev.  In  1905,  Kal iayev  had
assassinated one of  the czar’s uncles, Grand Duke Sergei. But he succeeded only on
the second try. Kaliayev aborted his first attempt when he saw two children sitting

next to the duke in the royal carriage. Kal iayev defused the bomb he was about to
throw,  saving  the  lives  of   the  innocent  children  but  endangering  his  own  life  and
those  of   fellow  conspirators. When  Kaliayev  finally  carried  out  his  plan  two  days
later, he allowed himself  to be arrested and walked calmly to his execution.
In  his  play  The  Just  Assassins,   Camus  explores  the  ethical  nature  of   Kal iayev’s
act. After he calls off  his first attempt, Kal iayev’s fellow revolutionary Stepan berates
him.  “Children!”  he  explodes:  “There  you  go,  always  talking  about  children!”
Becau se Kaliayev does not throw the bomb, “thousands of  Russian children will die
of  hunger for many years to come.” The utilitarian calculus is straightforward: “Not
until  the  day  comes  when  we  stop  being  sentimental  about  children,  will  the
revolution triumph and we be masters of  the world. . . . Nothing that can  serve our
36
cau se should be ruled out. . . . There are no limits.”
The consequences of  a world freed from limits had preoccu pied Camus for most
of   his  life:  he  brooded  over  metaphysical  limits  in  The  Myth  of   Sisyphus,   moral
limits  in  Letters  to  a  German  Friend,   and  political  limits  in  The  Rebel.  With  the
advent  of   war  in  Algeria,  Camus  now  confronted  the  question  of   limits  in  yet
another  guise.  Stepan’s  moral  absolutism  in  The  Just  Assassins   anticipates  the
rationale offered by European apologists for the FLN’s terrorism such as Me rleau-
Ponty  and  Sartre.  In  a  way,  the  case  for  revolutionary  violence  made  by  Me rleau-
Ponty in  Humanism and Terrorism  was fungible: any revolutionary convinced he is
on  the  right  side  of   history  is  free  to  use  it. The  FLN  and  its  supporters  had
concluded that violence was part and parcel of  historical experience.
For  Camus,  too  many  individuals  on  both  sides  were  guilty  not  just  of   murder
but  also  of   flattening  life  into  abstractions  or  stereotypes.  In  particular,  Cam us
struggled against the Left Bank’s simplistic view of  the  pieds noirs.  It was not a land
of   richards —wealthy  European  landowners  and  industrialists—who  carry  “riding
37
crops, smoke cigars and drive Cadillacs.”  Most  pieds noirs  were instead of  modest
means;  it  was  his  family  and  neighbors  in  Belcourt,  Camus  feared,  who  would  pay
38
the  heaviest  price  for  the  Left’s  “murderous  frivolity.”   These  “intellectuals  for
progress,”  Camus  despaired,  “rethread  the  stitches  of   reasoning  torn  out  by  .  .  .
39
every head that falls.”

° ° °
Heads were already falling in 1956. His failure as a peacemaker haunted Cam us.
By  the  time  he  left  Algeria,  he  felt  he  had  been  used  by  the  FLN,  whose  role  he
discovered  only  after  the  fact. Yet,  once  Camus  was  back  in  France,  he  found  that
former  friends  on  the  Left  saw  his  efforts  as  little  more  than  grandstanding.
Beauvoir spoke for the circle at  Les Temps Modernes  when she defended the FLN’s
use  of   terrorism—“We  refused  to  feel  indignant  about  [their]  methods  of
40
fighting”—and denounced Camus’s  “hollow” language.  Sartre was no less hostile.
Less than a week after Camus’s intervention in Algiers, Sartre spoke at a pro-FLN
rally  in  Paris:  taking  clear  aim  at  his  former  friend,  he  ridiculed  “tender-hearted
realists”  who  called  for  reforms  in  Algeria.  The  answer,  Sartre  declared,  was
revolution,  not  reform:  “The  neo-colonialist  is  a  fool  who  still  believes  that  the
41
colonial system can  be overhauled.”
Sartre,  no  doubt,  also  counted  Germaine Tillion  among  the  fools.  Like  Cam us,
she did not believe that the Arabs and Berbers were ready for independence; and like
Camus,  she  mercilessly  exposed  the  staggering  economic  and  political  hardships
France had imposed on native Algerians. Her book,  L’Algérie en 1957,  introduced
the  notion  of   pauperization  and  created  a  firestorm  of   interest  in  France  and
abroad. Camus wrote the preface to the English-language translation: it was the only
work on Algeria, he stated, that did not leave him with a “sense of  unreality, unease,
42
or anger.”
Like Camus, Tillion tried to patch together a truce. Nearly two years after Cam us
returned empty-handed to Paris, Tillion met with two of  the senior leaders of  the
FLN,  Yacef   Saad i  and  Ali  la  Pointe.  Impressed  by  Tillion’s  objectivity  and  her
rigorous analysis, and worried by the successes notched up by the French military in
the Battle of  Algiers, Saad i arranged a clandestine meeting with her in Algiers. Taken
to an underground apartment in the Kas bah, Tillion promptly told the FLN leaders
that Algeria was not yet ready for full independence. As Saad i and la Pointe looked
at  her  in  astonishment,  a  furious Tillion  added:  “You  are  assassins.”  Saad i  agreed
with her but insisted that the FLN had no choice. Given the disproportionate size
and capacity of  the enemy, the FLN had to pursue a strategy of  terror. Like Cam us,
Tillion  firmly  rejected  this  claim:  one  must  always  choose  not   to  kill  innocent

people, she replied. Her reply persuaded the two men: they agreed to halt the FLN’s
killing of  civilians while Tillion tried to persuade the French authorities to stop the
executions of  cap tured FLN fighters. It was, in effect, a civil truce—o ne remarkably
close  to  Camus’s  own  idea. The  FLN  kept  its  end  of   the  bargain  for  several  days,
but  the  French  military  command  continued  to  guillotine  prisoners,  sabotaging
43
Tillion’s efforts.
Camus  learned  of  Tillion’s  initiatives  directly  from  her.  In  October  1957,  she
visited  him  in  Paris  and  told  him  of   her  meeting  with  the  FLN  leaders.  She  also
brought along the essays of  Muslim grade school students. Their teacher had asked
them to write on the question: “What would you do if  you were invisible?” In every
one of  the essays, the student explored how he or she would devote his or her time
to killing the French. Upon concluding his acco unt in his journal, Cam us wrote:  “I
44
despair for the future.”
° ° °
By the time Tillion paid her visit, Camus was in the twentieth month of  a self-
imposed  public  silence  on  the  subject  of   Algeria.  In  fact,  only  two  days  after
Mollet’s  disastrous  visit  to  Algiers,  Camus  resigned  from  L’Express   and  told  his
friends  he  would  no  longer  speak  or  write  on  the  torment  of   his  native  country.
Mendès’s  defeat  by  the  parliamentary  system  and  Mollet’s  cap itulation  to  the  pied
noir   mob  had  smothered  Camus’s  hope  that  the  republic  would  prove  equal  to  its
ideals. Events had also demolished Cam us’s earlier conviction that neither  pied noir
nor Arab truly wanted to finish this race toward mutual destruction: as the Battle of
Algiers soon revealed, each side was determined to pound the other into submission.
What more could he say at this point? Nothing, he believed: silence was all he had
left.
The  clamor  created  by  Camus’s  silence  was  deafening.  Many  on  the  Left  were
struck  by  the  dissonance  between  Cam us’s  responses  to  the  USSR’s  invasion  of
Hungary  in  1956  on  the  one  hand  and  to  France’s  increasing  use  of   torture  in
Algeria on the other. When Soviet tanks lumbered into Budapest, Cam us led the list
of  Western  intellectuals  to  whom  the  rebels  appealed.  He  replied  immediately:  he

would never abandon “the October insurgents as long as liberty is not given back to
45
the Hungarian people.”
While  images  of   shattered  barricad es  in  Budapest  flashed  across  the  world,
however, Algiers was the arena for a different form of  urban warfare. The Battle of
Algiers  was  under  way,  and  the  French  military  had  institutionalized  the  use  of
torture.  Reports  grew  so  frequent  that  Beauvoir  bitterly  noted  the  “same  boring
program  of   electric  goads,  immersions,  hangings,  burnings,  rape  funnels,  stakes,
nails  torn  out,  bones  broken.”  As  for  her  estranged  friend  Camus,  Beauvoir  “was
46
revolted by [his] refusal to speak.”  Even fellow  pieds noirs  such as Jean Daniel and
Jules Roy had reluctantly come to acce pt the inevitability of  Algerian independence
and wondered over Camus’s muteness. As his sense of  separation deepened, Cam us
blamed  it  on  his  insistence  to  parler  vrai:   “If   I  have  always  refused  to  lie  .  .  .  it  is
47
becau se I could never acce pt solitude. But solitude should now also be acce pted.”
The references to silence and solitude did not mean that Cam us had joined the
Trappists. In private he continued to talk about this  “personal tragedy” with close
48
friends.   More  important,  even  if   he  did  not  speak  publicly,  he  continued  to  act
privately. He wrote more than 150 appeals for Arab prisoners facing imprisonment
or   death,   sending   his   letters   to   government   ministers   or   friends   in   the
49
administration.  He pleaded for the lives of  FLN militants as well as Communists,
taking care in each case to note the specific circumstances: this prisoner did not kill
blindly;  that  prisoner  did  not  kill  anyone  at  all. The  appeals  sometimes  succeeded
but more often failed, leaving Camus with a new appreciation for the absurd. A few
days after sending a letter to President Coty asking him to pardon several militants,
he read in the newspaper that three of  the condemned men had been shot. “ Fifteen
days  after  the  execution, ”  he  observed,  the  president’s  aide  “informs  me  that  my
letter held the attention of  the President and was transmitted to the higher council
50
of  the magistracy. Bureaucracy of  dreamers.”
° ° °
A different kind of  bureaucracy of  dreamers eventually forced Cam us out of  his
stubbornly held silence. Two weeks after Tillion’s visit in 1957, Camus was dining in

a Paris restaurant when a waiter hurried to his table: the radio had just announced
that Camus had won the Nobel Prize for Literature. On hearing the news, Cam us
grew  pale  and  agitated:  Malraux,  he  insisted,  should  have  received  the  prize. The
following  day,  he  wrote  in  his  journal:  “Nobel.  Strange  feeling  of   overwhelming
pressure  and  melancholy.  At  20  years  old,  poor  and  naked,  I  knew  true  glory.  My
51
mother.”
It  was  natural  that  Camus  should  be  burdened  by  the  news.  He  suspected  that
politics had influenced the Swedish Acad emy: the Battle of  Algiers had cap tured the
world’s attention and Camus represented the last, best chance for reconciliation. Did
not  the  acad emy  affirm  that  Camus’s  work  “illuminated  the  problems  of   human
conscience  in  our  times”? The  dilemma  was  that  by  breaking  his  silence,  Cam us
would  betray  his  conscience;  by  maintaining  it,  he  would  betray  the  world’s
expectations. No less troubling, just as he had nothing more to say on Algeria as an
intellectual,  Camus  worried  he  had  nothing  more  to  offer  the  world  as  an  artist.
Apart from a collection of  short stories, Cam us had not published a work of  fiction
since  The  Plagu e.   Tellingly,  many  other  writers  and  critics  in  Paris  agreed  with
Camus  that  Malraux  should  have  been  given  the  prize.  “No  matter  what,”  he
reminded  himself,  “I  must  overcome  this  sort  of   fear,  of   incomprehensible  panic
52
where this unexpected news has thrown me.”
When  Camus  arrived  in  Stockholm  two  months  later  to  acce pt  the  prize,  his
fears  were  partly  confirmed.  A  local  newspaper  welcomed  his  arrival  with  the
question on most people’s minds: Why was the conscience of  his generation silent
on  his  native  Algeria?  Swedish  and  foreign  journalists  did  not  press  Cam us  for  a
direct reply. But Camus’s circumspection gave way when, shortly before his official
discourse,  he  met  with  a  large  gathering  of   university  students  in  Stockholm.  Few
students asked about literature; instead, current events were on their minds, and the
dialogue  quickly  veered  toward  Algeria.  A  Muslim  student  rose  from  the  audience
and  demanded  to  know  why  Camus  spoke  so  freely  about  violence  in  Eastern
Europe  but  not  in  Algeria.  Before  Cam us  could  reply,  the  student  began  to  insult
him. Waiting with scarcely controlled anger for the student to pause, Camus finally
spoke:  “I have never spoken to an Arab or to one of  your militants as you have just
spoken  to  me  in  public. You  are  for  democracy  in  Algeria,  so  be  democratic  right
53
now and let me speak.”

The  student  refused  him  this  right,  instead  tossing  new  salvos  of   insults
apparently supplied by a knot of  students at the back of  the room to whom he kept
returning.  One  spectator  had  the  “painful  impression  of   an  attack  dog  ordered  to
54
leap  at  [Camus’s]  throat.”   It  was  as  if   everything  and  nothing  had  changed  since
his  public  lecture  nearly  two  years  before  at  the  Cercle  du  Progrès:  instead  of
enraged  pieds noirs,  it was now a representative of  Muslim Algeria who refused to
listen. Yet Camus insisted on being heard: “Though I have been silent for a year and
eight months, that doesn’t mean I have stopped acting. I’ve always been a supporter
for  a  just  Algeria  in  which  two  equal  peoples  would  live  peacefully.  I’ve  repeatedly
demanded that justice be rendered to the Algerian people and that they be given full
democratic  rights.”  He  had  stopped  speaking  out  for  these  rights  becau se  “the
hatred  on  both  sides  is  now  so  great  that  an  intellectual  can   no  longer  intervene
without taking the risk of  making the violence worse.” And so, Cam us declared, he
decided  to  wait  for  a  moment  when  he  could  unite  rather  than  divide  peoples.  As
his  frustration  continued  to  mount,  he  told  his  antagonist  that  some  of   his
comrades were  “alive today thanks to efforts you are not aware of.” He then turned
to  the  heart  of   the  matter,  terror  and  his  own  family:  “I  have  always  condemned
terror.  But  I  must  also  condemn  terrorism  that  strikes  blindly,  for  example  in  the
streets of  Algiers, and which might strike my mother and family. I believe in justice,
55
but I’ll defend my mother before justice.”
° ° °
When  the  conference  ended,  the  battle  over  the  meaning  of   Camus’s  celebrated
declaration  began. While  the  audience  at  Stockholm  applauded  on  hearing  it,  the
Left in Paris condemned it on reading the report in the next day’s  Le Monde.  When
the  newspaper’s  cerebral  editor,  Hubert  Beuve-Mé ry,  first  read  his  correspondent’s
acco unt,  he  rubbed  his  eyes  and  demanded  reconfirmation.  When  his  reporter
confirmed  the  quotation,  Beuve-Méry  muttered:   “I  knew  Camus  would  say
56
something  bloody  stupid.”   As  for  Beauvoir,  she  thought  that  Cam us  had  come
clean: he was little more than a shill for the  pieds noirs:   “The fraud lay in the fact
that he posed at the same time as a man above the battle, thus providing a warning

for  those  who  wanted  to  reconcile  this  war  and  its  methods  with  bourgeois
57
humanism.”
Michael Walzer has taken this critique and set it on its head: Cam us does put the
pieds noirs  first but he is ethically justified in doing so. Objectivity, Walzer suggests,
is  not  all  it  is  cracked  up  to  be:  the  “critical  distance”  of   critics  like  Beauvoir  and
Sartre reduces the robustness of  life, making for an  “ideologically flattened world.”
Complexity  and  ambiguity,  shadows  and  blur  are  all  eliminated;  vast  can vases  are
turned  into  cartoons;  political  choices  are  made  easy  at  the  expense  of   different,
often antagonistic truths.
Herein  lies  Camus’s  importance  as  an  observer, Walzer  argues.  It  is  becau se  of,
not despite, his deep roots in Algeria that Camus’s words and silences are so terribly
important.  Were  it  not  for  his  particular  identity,  Cam us  would  have  lacked
credibility with his fellow  pieds noirs;  were it not for his particular experiences, he
would have lacked clarity on the tragic implications of  the war. Camus believed the
“values  I  ought  to  defend  and  illustrate  today  are  average  values. This  requires  a
58
talent so spare and unadorned that I doubt I have it.”  These everyday values were
the  universal  claims  of   French  republican ism  refracted  through  the  sights  and
sounds  of   Belcourt. While  the  process  of   refraction  takes  in  both  the  pieds  noirs
and  the  Arabs,  it  focuses  most  particularly  on  les  siens:   one’s  own  community.
“Camus  would  not  have  said  .  .  .  that  French  and  Arab  lives  were  of   equal
importance  in  his  eyes.”  This  is  as  it  should  be,  Walzer  reassures  us:  “Mo rality
required  the  mutual  acce ptance,  not  the  abolition  or  transcendence,  of   these
different meanings. The Frenchmen had his own loyalties, and so did the Arab; and
59
each had a right to his own.”
This  claim  is  intriguing  but  also  questionable. Walzer’s  interpretation  may  have
been the perspective of  Raymond, or even of  Meursault, in  The Stranger,  but it was
not  Camus’s  perspective.  Had  he  been  truly  incap able  of   taking  the  distance
required to measure the claims of  both sides, Cam us would not have become silent
—or, at least, not in the same way. From his youthful days as a militant in the PCF
and  a  reporter  for  Alger-Républicain   to  his  mature  days  as  editor  of   Combat   and
advocate  of   a  civil  truce,  Camus  represented  Arabs  and  Berbers  no  less  than  the
European  working  class  of   Belcourt.  If,  as  Walzer  writes,  Cam us’s  silence  was
“eloquent  in  its  hopelessness,”  it  is  not  becau se  he  refused  to  surrender  his  primal

loyalties  to  the  pied  noir   community.  Instead,  Camus  refused  to  surrender  his
loyalty to  both  communities, just as he would not surrender his lucidity in regard to
60
the tragic character of  the human condition.
Apart  from  one  other  instance—the  introduction  he  wrote  for  Actuelles  III,   a
collection  of   editorials  and  letters  on  the  subject  of   Algeria—Cam us  never  again
61
spoke  publicly  about  his  native  country’s  torment.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  still
mine  his  silence  for  meaning.  Much  has  been  said  about  it,  all  of   it  nonsensical.
This is inevitable and will inevitably continue: silence invites interpretation, but the
moment interpretation begins, it undercuts the fundamental character of  silence.
But  it  is  no  less  necessary  to  keep  on  with  the  nonsense. This,  at  least,  was  the
view of  the  “other North African ,” Augustine. Early in his  Confessions,  Augustine
wonders about God’s nature, while acknowledging the fundamental insufficiency of
any human answer. What else would one expect, given the limits of  language on the
one  hand  and  God’s  utter  lack  of   limits  on  the  other?  Augustine  embraces  this
paradox:  “What has anyone achieved in words when he speaks about you? Yet woe
to  those  who  are  silent  about  you  becau se,  though  loquacious  with  verbosity,  they
62
have nothing to say.”
So, too, does Ludwig Wittgenstein. Me asured by climate or culture, few cities in
the twentieth century were further from Algiers than Vienna. No less distant from
each  other  were  the  lives  and  work  of  Wittgenstein  and  Cam us.  Each  of   the  two
men, moreover, seems to have been utterly unaware of  or indifferent to the other’s
63
work.   And  yet  they  had  a  common  love  for  Augustine:  the  Viennese  thinker
believed  the  Confessions   to  be  the  “most  serious  book  every  written”  and  was
especially  drawn  to  Augustine’s  preoccu pation  with  getting  language  right.  In  this
spirit,  Wittgenstein  translated  Augustine’s  puzzling  exhortation  in  book  1  as
follows:  “And  woe  to  those  who  say  nothing  concerning  thee  just  becau se  the
64
chatterboxes talk a lot of  nonsense.”
Camus  and  Wittgenstein  also  shared  a  concern  for  getting  both  words  and
actions right—a concern so deep that, at times, it debilitated both men. Ethics and
language, they agreed, were closely connected; to act well meant to speak well; and
silence,  in  an  important  though  elusive  sense,  was  an  essential  aspect  of   the
relationship between saying and acting. Perhaps the most famous line of  twentieth-

century  philosophy  is  the  last  sentence  in Wittgenstein’s  first  book,  the  Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus,   completed  at  the  end  of   the  same  war  that,  at  its  start,  left
the  infant  Camus  fatherless:  “Whereof   one  can not  speak,  thereof   one  must  be
silent.”
As one commentator notes, this observation contains both a logical truth and an
65
ethical command.  We must always strive to articulate meaning, yet we will always
be  foiled  by  the  limitations  of   language.  It  is  hardly  true,  however,  that  what  falls
outside  the  realm  of   the  “sayable”  does  not  exist.  As Wittgenstein  warned,  it  is
simply “unsayable.” But, he added, it can  be  shown  through traditional metaphysical
claims  or,  to  be  sure,  through  the  refusal  to  articulate  any  claim  at  all.  After  all,
Wittgenstein described the  Tractatus  as a ladder to be thrown away once we attain
our goal—a goal where language is no longer required.
In the only  “popular” lecture he ever gave, Wittgenstein spoke on ethics. As his
Tractatus  shows, any attempt to formulate an ethics inevitably leads to nonsense, but
this  must  not  prevent  us  from  continuing  our  efforts:  “This  running  against  the
walls  of   our  [linguistic]  cag e  is  perfectly,  absolutely  hopeless.  Ethics  so  far  as  it
springs  from  the  desire  to  say  something  about  the  meaning  of   life,  the  absolute
good,  the  absolute  valuable,  can   be  no  science. What  it  says  does  not  add  to  our
knowledge  in  any  sense.  But  it  is  a  document  of   a  tendency  in  the  human  mind
which  I  personally  can not  help  respecting  deeply  and  I  would  not  for  my  life
66
ridicule it.”
These  sentiments  mirror  Camus’s  attitude  toward  Christianity.  But,  more
important,  they  suggest  a  new  meaning  to  his  final  silence.  In  1953,  two  years
before  the  tragedies  of   Philippeville,  Camus  published  “Return  to Tipasa.”  In  this
essay on his native Algeria, he tried to balance the two great forces in his life  “even
when  they  contradict  one  another”:  the  wonder  of   the  world  and  the  equally
sublime  ethical  duties  of   the  individual.  “Yes,  there  is  beauty  and  there  are  the
humiliated. Whatever difficulties the enterprise may present, I would like never to be
unfaithful either to one or the other.” But, he continues, “this still sounds like ethics,
and we live for something that transcends ethics. If  we could name it, what silence
67
would follow!”
Camus’s silence does not transcend ethics but instead reflects an ethics similar to
Wittgenstein’s. Tony Judt is right to suggest that Cam us’s silence was an  “extension

of  his earlier promise to speak out for the truth,” but wrong to conclude that in the
68
“Algerian case there was no longer any truth, just feelings.”  On the contrary, there
were  truths,  but  tragically,  they  were  incompatible  with  the  feelings.  For  Cam us,
Algeria  was  not  an  abstraction  but  rather  his  very  life.  It  was,  in  part,  precisely
becau se  he  was   a  pied  noir   that  Camus  was  ideally  placed  to  express  the  Algerian
dilemma. In a letter Camus sent to  Le Monde  shortly after his trip to Stockholm,
he  wrote  that  he  felt  closer  to  the  Muslim  student  at  the  meeting  than  those
“Frenchmen who talk about Algeria without knowing it.” His young antagonist, at
least, “knew what he was talking about.” His face, Cam us added, was not marked by
hatred, but by “despair and unhappiness. I share that unhappiness: his is the face of
69
my country.”
A  detached  or  “objective”  critic,  like  a  rooted  or  “subjective”  critic,  is  perfectly
cap able  of   silence.  But  such  a  critic  makes  a  different  sound  of   silence.  The
muteness of  the  “objective” observer may well signal indifference, while, as Walzer
notes,  “the silence of  the connected social critic is a grim sign—a  sign of  defeat, a
70
sign  of   endings.”  This  was  certainly  the  case  for  Camus.  In  his  Nobel  lecture—
given  two  days  after  his  encounter  with  the  Algerian  student—Cam us  said  that
71
silence,  at  times,  “takes  on  a  terrifying  sense.”   The  Algerian  conflict  was,  for
Camus,  one  of   those  moments.  Euripides  impressed  Camus  much  less  than
Aeschylus  and  Sophocles:  unlike  his  predecessors,  the  author  of   Medea   failed  to
72
depict  the  “pessimistic  and  tragic  Greece”  he  felt  to  be  truest.   To  be  sure,
Euripides  had  a  weakness  for  the  deus  ex  machina  that  would  lift  his  protagonists
from  an  otherwise  paralyzing  knot  of   equally  powerful  but  opposing  claims.  For
Algeria, Camus ultimately understood, there could be no deus ex machina.

EPILOGUE
In the same way as a writer’s death makes us exaggerate
the importance of his work, a person’s death makes us exaggerate
the importance of his place among us. Thus the past is wholly
made up of death, which peoples it with illusions.
In the same year that Camus won the Nobel Prize and briefly broke his silence
over Algeria, he published a short story called  “The Guest.” The tale is one of  the
few explicitly situated in the midst of  the Algerian conflict. A powerful snowstorm
has blanketed a harsh region of  Algeria where a  pied noir  named Daru works as a
grade school teacher. Soon after the storm lifts, he receives a visit from Balducci, a
gendarme with whom he is on good terms. Mo unted on a horse that slowly climbs
the slope to the school, Balducci leads an Arab, who is on foot and tied to a rope.
Once Balducci reaches Daru, he tells him that his unnamed prisoner is to be tried
for the murder of  a fellow Arab.
Daru  then  learns  the  reason  for  Balducci’s  visit:  he  has  been  ordered  by  the
authorities to turn the prisoner over to Daru, who in turn is to take him to the local
administrative seat in Tinguit. Dismayed by the message, Daru protests that he will
not  obey  the  orders.  Despite  Balducci’s  repeated  efforts,  the  teacher  insists  that,
while disgusted by the man’s crime, he will not turn him in. Balducci finally shrugs
his shoulders. Turning the prisoner over to Daru, he tells him to do what he sees fit:
“If   you  want  to  break  with  us,  go  ahead,  I  won’t  denounce  you.  I  have  orders  to
1
hand  over  the  prisoner:  I’m  doing  it.”   He  places  his  revolver  on  Daru’s  desk  and
leaves.
Alone  with  the  prisoner,  whose  hands  had  been  untied  at  Daru’s  request,  the
teacher  puts  the  gun  in  his  pocket  and  goes  into  his  own  room,  which  adjoins  the
school. Lying on his couch, he stares out the window,  “watching the sky gradually

close  over,  listening  to  the  silence.  It  was  this  silence  that  had  seemed  difficult  to
2
him  in  the  first  days  after  his  arrival.”  Yet,  though  the  “solitude  and  silence  had
been  hard  for  him  in  these  merciless  lands  inhabited  only  by  stones,”  Daru  had
grown accu stomed to them. This world, he reflects, was  “a cruel place to live, even
without the men. . . . And yet outside this desert, neither of  them, Daru knew, could
3
have truly lived.”
Nor,  it  appears,  can   Daru  and  his  guest  live  together  for  very  long,  even  in  the
desert. As night descends, the two men exchange barely a dozen words. Mu ch to the
Arab’s astonishment, Daru shares with him a simple dinner. He asks Daru why he is
4
eating with him, to which the teacher replies: “I’m hungry.”  They also share a room
to bunk down for the night. After Daru has made the beds, there is nothing more to
5
do—except, that is, try to connect. Daru  “had to take a look at this man.”  When
Daru  asks  the  Arab  why  he  killed  the  man,  he  replies  obliquely:  “He  was  running
away.  I  ran  after  him.”  To  Daru’s  second  question—“ Are  you  sorry?”—t he
uncomprehending  Arab  has  no  answer.  But  equally  inadequate  is  Daru’s  answer  to
the Arab’s insistent question about what will happen to him next: “I don’t know,” he
6
says twice.
Eventually, the two men fall asleep in the small stove-heated room. At one point,
the  Arab  stirs,  rises  from  his  bed,  and  steps  outside.  Awakened  by  the  opening  of
the latch, Daru watches the dark shape slip through the door; with relief, he thinks
the  Arab  is  running  away.  He  then  hears  the  sound  of   running  water  and,  a  few
minutes later, sees the door reopen: the Arab slides back in and returns to his bed.
The  next  morning,  making  coffee  for  himself   and  his  uninvited  guest,  Daru
silently  curses  “both  his  own  people,  who  had  sent  him  this  Arab,  and  the  man
himself  who had dared to kill and hadn’t known enough to run away.” He prepares a
satchel of  food, dons his jacket, and leads the Arab outside, locking the school door
behind  him. The  two  men  walk  for  hours  across  the  snow-clad  landscap e,  finally
reaching  the  edge  of   the  plateau.  Daru  turns  to  the  Arab,  hands  him  the  food
satchel, and points east. If  you go that way, the Frenchman tells the Arab, you will
reach Tinguit, where the police are waiting. Daru then motions toward the south and
says:  “A  day’s  walk  from  here  you’ll  find  pastures  and  the  first  nomads. They  will
7
welcome you and give you shelter, acco rding to their law.”

Daru  turns  around  and  returns  to  his  school.  On  reaching  a  nearby  hilltop,
however,  he  stops  to  look  back  at  the  plain.  He  sees,  “his  heart  aching,  the  Arab
8
slowly making his way along the road to the prison.”  The story ends one paragraph
later with Daru back in his school, again staring out the window at the sky. On the
wall  behind  him  hangs  a  blackboard;  when  school  was  still  in  session  Daru  had
drawn on it the courses of  the principal French rivers. But now, imposed over this
9
map was a clumsily written message: “You turned in our brother. You will pay.”
° ° °
In  scarcely  twenty  pages,  written  during  the  last  period  of   his  life,  Cam us
returned  to  his  “few  familiar  ideas.”  Against  an  austere  Algerian  landscap e,  “The
Guest” depicts the clash between the obligations of  justice and liberty. At one level,
the tension between the two imperatives is straightforward: the Arab is accu sed of  a
crime,  Daru  is  charged  with  bringing  him  to  justice;  the  Arab  is  a  prisoner,  Daru
sets him free. But the plainness of  the prose and the severity of  the scenery conjure
a mirage of  sorts: the clipped language and bare land eventually dissolve into blurred
and elusive lines of  motivation and action. While Daru knows that the Arab killed
another man, he does not know the precise nature of  the crime. His effort to cast
light  on  the  event  sputters  and  fails  when  the  Arab  avoids  his  questions. We  never
grasp  what  the  Arab  did,  just  as  we  never  plumb  the  Arab’s  mind.  Expressing  the
story’s harsh epistemology is Balducci’s reply when Daru asks if  the Arab is “against
10
us”:  “I  don’t  think  so.  But  you  never  know.”   Nor,  for  that  matter,  do  we  fully
understand  Daru.  At  the  climax  of   his  disagreement  with  Balducci,  the  teacher
exclaims: “All of  this disgusts me, and your boy first and foremost. But I won’t turn
11
him in. Fight for myself, yes, if  need be. But not that.”  But the adjectival pronouns
are  unmoored:  to  what,  precisely,  does  “that”  refer  to?  The  brewing  war?  The
ostensible  crime? The  role  Daru  is  ordered  to  play?  In  the  end,  Daru  never  clearly
states what disgusts him; nor does he say what he will  not  fight for.
What  is  clear  is  that  Daru  is  a  loner,  different  from  the  society  he  has  fled;  as
12
Balducci  tells  him,  “You’ve  always  been  a  little  crazy.”   Equally  clear  is  that  he
conceives of  justice in a broader manner, as an impersonal weight, a view the ancient

Greeks  would  have  readily  recognized.  Mo re  than  once,  Daru  reflects  on  the
immense  forces  at  work  in  nature—f orces  to  which  men  and  their  doings  must
sooner or later bend and submit. Even before the arrival of  his guest, he had come
to  understand  life’s  cycle:  “Towns  sprang  up,  flourished,  then  disappeared;  men
13
passed through, loved each other or cut each other’s throats, then died.”  The rise
and fall of  cities, the birth and death of  generations, all under an impassive sky and
unblinking  sun:  these  massive  and  ageless  scales,  slowly  tilting  one  way,  then  the
other, constitute justice.
But this sublime structure does not free man of  responsibility; on the contrary, it
impels  him  to  seek  purely  human  forms  of   justice.  Attending  to  others  is  one
expression  of   this  task.  Sitting  across  from  the  Arab,  Daru  “had  to  take  a  look  at
this man.” He studies his “guest,” refusing to see him as an abstraction. In one sense,
Daru fails in his effort: he sees nothing  “but the dark, shining eyes, and the animal
mouth.”  But  he  does  not  give  up.  Rather  than  seeing  the  Arab  as  a  pawn  in  an
unspoken  war  or  an  object  of   impersonal  justice,  Daru  insists  on  his  dignity  and
autonomy. This nameless guest must, like Daru, act on his own. The Arab’s choice
—to take the road to Tinguit, where prison or worse awaits—i s a source of  despair,
but  how  much  greater  Daru’s  despair  would  have  been  if   he  had  led  him  there
himself.
A  corollary  to  this  conception  of   human  justice  is  our  need  to  see  the  world
clearly.  Or,  since  we  can   never  see  it  with  complete  clarity,  to  at  least  view  it  with
what  Iris  Murdoch  calls  “increasing  precision.”  The  improvement  of   our  moral
being, according to Murdoch, follows from the improvement of  our vision: it turns
us  away  from  ourselves  and  toward  others  and  the  world.  Daru  does  not  speak  in
abstractions  or  grand  phrases.  In  fact,  he  speaks  rarely;  when  he  does  speak,  he  is
terse. His language is as arid as the landscap e; he can  no more be separated from one
than  from  the  other:  “Anywhere  else,  he  felt  exiled.” While  Daru  might  have  an
unrealistic  sense  of   what  he  can   do—B alducci  laughs  when  Daru  tells  him  he  can
defend himself  with an old hunting rifle—h e nevertheless has fewer illusions than
most people have about the world. He remains faithful both to the world and to its
inhabitants:  he  sees  his  fellow  men  with  the  same  exactitude  and  precision  with
which he observes the rocks and ridges of  his physical world.
The story leaves Daru standing at the classroom window as the sun resumes its
daily  assault  on  the  world.  Back  turned  to  the  ominous  message  inscribed  on  the

board, he looks north toward the sea:  “He watched distractedly as the yellow light
leaped  from  the  heights  of   the  sky  and  spread  across  the  whole  surface  of   the
plateau.”  The  last  line—“In  this  vast  country  he  had  loved  so  much,  he  was
alone”—rings  with  the  finality  of   an  epitaph. Yet  finality,  at  least  in  terms  of   our
comprehension,  is  never  achieved.  Critics  have  noted  the  ambiguity  of   the  story’s
title: the French word  “hôte” can  mean either  “guest” or  “host”—an etymological
confusion  that  reflects  Daru’s  own  life.  He  is,  of   course,  a  host  who  welcomes
Balducci  and  his  prisoner  to  his  home. Yet  Daru  discovers  he  is  also  a  stranger  in
what  he  always  believed  to  be  his  own  land.  He  has  spent  his  life  feeling  like  an
outsider  anywhere  but  in  Algeria  but  is  now  also  exiled  from  his  native  land.  An
awful truth dawns on Daru: the historical, cultural, and linguistic division between
the  pieds noirs  and the Arabs—both of  whom are simultaneously hosts and guests
to each other—is too great to bridge.
By the last years of  his life, Camus had come up hard against this division. Hence
his silence: What more could be said about events whose tragic dimensions beggared
language?  Camus’s  muteness  spoke  to  his  inability  to  deny  the  legitimate  rights  of
either the  pied noir  or Arab communities. For Daru, this ethical lucidity estranges
him from both Balducci and the Arabs. So, too, for Cam us: his insistence on calling
things  by  their  names  eventually  forced  him  into  silence.  Both  men  are  moralists
and, consequently, both men are condemned to a life of  exile.
But  Daru’s  and  Camus’s  common  plight  is,  for  want  of   a  better  word,  also
metaphysical. The relationship these men have to the universe is as uncertain as their
relationship  to  Algeria.  Are  they  guests?  Or  are  they  hosts?  Being  a  host  implies
knowledge and duties, while being a guest entails rights and protections. But in this
silent and indifferent world, both Daru and Cam us seem no less deprived of  a host’s
knowledge  than  of   a  guest’s  rights. This  fundamental  instability—this  inability  to
know where one stands in relation to others and the world—is just another way of
acknowledging our absurd condition.
Yet  Daru  does  what  he  has  to  do:  he  refuses  to  close  his  eyes.  His  unblinking
vision is such that when the moment comes to act, his choice has already been made.
As Murdoch notes, freedom is  “not the sudden jumping of  the isolated will in and
out of  an impersonal logical complex, it is a function of  the progressive attempt to
14
see  a  particular  object  clearly.”   Daru  resists  viewing  the  world  through  racial,
political,  or  ideological  prisms;  instead,  he  sees  only  a  world  of   particular  and

singular  objects. This  is  not  a  matter  of   moral  vision,  as  Mu rdoch  observes,  since
there is nothing to see morally. “There is only the ordinary world which is seen with
15
ordinary vision.”
As the story reveals, seeing the world clearly and making the right moral choices
do not change the world. But this is not the point—no more the point, at least, than
Sisyphus trying to change the world by endlessly and repeatedly pushing the boulder
up  the  slope. The  importance  of   the  act  instead  lies  in  “increasing  perfection”—
attending to the task at hand, in other words, and getting it “more” right. But unlike
Sisyphus’s task, Daru’s work does not occu r on a desolate mountainside. Or rather,
it does occu r in such a place, but Daru, unlike Sisyphus, is not alone. A fellow man
appears whose anonymity, rather than making him an inhuman figure, instead makes
him fully human. Daru seemingly fails in his effort to liberate this man; in fact, his
action brings catastrophe down on his own head. Yet he does not regret what he has
done. Just as we must imagine Sisyphus happy, so too must we imagine Daru, if  not
happy, at least at peace with the choice he has made.
° ° °
Soon after the completion of   “The Guest,” Camus observed in his journals:  “In
the  Old Testament  God  says  nothing,  it  is  the  living  people  who  serve  him  with
their words. It is becau se of  this that I have not stopped loving that which is sacred
16
in  this  world.”   For  Camus,  service  to  others  is  as  sacred  as  anything  can   be  in  a
world shorn of  transcendental meaning. Service is worthy of  respect and veneration
even—or  especially—in  the  face  of   silence  and  is  based  on  the  fundamental
recognition  that  the  other  is  equally  implicated  and  enmeshed  in  an  absurd  world.
Among the ways we serve is through communication: becau se of  the silence hanging
over our lives, we must speak to and for ourselves, to and for others. We do so not
only in the face of  silence, but in order to give voice to that silence.
Probing silence is the task of  the artist as well as the moralist. For most of  his
life, Camus dwelt on the changing nature of  silence. He identified silence, like the
state of  childhood innocence, with his mother. Cam us’s silence later came to express
the  tragic  reality  of   Algeria  and  the  tragic  reality  of   the  human  condition.  And
silence followed in the wake of  attention. Simone Weil spoke to this idea when she

asked  about  the  true  value  of   solitude:  “For  in  solitude  we  are  in  the  presence  of
mere matter . . . things of  less value (perhaps) than a human spirit. Its value lies in
the  greater  possibility  of   attention.  If   we  could  be  attentive  to  the  same  degree  in
17
the  presence  of   a  human  being.”  True  attention,  for  Camus  as  for Weil,  requires
the degree of  concentration that we give to objects but rarely to human beings. We
do not feel uneasy when we silently attend to a sweeping mountain range, a towering
cathedral, or an achingly beautiful painting. The moment and setting quite naturally
call on us to stop, fall silent, and see.
But  we  feel  deeply  uneasy  attending  with  the  same  intensity  to  a  fellow  man  or
woman. Yet  this  should  be  no  less  natural  than  paying  attention  to  the  material
world. Daru does this in his life, just as Camus did in his art: with unusual clarity
and  empathy  he  turned  his  attention  to  our  lives. Through  his  work  as  a  novelist,
Camus  created  characters  that  excel  at  the  work  of   seeing.  From  Meursault  and
Sisyphus to Rieux and Tarrou to Cormery and Daru, Cam us gave voice to the often
mute  but  always  critical  work  of   attention.  Each  of   these  characters  embodies
Camus’s insistence that, “in the presence of  the world, I have no wish to lie or to be
lied to. I want to keep my lucidity to the last, and gaze upon my death with all the
18
fullness of  my jealousy and horror.”
Equally  important,  as  a  journalist  and  essayist  Camus  represented  lives  and
situations  that  otherwise  would  have  been  condemned  to  silence. We  always  take  a
step  forward  when  we  discover  a  human  problem  behind  the  facad e  of   a  political
problem,  Camus  insisted.  But  the  human  problem  of   course  must  first  be  made
manifest.  No  matter  how  uneasy  this  task  makes  us—and  Camus  often  admits  to
being  mal dans sa peau —we must confront it. This imperative, for Cam us, applies
to  political  injustice  and  to  social  inequities.  In  our  age,  he  warned  in  his  Nobel
speech,  artists  must  assume  their  responsibilities  toward  their  fellow  men  and
women.
In his stubborn commitment to the world of  politics, Camus understood better
than anyone else that existential despair was a luxury the poor and oppressed could
not afford. But he also understood that his responsibilities as an artist went beyond
the realm of  politics. In a world that denies us transcendental solace, the artist’s task
is  to  justify  the  pursuit  of   meaning  by  human  beings.  At  the  heart  of   Cam us’s
writing,  as  Jeffrey  Isaac  notes,  is  “a  conception  of   humans  as  agents  who,  as

possessors  of   interpretative  and  material  powers,  seek  to  sustain  value  in  their
19
world.”  We are overmatched and inevitably overwhelmed in this struggle, but this
is not cau se for despair. As the work of  Camus will always serve to remind us, true
despair occu rs only when  “we no longer know the reasons for struggling, or if  it is
20
even   necessary   to   struggle.”    Like   Jacq ues   Cormery   gazing   at   his   father’s
tombstone,  most  of   us  have  already,  or  will  one  day  soon,  reach  the  age  when  we
realize  with  a  shock  that  we  are  older  than  Camus,  but  that  the  reasons  for
struggling are ageless.

NOTES
Regarding Camus
1 . Albert Camus,  “The Wind at Djemila,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  trans. Ellen Kennedy (New York:
Knopf, 1968), 76.
2 . Siân Miles, ed.,  Simone Weil: An Anthology  (New York: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1986), 5.
3 .  Quoted  in  Olivier Todd,  Albert  Camus:  Une  vie   (Paris:  Gallimard,  1996),  593. Throughout  this  book,
passages quoted from the French are my translation, unless an English-language source is cited in the notes.
4 . Albert Camus,  Discours de Suède  (Paris: Gallimard, 1958), 17.
5 . Albert Camus,  Fragments d’un combat: 1938–1940,  vol. 2, ed. Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi (Paris: Gallimard,
1978), 720.
6 . Ibid., 730.
7 . See the chapter on Camus in Tony Judt,  The Burden of  Responsibility  (Chicago: University of  Chicago
Press, 1998), 87–135.
8 . Albert Camus,  The Myth of  Sisyphus and Other Essays,  trans. Justin O’Brien (New York: Vintage, 1991),
21.
9 . Quoted in John Foley,  Albert Camus: From the Absurd to Revolt  (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 2008), 4.
10 . Albert Camus,  The First Man,  trans. David Hapgood (New York: Knopf, 1995), 25.
11 .  “Lettre  à  Jean  de  Maisonseul,”  in  Albert  Camus,  Oeuvres  complètes,   vol.  1,  ed.  Jacqueline  Lévi-Valensi
(Paris: Gallimard: 2006), 97.
12 . Preface to Camus,  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  5–6.
13 . Camus,  The First Man,  41.
14 . Albert Camus, “Between Yes and No,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  32.
15 . Quoted in Alba Amoia, “Sun, Sea and Geraniums: Camus en voyage,” in  Critical Essays on Albert Camus,
ed. Bettina Knapp (Boston: G.K. Hall: 1988), 67.
16 . Albert Camus, “Nuptials at Tipasa,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  68.
17 . Camus,  The First Man,  146.
18 . Camus, “Between Yes and No,” 32.
19 . Camus,  The First Man,  98.
20 . Camus, “Between Yes and No,” 37.
21 . Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  trans. Ryan Bloom (Chicago: Ivan Dee, 2008), 125.
22 . Camus, “Between Yes and No,” 33–34.
23 . Ibid., 35–36.
24 . Albert Camus, “The Enigma,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  161.
25 . Albert Camus, “Return to Tipasa,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  167–168.
26 . Ibid., 169–170.
27 . Camus,  The First Man,  96.
28 . Albert Camus, “Preface to The Wrong and the Right Side,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  16.
29 . Quoted in Ray Monk,  Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of  Genius  (New York: Free Press, 1990), 277.

1939: From County Mayo to Kabylia
Epigraph.   “Return  to  Tipasa,”  in  Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays,   trans.  Ellen  Kennedy  (New  York:  Knopf,
1968), 169–170.
1 .  Albert  Camus,  Notebooks  1935–1951,   trans.  Philip  Thody  (New  York:  Marlowe,  1998),  60.  This
Marlowe  edition  combines  two  different  notebooks,  which  were  originally  published  separately:  Notebooks
1935–1942,  trans. Philip Thody, and  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. Justin O’Brien. The original pagination for
each notebook is retained (i.e., the first page of   Notebooks 1942–1951  starts again with page 1). Hereafter, if
the source is this Marlowe edition I will cite either Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Thody, or  Notebooks
1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien.
2 .  Albert  Camus,  quoted  in  Mark  Orme,  The  Development  of   Albert  Camus’s  Concern  for  Social  and
Political Justice  (Madison, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2007), 37.
3 . Albert Camus,  Discours de Suède  (Paris: Gallimard, 1958), 17.
4 . Olivier Todd,  Albert Camus: Une vie  (Paris: Gallimard, 1996), 120.
5 .  Quoted  in  Christine  Margerrison,  “Camus  and  the Theater,”  in  The  Cambridge  Companion  to  Camus,
ed. Edward J. Hughes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 69.
6 . Todd,  Une vie,  121; Roger Quilliot, quoted in Neil Oxenhandler,  Looking for Heroes in Postwar France
(Dartmouth: University of  New England Press, 1996), 49–50.
7 .  Albert  Camus,  “La  mer  au  plus  près,”  Oeuvres  complètes,   vol.  2,  ed.  Jecqueline  Lévi-Valensi  (Paris:
Gallimard, 2006), 879; Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Thody, 173.
8 . Ibid., 37, 106.
9 . Ibid., 64.
10 . Ibid., 15.
11 . Patrick McCarthy,  Camus  (New York: Random House, 1982), 84.
12 . Albert Camus,  The Rebel,  trans. Anthony Bower (New York: Vintage, 1992), 284.
13 .  Quoted  in  Orme,  Development  of   Camus’s  Concern   (Madison:  Fairleigh  Dickinson  University  Press,
2007), 59.
14 . Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi and André Abbou, eds.,  Cahiers Albert Camus 3: Fragments d’un combat,  vol. 2
(Paris: Gallimard 1978), 677.
15 . Camus,  Oeuvres complètes,  2:1800.
16 . Herbert Lottman,  Albert Camus  (Corte Madera: Gingko Press, 1997), 47.
17 . Albert Camus,  Essais,  ed. Roger Quilliot (Paris: Gallimard, 1965), 1216–1217.
18 . See Todd,  Une vie,  128.
19 . Camus,  Correspondence,  111.
20 .  Jean  Grenier,  quoted  in Toby  Garfitt,  “Situating  Camus: The  Formative  Influences,”  in  Hugues,  The
Cambridge Companion to Camus,  34.
21 . Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Thody, 28.
22 . For an account of  this obscure engagement, see Lottman,  Albert Camus,  59.
23 . Alice Conklin argues that, if   “the empire endured as long as it did, it was in part because French racism
often  worked  hand-in-hand  with  more  progressive  values.”  See  A  Mission  to  Civilize   (Palo  Alto:  Stanford
University  Press,  1997),  256.  See  also  Todd  Shephard,  The  Invention  of   Decolonization   (Ithaca:  Cornell
University  Press,  2006),  which  depicts  the  conflict  between  official  French  policy  in  Algeria,  founded  on
republican and egalitarian principles, and the racism exhibited by the local bureaucracy.
24 . Camus,  Oeuvres complètes,  vol. 1, ed. Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi (Paris: Gallimard: 2006), 57.
25 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  90.
26 . I believe Paul Archambault is right to suggest that it  “could be that nothing in Camus would have been
different  had  he  never  heard  of   Augustine;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Augustine  served  as  a  mirror  that

allowed  Camus  to  discover  those  qualities  that  became  characteristically  his.”  See  his  Camus’  Hellenic  Sources
(Chapel Hill: University of  North Carolina Press, 1971), 167.
27 . Camus,  Oeuvres complètes,  1:854.
28 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  1:58.
29 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  179.
30 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  2:362.
31 . Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Thody, 24.
32 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  2:368.
33 . Ibid., 513.
34 . Ibid., 523.
35 . Ibid., 529.
36 . Ibid., 528.
37 .  Albert  Camus,  “Preface  to The Wrong  Side  and  the  Right  Side,”  in  Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays,   trans.
Ellen Kennedy (New York: Knopf, 1968), 8.
38 .  Quoted  in  John  Ruedy,  Modern  Algeria: The  Origins  and  Development  of   a  Nation   (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1992), 79. My historical account of  Kabylia is indebted to Ruedy’s monograph.
39 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  1:278–279.
40 . Jacques Copeau,  Appels  (Paris: Gallimard, 1974), 223.
41 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  1:279.
42 . See Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Thody, 71.
43 .  Lévi-Valensi  and  Abbou,  Fragments  d’un  combat,   1:288.  The  reference  to  Berber  companions  is  in
McCarthy,  Camus,  118.
44 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  1:283.
45 . Albert Camus, “The New Mediterranean Culture,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  194.
46 . Albert Camus, “Summer in Algiers,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  90.
47 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  1:281.
48 . Ibid., 289.
49 . Ibid., 288.
50 . Ibid., 314.
51 . Ibid., 314.
52 . Ibid., 335–336.
53 . Ibid., 300.
54 . Michel Walzer,  The Company of  Critics  (New York: Basic Books, 1988), 68.
55 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  1:335.
56 . Ibid., 274.
57 . Ibid., 275.
58 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  2:531.
59 . Quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  226.
60 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  2:695.
61 . Ibid., 691–692.
62 . Quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  224.
63 . Lévi-Valensi and Abbou,  Fragments d’un combat,  2:733.
64 . Ibid., 736.
65 . Tony Judt,  The Burden of  Responsibility  (Chicago: University of  Chicago Press, 1998), 122.
66 . Quoted in Nicholas Grene,  Synge: A Critical Study of  the Plays  (London: Macmillan, 1975), 1.
67 . Albert Camus, “Return to Tipasa,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  169.

1945: A Moralist on the Barricades
Epigraph.  Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. Justin O’Brien (New York: Marlowe, 1998), 182.
1 . Quoted in Colin Jones,  Paris: The Biography of  a City  (New York: Viking, 2004), 427. For a survey of
the  desperate  material  conditions  in  Paris,  see  Dominique Veillon,  Vivre  et  survivre  en  France:  1939–1947
(Paris: Payot, 2004).
2 .  Albert  Camus,  Between  Hell  and  Reason,   trans.  Alexandre  de  Gramont  (Wesleyan  University  Press,
1991), 43.
3 . Ibid., 39–40; Albert Camus,  Essais,  ed. Roger Quilliot (Paris: Gallimard, 1965), 1520.
4 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 24.
5 . Ibid., 26.
6 . Herbert Lottman,  Albert Camus  (Corte Madera: Gingko Press, 1997), 264.
7 . Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Philip Thody (New York: Marlowe, 1998), 103.
8 . Albert Camus,  The Stranger,  trans. Matthew Ward (New York: Vintage, 1989), 41.
9 . Ibid., 59.
10 . Ibid., 50.
11 . Ibid., 66.
12 . Ibid., 69.
13 . Conor Cruise O’Brien,  Albert Camus of  Europe and Africa  (New York: Viking, 1970), 25–26.
14 .  See  David  Carroll,  Albert  Camus  the  Algerian   (New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  2007),  in
particular chap. 1.
15 . Quoted in Olivier Todd,  Albert Camus: Une vie  (Paris: Gallimard, 1996), 256.
16 . Quoted in Ibid., 257–258.
17 . Carroll,  Albert Camus the Algerian,  33.
18 . Camus,  The Stranger,  85.
19 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 42.
20 . Ibid., 24.
21 . The classic account of  Le Chambon is Philip Haillie,  Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed  (New York: Harper
and Row, 1979).
22 . Haillie,  Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed,  103.
23 .  Albert  Camus,  “Summer  in  Algiers,”  in  Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays,   trans.  Philip Thody  (New York:
Knopf, 1968), 90.
24 . Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Thody, 93.
25 . Tony  Judt,  Past  Imperfect:  French  Intellectuals  1944–1956   (Berkeley:  University  of   California  Press,
1992), 61.
26 .  Albert  Camus,  “La  profession  de  journaliste,”  in  Oeuvres  complètes,   vol.  1,  ed.  Jacqueline  Lévi-Valensi
(Paris: Gallimard, 2006), 920.
27 . Camus,  Between Hell and Reason,  45–46.
28 . Todd,  Une vie,  347.
29 . Ibid., 327.
30 . Albert Camus,  Lettres à un ami allemand  (Paris: Gallimard, 1948), 71–72.
31 . Ibid., 78.
32 . Quoted in David Carroll,  French Literary Fascism  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), 123.
33 .  Quoted  in  Alice  Kaplan,  The  Collaborator: The Trial  and  Execution  of   Robert  Brasillach   (Chicago:
University of  Chicago Press, 2000), 49–50, 51, 58.
34 . Quoted in Ibid., 172–173.
35 . Quoted in Jean Lacouture,  François Mauriac  (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1980), 389–390.

36 . Quoted in Ibid., 408.
37 .  Essais,  1469.
38 . Camus,  The Stranger,  110.
39 . Albert Camus, “Tout ne s’arrange pas,” in  Oeuvres complètes,  1:922.
40 .  In  his  Arendt,  Camus  and  Modern  Rebellion   (New  Haven: Yale  University  Press  1992),  Jeffrey  Isaac
elaborates on this important parallel.
41 . Camus,  Between Hell and Reason,  42.
42 . Ibid., 68.
43 . Quoted in Jean Lacouture,  François Mauriac,  412.
44 . Camus,  Between Hell and Reason,  72.
45 . Ibid., 99.
46 . Ibid., 102.
47 . Quoted in Michel Winock,  Le siècle des intellectuels  (Paris: Seuil, 1997), 383.
48 . Camus,  Between Hell and Reason,  103–105.
49 . Lottman,  Albert Camus,  367–368.
50 . Albert Camus, “Réflexions sur la guillotine,” in  Essais,  1021.
51 . Quoted in Kaplan,  The Collaborator,  198.
52 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 99.
53 . Ibid., 99, my emphasis.
54 . Ibid., 195.
55 . Quoted in Kaplan,  The Collaborator,  212. A short time after the execution, when his personal secretary
told him he still regretted Brasillach’s death, de Gaulle cut him short: “What of  it? He was shot, like a soldier!”
Quoted in Jean Lacouture,  De Gaulle: The Ruler 1945–1970,  trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Norton, 1992),
81.
56 . Quoted in Lacouture,  De Gaulle: The Ruler,  79.
57 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 147.
58 .  Sébastien-Roch  Nicolas  Chamfort,  Maximes  et  anecdotes.  Avec  une  biographie  par  Ginguené  et  une
introduction  par  Albert  Camus   (Monaco:  DAC,  1944).  Camus’s  introduction  is  reprinted  in  Sébastien-Roch
Nicolas Chamfort,  Oeuvres complètes,  vol. 1, ed. Jacqueline Lévi-Valensi (Paris: Gallimard, 2006), 923–933.
59 . Albert Camus, introduction to Chamfort,  Maximes et anecdotes,  924.
60 . Ibid., 929.
61 . Ibid., 932.
62 . Iris Murdoch,  The Sovereignty of  Good  (New York: Routledge, 2007), 46.
63 . Ibid., 84–85.
64 . Ibid., 52.
65 .  Murdoch,  “The  Existentialist  Hero,”  in  Existentialists  and  Mystics,   ed.,  Peter  Conradi  (New  York:
Penguin, 1997), 114.
66 . Camus,  Between Hell and Reason,  112.
67 . Camus,  Oeuvres complètes,  2:471.
68 . Ibid., 471.
1952: French Tragedies
Epigraph.  Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. Justin O’Brien (New York: Marlowe, 1998), 119.
1 . Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  trans. Ryan Bloom (Chicago: Ivan Dee, 2008), 20.
2 . See Herbert Lottman,  Albert Camus  (Corte Madera: Gingko Press, 1997), 522–523.

3 . Tony  Judt,  Past  Imperfect:  French  Intellectuals  1944–1956   (Berkeley:  University  of   California  Press,
1992), 119.
4 . Simone de Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  trans. Richard Howard (New York: Penguin, 1963), 264.
5 . Simone de Beauvoir,  La force de l’âge  (Paris: Gallimard, 1960), 616–617.
6 .  Albert  Camus,  “The  Enigma,”  in  Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays,   trans.  Philip Thody  (New York:  Knopf,
1968), 160.
7 . As Paul Archambault notes, this exchange does not appear in Aeschylus’s tragedy but was instead invented
by Camus. See his  Camus’ Hellenic Sources  (Chapel Hill: University of  North Carolina Press, 1971), 27.
8 . Albert Camus, “Prometheus in the Underworld,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  141.
9 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 136.
10 . Albert Camus,  The Plague,  trans. Stuart Gilbert (New York: Vintage, 1991), 209.
11 . Ibid., 39–40.
12 . Ibid., 62.
13 . Ibid., 247–248, 253–254.
14 . Ibid., 180.
15 .  See,  in  particular,  Archambault,  Camus’  Hellenic  Sources.  Yet  Archambault  concludes  that Thucydides’
presence in  The Plague  is limited to the Greek historian’s methodology and his account of  the plague.
16 . Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1935–1942,  trans. Philip Thody (New York: Marlowe, 1998), 185.
17 . Ibid., 193.
18 . Quoted in Olivier Todd,  Albert Camus: Une vie  (Paris: Gallimard, 1996), 545.
19 . Camus,  The Plague,  236.
20 . Ibid., 153.
21 . Camus,  The Plague,  138.
22 . Thucydides,  History of  the Peloponnesian War,  159.
23 . Ibid., 48.
24 . W. Robert Connor,  Thucydides  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), 250.
25 . Ibid., 247.
26 . Camus,  The Plague,  308.
27 . Thucydides,  History of  the Peloponnesian War,  48.
28 . Camus,  The Plague,  308.
29 . Ibid., 130.
30 . Ibid., 127.
31 . Ibid., 128.
32 . Ibid., 131.
33 . Thucydides,  History of  the Peloponnesian War,  402.
34 . Ibid., 407.
35 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 56.
36 .  Jacqueline  Lévi-Valensi,  ed.,  Camus  at  Combat:  Writing  1944–1947,   trans.  Arthur  Goldhammer
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006), 287.
37 . Thucydides,  History of  the Peloponnesian War,  147.
38 . Camus,  The Plague,  157.
39 . Quoted in Ronald Aronson,  Camus and Sartre: The Story of  a Friendship and the Quarrel That Ended It
(Chicago:  University  of   Chicago  Press,  2004),  54–55.  I  am  deeply  indebted  in  this  chapter  to  Aronson’s
depiction of  the friendship between the two writers.
40 . Simone de Beauvoir,  A Transatlantic Love Affair,  quoted in Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  24.
41 . See Aronson,  Camus and Sartre  (24), for a discussion of  this event.
42 . Todd,  Une vie,  355. As Aronson rightly notes, Todd does not offer a source for this exchange.

43 . Interview in  Les Nouvelles Littéraires,  November 15, 1945, in Camus,  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  345.
44 . Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  55.
45 . Quoted in ibid., 37.
46 . See Albert Camus, “La nausée de Jean-Paul Sartre,” in  Essais,  ed. Roger Quilliot (Paris: Gallimard, 1965),
1417–1419.
47 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 24.
48 . Camus, “Three Interviews,”  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  346.
49 . Ibid., 346, 348.
50 . Quoted in Rod Kedward,  France and the French  (New York: Overlook Press, 2005), 362.
51 . Quoted in Tony Judt,  Postwar  (New York: Penguin, 2005), 197.
52 . Simone de Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  trans. Richard Howard (New York: Penguin, 1963), 243.
53 . Quoted in Judt,  Postwar,  221.
54 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  265, 272.
55 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  452.
56 . Albert Camus, “The Deaf  and Dumb Republic,” in Lévi-Valensi,  Camus at Combat,  280.
57 . Albert Camus, “To Our Readers,” in Lévi-Valensi,  Camus at Combat,  292.
58 . According to Aronson, Sartre treated  “violence as a token of  becoming real [and] focused on its positive
political and psychological effects on those who practice it, especially the victims of  oppression, when all other
paths became blocked.”  Camus and Sartre,  34.
59 . Quoted in John Foley,  Albert Camus: From the Absurd to Revolt  (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 2008), 39.
60 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  211.
61 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 147–148.
62 . Ibid., 120–121.
63 . Camus,  The Plague,  128.
64 . Ibid., 218.
65 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  120.
66 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 211.
67 . Albert Camus,  The Rebel,  trans. Anthony Bower (New York: Vintage, 1991), 4.
68 . Ibid., 10.
69 .  Michel  de  Montaigne,  The  Essays,   trans.  Donald  Frame  (Palo  Alto,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press,
1943), 323.
70 . Montaigne,  The Essays,  457.
71 . Camus,  The Rebel,  11.
72 . Ibid., 236.
73 . Foley,  From the Absurd to Revolt,  32.
74 . Camus,  The Rebel,  22.
75 . Ibid., 16.
76 . Thucydides,  History of  the Peloponnesian War,  407.
77 . Camus,  The Rebel,  22.
78 . Ibid., 27.
79 . Ibid., 22.
80 . Albert Camus, “Défense de  l’homme révolté, ” in  Essais,  1705–1706.
81 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  254.
82 . Quoted in Judt,  Past Imperfect,  117.
83 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  273.
84 . Quoted in Annie Cohen-Solal,  Sartre: A Life,  trans. Anna Cagnoni (New York: Pantheon, 1987), 328.

85 . Letter to René Char (November 29, 1951), in Camus,  Essais,  1627.
86 . Quoted in Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  139.
87 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  561.
88 . Quoted in Foley,  From the Absurd to Revolt,  112.
89 . Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  142.
90 . Albert Camus, “Révolte et servitude,” letter to  Les Temps Modernes  (June 30, 1952), in  Essais,  754.
91 . Ibid., 758.
92 . Ibid., 760–761.
93 . Ibid., 771.
94 . Ibid., 772.
95 . Quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  531.
96 . For a discussion of  the Hume-Rousseau affair, see Robert Zaretsky and John T. Scott,  The Philosophers’
Quarrel: Hume, Rousseau and the Limits of  Human Understanding  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009).
97 . Quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  531.
98 . Quoted in Foley,  From the Absurd to Revolt,  117.
99 . Quoted in Ibid., 116.
100 . Quoted in Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  38.
101 . Lottman,  Albert Camus,  532.
102 . Quoted in Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  156.
103 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  573.
104 . Quoted in Ibid., 573–574. Aronson’s translation mistakenly attributes the adjective  endormies  (numbing)
to Camus’s physical state rather than his thoughts. See Aronson,  Camus and Sartre,  157.
105 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  trans. Ryan Bloom, 21, 26–28, 31, 47, 38.
106 . Martha Nussbaum,  The Fragility of  Goodness  (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 35.
107 .  The Oresteia,  trans. Robert Fagles (New York: Penguin, 1981), 267.
108 . Nussbaum,  The Fragility of  Goodness,  49.
109 . Camus, “Défense de  l’homme révolté, ” 1709–1710.
1956: Silence Follows
Epigraph.   Albert  Camus,  “Review  of   Brice  Parrain’s  On  a  Philosophy  of   Expressions,”   in  Lyrical  and
Critical Essays,  trans. Philip Thody (New York: Knopf, 1968), 239.
1 . Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  trans. Ryan Bloom (Chicago: Ivan Dee, 2008), 167.
2 . Quoted in Alistair Horne,  A Savage War of  Peace: Algeria, 1954–1962  (New York: Penguin, 1977), 27.
3 .  Jacqueline  Lévi-Valensi  identifies  Camus’s  use  of   the  term  “inquiry”  in  both  series  of   articles.  See
Jacqueline  Lévi-Valensi,  ed.,  Camus  at  Combat: Writing  1944–1947,   trans.  Arthur  Goldhammer  (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2006), 199 n480.
4 . Lévi-Valensi,  Camus at Combat,  200, 205.
5 . Ibid., 205.
6 . Ibid., 205.
7 . Ibid., 216.
8 . Ibid., 209.
9 . Ibid., 216.
10 .  The Oresteia,  trans. Robert Fagles (New York: Penguin, 1981), 267.
11 . Albert Camus,  The First Man,  trans. David Hapgood (New York: Knopf, 1995), 144–145.
12 . Lévi-Valensi,  Camus at Combat,  208.

13 . Ibid., 215.
14 .  Albert  Camus,  “Réponse  à  Emmanuel  d’Astier  de  la  Vigerie,”  in  Essais,   ed.  Roger  Quilliot  (Paris:
Gallimard, 1965), 357.
15 . Quoted in Horne,  Savage War of  Peace,  119.
16 . Ibid., 120–122.
17 . Albert Camus,  The Plague,  trans. Stuart Gilbert (New York: Vintage, 1991), 254.
18 . Albert Camus,  “Letter to an Algerian Militant,” in  Resistance, Rebellion and Death,  trans. Justin O’Brien
(New York: Knopf, 1963), 93–97.
19 . “La table ronde,” reprinted in  Essais,  971.
20 .  Albert  Camus,  Notebooks  1935–1942,   trans.  Philip  Thody  (New  York:  Marlowe,  1998),  24  (May
1936).  Here  I  am  making  use  of   Jeffrey  Isaac’s  notion  of   “representative  thinking.”  Isaac  takes  issue  with
Michael Walzer’s claim that Camus valued—and rightly valued— pied noir  lives more deeply than Muslim lives.
See Jeffrey Isaac,  Arendt, Camus, and Modern Rebellion  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 194–206.
21 . Albert Camus, “L’Algérie déchirée,” in  Essais,  985.
22 . Quoted in Olivier Todd,  Albert Camus: Une vie  (Paris: Gallimard, 1996), 624–625n.
23 . Albert Camus, introduction to  Actuelles I,  in  Essais,  252.
24 . Quoted in Jean Lacouture,  Pierre Mendès-France,  trans. George Holoch (New York: Holmes and Meier,
1984), 166.
25 . Lacouture,  Pierre Mendès-France,  334–335.
26 . Quoted in Frank Giles,  The Locust Years  (London: Carroll & Graf, 1991), 273.
27 . Jean Daniel, quoted in  Essais,  1840.
28 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  trans. Ryan Bloom, 108.
29 . “Appel pour une trêve civile en Algérie,” in  Essais,  991–999.
30 . For the text of  Camus’s speech, see  Resistance, Rebellion and Death,  97–106.
31 . Herbert Lottman,  Albert Camus  (Corte Madera: Gingko Press, 1997), 604.
32 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  630.
33 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  175.
34 . Albert Camus,  The Rebel,  trans. Anthony Bower (New York: Vintage, 1991), 166.
35 . Ibid., 167.
36 . Albert Camus,  The Just Assassins,  in  Caligula and Three Other Plays,  trans. Stuart Gilbert (New York:
Vintage, 1958), 258.
37 . Albert Camus, editorial in  L’Express  (October 21, 1954), in  Essais,  973.
38 . Todd,  Une vie,  620.
39 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  183.
40 .  Simone  de  Beauvoir,  Force  of   Circumstance,   trans.  Richard  Howard  (New York:  Penguin,  1963),  353–
354.
41 . Quoted in John Foley,  Albert Camus: From the Absurd to Revolt  (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 2008), 161.
42 .  Albert  Camus,  preface  to  Germaine  Tillion,  Algeria:  The  Realities   (New  York:  Knopf,  1958),  trans.
Ronald  Matthews,  French  version  in Tzvetan Todorov,  ed.,  Le  siècle  de  Germaine Tillion   (Paris:  Seuil,  2007),
191. I have translated from the original French version.
43 . See Jean Lacouture,  “Au coeur de l’Algérie,” in Todorov,  Le siècle de Germaine Tillion,  197. Camus also
provides a detailed account; see his  Notebooks 1951–1959,  195–196.
44 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  197.
45 . Quoted in James Le Sueur,  Uncivil War: Intellectuals and Identity Politics during the Decolonization of
Algeria  (Lincoln: University of  Nebraska Press, 2001), 115–116.
46 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  391–392, 396.

47 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  68.
48 . Letter to Jean Gillibert, quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  606.
49 . Todd,  Une vie,  685.
50 .  Camus,  Notebooks  1951–1959,   96,  emphasis  in  the  original.  In  this  case,  Camus  was  defending
Tunisians, not Algerians, but the lesson he took from the affair has general application.
51 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  197. I have based my account on Lottman,  Albert Camus,  631.
52 . Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  197.
53 . Quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  648.
54 . Carl-Gustav Bjurstrom, postface to Albert Camus,  Discours de Suède  (Paris: Gallimard, 1997), 78.
55 .  Le Monde,  December 14, 1957, in Camus,  Essais,  1881–1882.
56 . Quoted in Todd,  Une vie,  701.
57 . Beauvoir,  Force of  Circumstance,  396.
58 . Camus,  Notebooks 1942–1951,  trans. O’Brien, 144.
59 . Michael Walzer,  The Company of  Critics  (New York: Basic Books, 1988), 146.
60 . Jeffrey Isaac, I believe, is quite right to insist on this point: Camus sought to  “occupy the no-man’s land
between the antagonists, the ground of  a minimal common humanity that might support dialogue and mutual
recognition”  (195).  John  Foley  offers  a  fuller  and  equally  persuasive  account  of   Isaac’s  position  in  his  recent
work. See his  From the Absurd to Revolt,  160–166.
61 . To  the  Algerian  novelist  Moulaud  Feraoun,  Camus  confessed  that  between  “wisdom  reduced  to  silence
and madness that shouts itself  hoarse, I prefer the virtues of  silence.” Quoted in Lottman,  Albert Camus,  657.
62 .  Confessions,  book 1, chap. 4, trans. Rex Warner (New York: Penguin, 1963), 19.
63 . In  Une vie,  Todd notes repeatedly Camus’s ignorance of  Wittgenstein’s work (e.g., 293). At the same time,
there is no trace of  recognition of  Camus’s work in Wittgenstein.
64 . Ray Monk,  Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of  Genius  (New York: Free Press, 1990), 282.
65 . Monk,  Ludwig Wittgenstein,  156.
66 . Quoted in Monk,  Ludwig Wittgenstein,  277.
67 . Albert Camus, “Return to Tipasa,” in  Lyrical and Critical Essays,  169–170.
68 . Tony Judt,  The Burden of  Responsibility  (Chicago: University of  Chicago Press, 1998), 120.
69 .  Le Monde,  December 17, 1957, in Camus,  Essais,  1883.
70 . Walzer,  The Company of  Critics,  152.
71 . Camus,  Discours de Suède,  26.
72 . Quoted in Paul Archambault,  Camus’ Hellenic Sources  (Chapel Hill: University of  North Carolina Press,
1971), 32.
Epilogue
Epigraph.  Albert Camus,  Notebooks: 1935–1942,  trans. Philip Thody (New York: Marlowe, 1998), 119–
120.
1 . “The Guest,” in  Exile and the Kingdom,  trans. Carol Cosman (New York: Vintage, 2006), 75.
2 . Ibid., 76
3 . Ibid., 76–77.
4 . Ibid., 78.
5 . Ibid., 78.
6 . Ibid., 79.
7 . Ibid., 84–85.
8 . Ibid., 85.

9 . Ibid., 86.
10 . Ibid., 73.
11 . Ibid., 75–75.
12 . Ibid., 74.
13 . Ibid., 77.
14 . Iris Murdoch,  The Sovereignty of  Good  (London: Routledge, 1970), 23.
15 . Ibid., 34.
16 . Albert Camus,  Notebooks 1951–1959,  trans. Ryan Bloom (Chicago: Ivan Dee, 2008), 186.
17 .  Simone  Weil,  “Gravity  and  Grace,”  in  Siân  Miles,  ed.,  Simone  Weil:  An  Anthology   (New  York:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1986), 216.
18 .  Albert  Camus,  “Between Yes  and  No,”  in  Lyrical  and  Critical  Essays,   trans.  Ellen  Kennedy  (New York:
Knopf, 1968), 78.
19 . Jeffrey Isaac,  Arendt, Camus and Modern Rebellion  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 118.
20 . Albert Camus, introduction to  Actuelles I,  in  Oeuvres complètes,  vol. 1:  Essais,  ed. Roger Quilliot (Paris:
Gallimard, 1965), 252.

Copyright © 2010 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief  quotations in a review, this book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced
in any form without permission in writing from the publisher. For information, address Cornell University
Press, Sage House, 512 East State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850.
Book design by Scott Levine
E-book edition 2011 by Cornell University Press
eISBN 978-0-8014-6237-5
Visit our website at  www.cornellpress.cornell.edu .