



FIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, SEPTEMBER 1995
Copyright © 1960 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Copyright renewed 1988 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New
York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
Originally published by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, in 1960.
The essays, originally published in French, were selected from  Lettres à un allemand ,
copyright 1948 by Librarie Gallimard;  Actuelles , copyright 1950 by Librarie Gallimard;
Actuelles II , copyright 1953 by Librarie Gallimard;  Actuelles III , copyright © 1958 by
Librarie Gallimard;  Réexions sur la peine capitale , copyright © 1957 by Calmann-Lévy;
Discours de Suède , copyright © Librarie Gallimard. The following were interviews: “Kadar
Had His Day of Fear,” which appeared as “Kadar a eu son jour de peur” in  Franc-Tireur  in
1957; “Socialism of the Gallows,” which appeared as “Le socialisme des potences,” and
“The Wager of Our Generation,” which appeared as “Le pari de notre generation,” both in
Demain  in 1957.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Camus, Albert, 1913–1960.
Resistance, rebellion, and death.
Reprint of the 1961 ed. published by Knopf, New York.
Essays selected by the author from his Actuelles and other works.
1. Europe—Politics—Addresses, essays, lectures.
2. Good and evil. I. Title.
[PQ2605.A3734A25 1974] 844′.9.′14 73-14867
eISBN: 978-0-307-82785-2
Cover design by Helen Yentus
v3.1

INTRODUCTION
I T WAS   as much for the positive  stand Albert  Camus  took on the issues of
the day as for his creative  writing—or  rather  it was for the combination
of the two—tha t he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1957 at the early
age of forty-three.  Because,  in everything  he wrote,  he spoke to us of our
problems  and in our language,  without  raising  his voice or indulging  in
oratory,  he illuminated,  as the Nobel citation  stated,  “the problems of the
human  conscien ce in our time.”  Over and above intellectual  or political
leadership,  he  provided  the  moral  guidance  the  postwar  generation
needed.  By remaining  agrantly  independent,  he could speak out both
against  the  Russian  slave-labor  camps  and  against  U.S.  support  of
Franco’s  Spain.  By overcomin g the immature  nihilism  and despair  that
he saw as poisoning our century,  he emerged  as the staunch  defender  of
our positive moral values  and of “those  silent men who, throughout  the
world, endure the life that has been made for them.”
Indeed,  one of the things that endeared  Camus  to all of us is that he
spoke for all. As he said in the brilliant  credo he voiced  in the Stockholm
town hall upon accepting  the most universally  distinguished  award,  “...
the  writer’s  function  is  not  without  arduous  duties.  By  denition,  he
cannot  serve today those who make history;  he must serve those who are
subject  to it.” Whether  we g ht in the regular  army or wage war as
civilians  in the shadows  of some  maquis ,  whether  we succumb  to famine
or slink into exile, whether  we are crushed  by dictators  or put to death
by due process of law, are we not all “subject to history”?
In  France  Camus  made  his  mark  as  a  journalist  and  polemicist  at
about the same time that he asserted  himself  as one of that country’s
leading  novelists.  But in 1943–4  his readers  didn’t  yet know that the
author  of  the  anonymous  editorials  they  were  clipping  from  the
clandestine  newspaper  Combat  as the most vigorous  expression  of their
own  feelings  and  the  author  of   L’Etranger  were  one  and  the  same

person.  Only after the Liberati on of Paris, when  Comba t  came out into
the open, did they discover  that the forthright,  inspiring  editorialist  they
had admired was named Albert Camus.
Little  by  little,  his  compatriots  learned  that  this  young  Algerian
Frenchman  had begun life as a journalist,  that, after having  incurred  the
government’s  wrath  for  his  most  revelatory  reportage  on  the  sorry
condition  of the Kabyle  tribes of Algeria,  he had come over to Occupied
France  and helped to found what was both an intelligence  network  and
an underground  newspaper.  And, as admiration  for his rst  two novels ,
The Stranger  and  The Plague,  grew in all countries,  Camus  continued
to  write essays  dealing  with the major problems,  social and political, that
haunted  him  and  his  generation.  In  1950  he  brought  out  a  collected
volume  of  those  articles  under  the  title   Actuelles;  a  second  volume
followed in 1953 and a third in 1958, soon after the Nobel Prize.
In the last year of his life, Albert Camus  chose from the three volumes
of   Actuelles  the  twenty-thre e  essays  he  considered  most  worthy  of
preservation  in English.  They deal with the perennially  current  issues that
periodically  tore him from his creative  writing  to speak out, as he said,
“in the service  of truth and the service  of freedom”:  war and resistance  in
a Europe dominated  by prisons, executions,  and exile; the tragedies  of
Algeria  and of Hungary;  the horror  of the death penalty;  and the writer’s
commitment.
The very title  Actuelles,  which unfortunately  could not be carried  over
into  English,  is  typical  of  the  man—concise  without  being  precise,
allusive  without  being  descriptive,  and  modest.  Indeed,  this  mere
adjective  in the feminine  plural  meaning  “current,”  “prevailing,”  or “of
present  interest”  almost  requires  a gloss in the original.  What noun did
Camus suppress for greater ambiguity —pensées, réexions, vues?
To some readers  these essays  will introduce  an utterly  new Camus—
what one might be tempted  to call the  Camus  actuel.  But he wrote them
concurrently  with his novels  and plays and in them explored  the same
themes  he touched  upon in his creative  work. An essential  part of the
man and the writer, these occasional  articles  and speeches  reveal  more
clearly  the position  of one of the most lucid spirits of our time—one  who
was both committed  and aloof, or, as he himself  implied  in his moral tale
“The Artist at Work,” at once solidary and solitary.

And Camus would never have allowed  anyone  to consider  these essays
as incidental  to, or less important  than, his plays and novels,  for he
recognized  them as a signicant  part of that  opera omnia  with which he
now—too soon, alas—must face posterity.
J USTIN  O’B RIEN

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Introduction
Letters to a German Friend
Preface for the Italian Edition
First Letter
Second Letter
Third Letter
Fourth Letter
The Liberation of Paris
The Blood of Freedom
The Night of Truth
The Flesh
Pessimism and Tyranny
Pessimism and Courage
Defense of Intelligence
The Unbeliever and Christians
Why Spain?
Defense of Freedom
Bread and Freedom
Homage to an Exile
Algeria

Preface to Algerian Reports
Letter to an Algerian Militant
Appeal for a Civilian Truce
Algeria 1958
Hungary
Kadar Had His Day of Fear
Socialism of the Gallows
Reections on the Guillotine
The Artist and His Time
The Wager of Our Generation
Create Dangerously
Other Books by This Author
About the Author

Letters to a German Friend
for
René Leynaud
A man does not show his greatness
by being at one extremity,
but rather by touching
both at once.
—P ASCAL

PREFACE FOR THE ITALIAN EDITION
1 HE   Letters  t o  a  German  Friend  were publishe d in France  after the
T Liberation  in a limited  edition and have never been reprinted. I
have  always  been  opposed   to  their  circulation  abroad  for  the
reasons that I shall give.
This is the rst  time they have appeared  outside  of France  and I
should  not have made up my mind to this had it not been for my
long-standing  desire  to contribute,  insofar  as I can, to removing  the
stupid frontiers separating our two territories.
But I cannot  let these pages be reprinted  without  saying  what they
are.  They  were  written  and  published  clandestinely  during  the
Occupation.  They had a purpose,  which  was to throw  some light on
the  blind  battle  we  were  then  waging  and  thereby  to  make  our
battle more eective.  They are topical  writings  and hence  they may
appear  unjust.  Indeed,  if one were to write about defeated  Germany,
a rather  dierent  tone would  be called  for. But I should  simply  like
to forestall a misunderstanding.  When  the author  of these letters
says “you,”  he means  not “you Germans”  but “you Nazis.”  When  he
says “we,” this signies  not always  “we Frenchmen”  but sometimes
“we  free  Europeans.”  I  am  contrasting  two  attitudes,  not  two
nations,  even if, at a certain  moment  in history,  these two nations
personied  two  enemy  attitudes.  To  repeat  a  remark  that  is  not
mine,  I love my country  too much to be a nationalist.  And I know
that  neither  France  nor  Italy  would  lose  anything—quite  the
contrary—if  they both had broader  horizons.  But we are still wide of
the mark, and Europe  is still torn. This is why I should  be ashamed
today  if I implied  that a French  writer  could  be the enemy  of a
single  nation.  I loathe  none but executioners.  Any reader  who reads
the  Letters  to  a  Ger man  Friend  in this perspective—in  other words,  as

a document  emerging  from the struggle  against  violence—will  see
how I can say that I don’t disown a single word I have written here.
1  The rst  of these letters appeared  in the second  issue of the  Revue  Libr e  in 1943;  the
second,  in No. 3 of the  Cahiers  de  Libération  in the beginning  of 1944. The two others,
written for the  Revue Libre , remained unpublished.

FIRST LETTER
OU  said to me: “The greatness  of my country  is beyond  price.
Y Anything  is  good  that  contributes  to  its  greatness.  And  in  a
world  where  everything  has  lost  its  meaning,  those  who,  like  us
young  Germans,  are lucky enough  to nd  a meaning  in the destiny
of our nation  must sacrice  everything  else.” I loved you then, but
at that point we diverged.  “No,” I told you, “I cannot  believe  that
everything  must be subordinated  to a single  end. There  are means
that cannot be excused.  And I should  like to be able to love my
country  and still love justice. I don’t want just any greatness  for it,
particularly  a greatness  born of blood and falsehood.  I want to keep
it alive by keeping  justice  alive.”  You retorted:  “Well,  you don’t love
your country.”
That was ve  years ago; we have been separated  since then and I
can say that not a single  day has passed  during  those long years (so
brief, so dazzlingly swift for you!) without  my remembering  your
remark.  “You don’t love your country!”  When  I think of your words
today,  I feel a choking  sensation.  No, I didn’t  love my country,  if
pointing  out what is unjust  in what we love amounts  to not loving,
if insisting  that what we love should  measure  up to the nest image
we have of her amounts  to not loving.  That was ve  years ago, and
many  men in France  thought  as I did. Some of them, however,  have
already  been stood up against the wall facing  the twelve  little black
eyes of German  destiny.  And those men, who in your opinion  did
not love their country,  did more for it than you will ever do for
yours,  even if it were possible for you to give your life a hundred
times.  For their heroism  was that they had to conquer  themselves
rst.  But I am speaking  here of two kinds of greatnes s and of a
contradiction about which I must enlighten you.

We shall meet soon again—i f possible.  But our friendship  will be
over. You will be full of your defeat.  You will not be ashamed  of
your former  victory.  Rather,  you will longingly  remember  it with all
your crushed  might.  Today  I am still close to you in spirit—your
enemy,  to  be  sure,  but  still  a  little  your  friend  because  I  am
withholding  nothing  from  you  here.  Tomorrow  all  will  be  over.
What your victory could not penetrate,  your defeat  will bring to an
end. But at least, before  we become  indierent  to each other,  I want
to leave you a clear idea of what neither  peace  nor war has taught
you to see in the destiny of my country.
I want to tell you at once what sort of greatness  keeps us going.
But this amounts  to telling  you what kind of courage  we applaud,
which  is not your kind. For it is not much to be able to do violence
when  you have been simply  preparing  for it for years and when
violence  is more natural  to you than thinking.  It is a great deal, on
the other hand, to face torture  and death when you know for a fact
that hatred and violence  are empty  things  in themselves.  It is a great
deal to ght  while despising  war,  to accept losing  everything  while
still preferring  happiness,  to face destruction  while  cherishing  the
idea  of  a  higher  civilization.  That  is  how  we  do  more  than  you
because  we have to draw on ourselves.  You had nothing  to conquer
in your heart or in your intelligence.  We had two enemies,  and a
military  victory was not enough  for us, as it was for you who had
nothing to overcome.
We  had  much  to  overcome—and,  rst   of  all,  the  constant
temptation  to emulate  you. For there is always  something  in us that
yields  to  instinct,  to  contempt  for  intelligence,  to  the  cult  of
eciency.  Our great virtues  eventually  become  tiresome  to us. We
become  ashamed  of  our  intelligence,  and  sometimes  we  imagine
some barbarou s state where  truth would  be eortless.  But the cure
for this is easy; you are there to show us what such imagining  would
lead to, and we mend  our ways.  If I believed  in some fatalism  in
history,  I should  suppose  that you are placed  beside  us, helots  of the
intelligence,  as our living  reproof.  Then we reawaken  to the mind
and we are more at ease.

But we also had to overcome  the suspicion  we had of heroism.  I
know,  you think that heroism  is alien to us. You are wrong. It’s just
that we profess heroism  and we distrust  it at the same time. We
profess  it because  ten centuries of history  have given us knowledge
of  all  that  is  noble.  We  distrust  it  because  ten  centuries  of
intelligence  have taught  us the art and blessings  of being natural.  In
order to face up to you, we had rst  to be at death’s  door. And this
is why we fell behind  all of Europe,  which  wallowed  in falsehood
the  moment  it  was  necessary,  while  we  were  concerned  with
seeking  truth.  This  is  why  we  were  defeated  in  the  beginnin g:
because  we were so concerned,  while you were falling  upon us, to
determine in our hearts whether right was on our side.
We had to overcome  our weakness  for mankind,  the image  we
had  formed  of  a  peaceful  destiny,  that  deep-rooted  conviction  of
ours that no victory  ever pays, whereas  any mutilation  of mankind
is irrevocable.  We had to give up all at once our knowled ge and our
hope, the reasons  we had for loving  and the loathing  we had for all
war. To put it in a word that I suppose  you will understa nd when it
comes  from me whom  you counted  as a friend,  we had to stie   our
passion for friendship.
Now we have done that. We had to make a long detour,  and we
are  far  behind.  It  is  a  detour  that  regard  for  truth  imposes  on
intelligence,  that regard  for friendship  imposes  on the heart.  It is a
detour  that safeguarded  justice  and put truth on the side of those
who  questione d  themselves.   And,  without  a  doubt,  we  paid  very
dearly  for it. We paid for it with humiliations  and silences, with
bitter experiences,  with prison  sentences,  with executions  at dawn,
with desertion s and separations,  with daily pangs  of hunger,  with
emaciated  children,  and, above  all, with humiliation  of our human
dignity.  But that was natural.  It took us all that time to nd  out if
we  had  the  right  to  kill  men,  if  we  were  allowed  to  add  to  the
frightful  misery of this world.  And because  of that time lost and
recaptured,  our  defeat  accepted  and  surmounted,  those  scruples
paid for with blood,  we French have the right to think today that we
entered  this  war  with  hands  clean—clean  as  victims  and  the
condemned  are—and  that we are going to come out of it with hands

clean—but  clean this time with a great victory  won against injustice
and against ourselves.
For  we  shall  be  victorious,  you  may  be  sure.  But  we  shall  be
victorious  thanks  to that very defeat,  to that long, slow progress
during  which  we found  our justication,  to that suering  which,  in
all its injustice,  taught  us a lesson.  It taught  us the secret  of any
victory,  and if we don’t lose the secret,  we shall know n al victory.
It taught us that, contrary  to what we sometimes  used to think,  the
spirit is of no avail against  the sword,  but that the spirit together
with the sword  will always  win out over the sword  alone.  That is
why we have now accepted  the sword,  after making  sure that the
spirit was on our side. We had rst  to see people  die and to run the
risk of dying  ourselves.  We had to see a French  workman  walking
toward  the  guillotine  at  dawn  down  the  prison  corridors  and
exhorting  his  comrades  from  cell  to  cell  to  show  their  courage.
Finally,  to possess  ourselves  of the spirit,  we had to endure  torture
of our esh.  One really  possesses  only what one has paid for. We
have paid dearly, and we have not nished  paying.  But we have our
certainties, our justications, our justice; your defeat is inevitable.
I have never believed  in the power  of truth in itself. But it is at
least worth knowing  that when expressed  forcefully  truth wins out
over falsehood.  This is the dicult  equilibrium  we have reached.
This is the distinction  that gives us strength  as we ght  today.  And I
am tempted  to tell you that it so happens  that we are ghting  for
ne  distinctions,  but the kind of distinctions  that are as important  as
man himself.  We are ghting  for the distinction  between  sacrice
and mysticism,  between  energy  and violence,  between  strength  and
cruelty,  for  that  even  ner  distinction  between  the  true  and  the
false, between  the man of the future  and the cowardly  gods you
revere.
This is what I wanted  to tell you, not above  the fray but in the
thick of the fray. This is what I wanted  to answer  to your remark,
“You don’t love your country,”  which  is still haunting  me. But I
want to be clear with you. I believe  that France  lost her power  and
her sway for a long time to come and that for a long time she will
need a desperate patience, a vigilant revolt to recover the element of

prestige  necessary for any culture. But I believe  she has lost all that
for reasons  that are pure. And this is why I have not lost hope. This
is the whole  meaning  of my letter.  The man whom  you pitied  ve
years ago for being so reticent  about  his country  is the same man
who wants  to say to you today,  and to all those of our age in Europe
and  throughout  the  world:  “I  belong  to  an  admirable  and
persevering  nation  which,  admitting  her errors  and weaknesses,  has
not lost the idea that constitutes  her whole  greatness.  Her people  are
always  trying  and her leaders are sometimes  trying  to express  that
idea even more clearly.  I belong  to a nation  which  for the past four
years has begun  to relive the course  of her entire  history  and which
is  calmly  and  surely  preparing  out  of  the  ruins  to  make  another
history  and  to  take  her  chance  in  a  game  where  she  holds  no
trumps.  This country  is worthy of the dicult  and demanding  love
that is mine. And I believe  she is decidedly  worth  ghting  for since
she is worthy  of a higher  love. And I say that your nation, on the
other hand,  has received  from its sons only the love it deserved,
which  was blind.  A nation  is not justied  by such love. That will be
your  undoing.  And  you  who  were  already  conquere d  in  your
greatest victories, what will you be in the approaching defeat?”
July 1943

SECOND LETTER
HAVE   already  written  you  once  and  I  did  so  with  a  tone  of
I certainty.  After ve  years of separation,  I told you why we were
the stronger—because  of the detour  that took us out of our way to
seek  our  justication,  because  of  the  delay  occasioned  by  worry
about  our  rights,  because  of  the  crazy  insistence  of  ours  on
reconciling  everything  that we loved.  But it is worth  repeating.  As I
have already told you, we paid dearly  for that detour.  Rather  than
running  the risk of injustice  we preferred  disorder.  But at the same
time that very detour  constit utes our strength  today,  and as a result
we are within sight of victory.
Yes, I have already  told you all that and in a tone of certainty,  as
fast as I could write and without erasing  a word.  But I have had
time to think about it. Night is a time for meditation.  For three years
you have brought  night to our towns  and to our hearts.  For three
years we have been developing  in the dark the thought  which  now
emerges  fully armed  to face you. Now I can speak  to you of the
intelligence.  For the certainty  we now feel is the certaint y in which
we see clearly  and everythin g stands  out sharp and clear, in which
the intelligence  gives its blessing  to courage.  And you who used to
speak  ippantly  of the intelligence  are greatly  surprised,  I suppose,
to see it return  from the shadow  of death  and suddenly  decide  to
play its role in history.  This is where  I want to turn back toward
you.
As I shall tell you later on, the mere fact that the heart is certain
does not make us any the more cheerful.  This alone gives a meaning
to everything  I am writing  you. But rst  I want to square  everything
again with you, with your memory  and our friendship.  While I still
can do so, I want to do for our friendship  the only thing one can do
for a friendship  about  to end—I  want to make it explicit.  I have

already  answered the remark,  “You don’t love your country,”  that
you used to hurl at me and that I still remember  vividly. Today  I
merely  want to answer  your impatient  smile whenever  you heard
the  word  “intelligence.”  “In  all  her  intelligences,”  you  told  me,
“France  repudiates  herself.  Some of your intellectuals  prefer  despair
to their country—others,  the pursuit  of an improbable  truth. We put
Germany  before  truth  and  beyond  despair.”  Apparently  that  was
true. But, as I have already  told you, if at times we seemed to prefer
justice  to our country,  this is because  we simply  wanted  to love our
country in justice, as we wanted to love her in truth and in hope.
This is what separated  us from you; we made demands.  You were
satised  to  serve  the  power  of  your  nation  and  we  dreamed  of
giving  ours her truth. It was enough  for you to serve the politics  of
reality  wherea s,  in  our  wildest  aberrations,  we  still  had  a  vague
conception  of  the  politics  of  honor,  which  we  recogn ize  today.
When I say “we,” I am not speaking  of our rulers.  But a ruler hardly
matters.
At  this  point  I  see  you  smile  as  of  old.  You  always  distrusted
words.  So did I, but I used to distrust  myself  even more. You used to
try  to  urge  me  along  the  path  you  yourself  had  taken,  where
intelligence  is ashamed  of intelligence.  Even then I couldn’t  follow
you. But today  my answers  would  be more assured.  What is truth,
you used to ask? To be sure, but at least we know what falsehood  is;
that is just what you have taught  us. What is spirit?  We know its
contrary,  which  is murder.  What is man? There  I stop you, for we
know.  Man is that force which ultimately  cancels  all tyrants  and
gods. He is the force of evidence.  Human  evidence  is what we must
preserve,  and our certainty  at present  comes  from the fact that its
fate and our country’s  fate are linked  together.  If nothing  had any
meaning,  you would  be right. But there is something  that still has a
meaning.
It would be impossible  for me to repeat  to you too often that this
is where we part company.  We had formed  an idea of our country
that  put  her  in  her  proper   place,  amid  other  great  concepts—

friendship,  mankind,  happiness,  our desire  for justice.  This led us to
be severe with her. But, in the long run, we were the ones who were
right. We didn’t  bring her any slaves,  and we debased  nothing  for
her sake. We waited patientl y until we saw clearly,  and, in poverty
and su ering, we had the joy of ghting  at the same time for all we
loved.  You, on the other hand, are ghting  against  everything  in
man that does not belong  to the mother  country.  Your sacrices  are
inconsequential  because  your  hierarchy  is  not  the  right  one  and
because  your values  have no place.  The heart is not all you betray.
The intelligenc e takes its revenge.  You have not paid the price it
asks,  not  made  the  heavy  contribution  intelligence  must  pay  to
lucidity.  From the depths  of defeat,  I can tell you that that is your
downfall.
Let  me  tell  you  this  story.  Before  dawn,  from  a  prison  I  know,
somewhere  in France,  a truck driven  by armed  soldiers  is taking
eleven  Frenchm en to the cemetery  where  you are to shoot them.
Out of the eleven, ve  or six have really done something:  a tract, a
few meetings,  something  that showed  their refusal  to submit.  The
ve  or six, sitting motionless  inside  the truck,  are lled  with fear,
but, if I may say so, it is an ordinary  fear, the kind that grips every
man  facing  the  unknown,  a  fear  that  is  not  incompatible  with
courage.  The others  have done nothing.  This hour is harder for them
because  they  are  dying  by  mistake  or  as  victims  of  a  kind  of
indierence.  Among  them is a child of sixteen.  You know the faces
of  our  adolescents;  I  don’t  want  to  talk  about  them.  The  boy  is
dominated  by  fear;  he  gives  in  to  it  shamelessly.  Don’t  smile
scornfully;  his teeth are chattering.  But you have placed  beside  him
a chaplain, whose  task is to alleviate  somewhat  the agonizing hour
of waiting.  I believe  I can say that for men who are about  to be
killed a conversation  about a future  life is of no avail. It is too hard
to believe  that the lime-pit  is not the end of all. The prisoners  in the
truck are silent. The chaplain  turns toward  the child huddled  in his
corner.  He will understand  better.  The child answers,  clings  to the
chaplain’s  voice,  and  hope  returns.  In  the  mutest  of  horrors

sometimes  it is enough  for a man to speak;  perhaps  he is going to x
everything.  “I haven’t  done anything,”  says the child. “Yes,”  says the
chaplain,  “but that’s not the question  now. You must get ready  to
die properly.”  “It can’t be possible that no one understands  me.” “I
am your friend  and perhaps  I understand  you. But it is late. I shall
be with you and the Good Lord will be too. You’ll  see how easy it
is.” The child turns his head away. The chaplain  speaks  of God. Does
the child believe  in him? Yes, he believes.  Hence  he knows that
nothing  is as important  as the peace  awaiting  him. But that very
peace  is what frightens  the child.  “I am your friend,”  the chaplain
repeats.
The others are silent.  He must think of  them.  The chaplain  leans
toward  the silent group,  turning his back on the child for a moment.
The truck is advancing  slowly  with a sucking  sound  over the road,
which  is damp with dew. Imagine the gray hour, the early-morning
smell of men, the invisible  countryside  suggested  by sounds  of teams
being  harnessed  or the cry of a bird. The child leans against  the
canvas  coverin g,  which  gives  a  little.  He  notices  a  narrow  space
between  it and the truck body.  He could  jump if he wanted.  The
chaplain  has his back turned  and, up front, the soldiers  are intent  on
nding  their way in the dark. The boy doesn’t  stop to think;  he tears
the canvas loose, slips into the opening,  and jumps.  His fall is hardly
heard,  the sound of running  on the road, then nothing  more.  He is
in the elds,  where  his steps can’t be heard.  But the apping  of the
canvas,  the sharp,  damp morning air penetrating  the truck make the
chaplain  and  the  prisoners  turn  around.  For  a  second  the  priest
stares at those men looking  at him in silence.  A second  in which  the
man  of  God  must  decide  whether  he  is  on  the  side  of  the
executioners  or  on  the  side  of  the  martyrs  in  keeping   with  his
vocation.  But he has already  knocked  on the partition  separating
him from his comrades.  “Achtung!”  The alarm  is given. Two soldiers
leap into the truck and point their guns at the prisoners.  Two others
leap to the ground and start running  across  the elds.  The chaplain,
a few paces  from the truck,  standing  on the asphalt,  tries to see
them through  the fog. In the truck the men can only listen to the
sounds  of the chase,  the mu  ed exclamations,  a shot, silence,  then

the sound  of voices  again coming  nearer,  nally  a hollow  stamping
of feet. The child is brought  back. He wasn’t  hit, but he stopped
surrounded  in that enemy  fog, suddenly  without  courage,  forsaken
by himself.  He is carried  rather  than led by his guards.  He has been
beaten  somewh at, but not much.  The most important  lies ahead.  He
doesn’t  look at the chaplain  or anyone  else. The priest has climbed
up beside the driver.  An armed  soldier  has taken  his place in the
truck.  Thrown   into  one  of  the  corners,  the  child  doesn’t  cry.
Between  the canvas  and the oor  he watches  the road slip away
again and sees in its surface a reection of the dawn.
I am sure you can very well imagine  the rest. But it is important  for
you to know who told me this story. It was a French  priest.  He said
to me: “I am ashamed  for that man, and I am pleased  to think that
no  French  priest  would  have  been  willing  to  make  his  God  abet
murder.”  That  was  true.  The  chaplain  simply  felt  as  you  do.  It
seemed  natural  to him to make even his faith serve his country.
Even the gods are mobilized  in your country.  They are on your side,
as  you  say,  but  only  as  a  result  of  coercion.  You  no  longer
distinguish  anything;  you are nothing  but a single impulse.  And now
you are ghtin g with the resources  of blind anger,  with your mind
on  weapons  and  feats  of  arms  rather  than  on  ideas,  stubbornly
confusing  every  issue  and  following  your  obsession.  We,  on  the
other  hand,  started  from  the  intelligence  and  its  hesitations.  We
were powerless  against  wrath.  But now our detour  is nished.  It
took only a dead child for us to add wrath  to intelligence,  and now
we are two against one. I want to speak to you of wrath.
Remember,  when I expressed  amazement  at the outburst  of one of
your superiors,  you said to me: “That  too is good.  But you don’t
understand.  There is a virtue  the French  lack—anger.”  No, that’s not
it, but the French  are dicult  on the subject  of virtues.  And they
don’t assume  them unless  they have to. This gives their wrath  the
silence  and strength  you are just beginning  to feel. And it is with
that sort of wrath, the only kind I recognize  in myself,  that I am
going to end this letter.

For, as I told you, certainty  is not gaiety  of heart.  We know what
we lost on that long detour;  we know the price we are paying  for
the bitter joy of ghting  in agreement  with ourselves.  And because
we have a keen sense of the irreparable,  there is as much bitterness
as condence  in our struggle.  The war didn’t  satisfy  us. We had not
yet assembled  our reasons  for ghting.  It is civil war,  the obstinate,
collective  struggle,  the unrecorded  sacrice  that our people  chose.
This war is the one they chose for themselves  instead  of accepting  it
from  idiotic  or  cowardly  governments,  a  war  in  which  they
recognize  themselves  and are ghting  for a certain  idea they have
formed  of  themselves.  But  this  luxury  they  permitted  themselves
costs them a dreadful  price.  In this regard,  too, my people  deserve
more credit than yours.  For the best of their sons are the ones who
are falling; that is my cruelest thought.  In the derision  of war there
is the benet  of derision.  Death  strikes  everywhere  and at random.
In the war we are ghting,  courage  steps up and volunteers,  and
every  day  you  are  shooting  down  our  purest  spirits.  For  your
ingenuousness  is not without  foresight.  You have never known  what
to select,  but you know what to destroy.  And we, who call ourselves
defenders  of  the  spirit,  know  nevertheless  that  the  spirit  can  die
when  the force crushing  it is great enough.  But we have faith in
another  force. In raining  bullets on those silent faces, already turned
away from this world,  you think you are disguring  the face of our
truth.  But you are forgetting  the obstinacy  that makes  France  ght
against  time.  That  hopeless   hope  is  what  sustains  us  in  dicult
moments;  our comrades  will be more patient  than the executioners
and more numerous  than the bullets.  As you see, the French  are
capable of wrath.
December 1943

THIRD LETTER
NTIL  now I have been talking  to you of my country  and you
U must  have  thought  in  the  beginning  that  my  tone  had
changed.  In reality,  this was not so. It is merely  that we didn’t  give
the same meaning to the same words;  we no longer  speak the same
language.
Words  always  take on the color of the deeds or the sacrices  they
evoke.  And in your country  the word “fatherland”  assumes  blind
and bloody  overtones  that make it forever  alien to me, whereas  we
have put into the same word the ame  of an intelligence  that makes
courage  more dicult  and gives man complete  fulllment . You have
nally  understood  that my tone has really never changed.  The one I
used with you before 1939 is the one I am using today.
You  will  probably  be  more  convinced  by  the  confession  I  am
going to make to you. During  all the time when we were obstinately
and silently  serving  our country,  we never lost sight of an idea and a
hope, forever present  in us—the  idea and the hope of Europe.  To be
sure,  we  haven’t  mentione d  Europe  for  ve  years.  But  this  is
because  you  talked  too  much  of  it.  And  there  too  we  were  not
speaking the same language; our Europe is not yours.
But before telling you what ours is, I want to insist that among
the reasons  we have for ght ing you (they  are the same we have for
defeating  you) there is perhaps  none more fundamenta l than our
awareness  of  having  been,  not  only  mutilated  in  our  country,
wounded  in our very esh,  but also divested  of our most beautiful
images,  for you gave the world  a hateful  and ridiculous  version  of
them.  The most painful  thing to bear is seeing  a mockery  made of
what one loves. And that idea of Europe  that you took from the best
among  us  and  distorted  has  consequently  become  hard  for  us  to
keep alive in all its original  force.  Hence  there is an adjective  we

have  given  up  writing  since  you  called  the  army  of  slavery
“European,”  but this is only to preserve  jealously  the pure meaning
it still has for us, which I want to tell you.
You speak of Europe,  but the dierence  is that for you Europe  is a
property,  whereas we feel that we belong  to it. You never spoke this
way until you lost Africa.  That is not the right kind of love. This
land on which so many centuries have left their mark is merely  an
obligatory  retreat for you, whereas  it has always  been our dearest
hope.  Your too sudden  passion  is made up of spite and necessity.
Such a feeling  honors  no one, and you can see why no European
worthy of the name would accept it.
You say “Europe,”  but you think in terms  of potential  soldiers,
granaries,  industries  brought  to heel, intelligence  under  control.  Am
I going too far? But at least I know that when you say “Europe,”
even  in  your  best  moments,  when  you  let  yourselves  be  carried
away by your own lies, you cannot keep yourselves  from thinking  of
a  cohort  of  docile  nations  led  by  a  lordly  Germany  toward  a
fabulous  and bloody  future.  I should  like you to be fully aware  of
this dierence.  For you Europe  is an expanse  encircled  by seas and
mountains,  dotted  with  dams,  gutted  with  mines,  covered  with
harvests,  where Germany  is playing  a game in which  her own fate
alone is at stake. But for us Europe  is a home of the spirit where  for
the last twenty  centuries  the most amazing  adventure  of the human
spirit has been going on. It is the privileged  arena in which  Western
man’s struggle  against  the world,  against  the gods, against  himself  is
today  reaching  its  climax.  As  you  see,  there  is  no  common
denominator.
Don’t worry  that I shall use against  you the themes  of an age-old
propaganda;  I shall not fall back on the Christian  tradition.  That is
another  problem. You have talked too much of it too, and, posing  as
defenders  of Rome,  you were not afraid  to give Christ  the kind of
publicity  he began  to be accustomed  to the day he received  the kiss
that marked  him for torture.  But, after all, the Christian  tradition  is
only  one  of  the  traditions  that  made  this  Europe,  and  I  am  not
qualied  to  defend  it  against  you.  To  do  so  would  require  the
instinct  and inclination  of a heart given over to God. You know this

is not the case with me. But when I allow myself  to think that my
country  speaks  in the name of Europe  and that when we defend  one
we  are  defending  both,  then  I  too  have  my  tradition .  It  is  the
tradition  both of a few great individuals  and of an inexhaustible
mass. My tradition  has two aristocracies,  that of the intelligence  and
that of courage;  it has its intellectual  leaders  and its innumerable
mass.  Now  tell  me  whether   this  Europe,  whose  frontiers  are  the
genius  of a few and the heart of all its inhabitants,  diers  from the
colored spot you have annexed on temporary maps.
Remember,  you said to me, one day when you were making  fun of
my outbursts:  “Don Quixote  is powerless  if Faust feels like attacking
him.”  I  told  you  then  that  neither  Faust  nor  Don  Quixote  was
intended  to attack  the other and that art was not invented  to bring
evil into the world. You used to like exaggerated  images and you
continued  your  argument.  According  to  you,  there  was  a  choice
between  Hamlet and Siegfried.  At that time I didn’t  want to choose
and, above all, it didn’t  seem to me that the West could exist except
in  the  equilibrium  between  strength  and  knowledge.  But  you
scorned  knowledge  and spoke only of strength.  Today  I know better
what I mean and I know that even Faust will be of no use to you.
For we have in fact accepted  the idea that in certain  cases choice  is
necessary.  But our choice  would be no more important  than yours if
we  had  not  been  aware  that  any  choice  was  inhuman  and  that
spiritual  values  could not be separated.  Later on we shall be able to
bring them together  again,  and this is something  you have never
been able to do. You see, it is still the same idea; we have seen
death face to face. But we have paid dear enough  for that idea to be
justied  in clinging  to it. This urges me to say that your Europe  is
not the right one. There  is nothing  there to unite or inspire. Ours is
a joint adventu re that we shall continue  to pursue,  despite  you, with
the inspiration of intelligence.
I shan’t go much  further.  Sometimes  on a street  corner,  in the
brief intervals  of the long struggle  that involves  us all, I happen  to
think of all those places  in Europe  I know well. It is a magnicent
land molded  by suering  and history.  I relive  those pilgrimages  I
once made with all the men of the West: the roses in the cloisters  of

Florence,  the gilded  bulbous  domes  of Krakow,  the Hradschin and
its dead palaces,  the contorted  statues  of the Charles  Bridge over the
Ultava,  the  delicate  gardens  of  Salzburg.  All  those  owers  and
stones,  those hills and those landscapes  where  men’s  time and the
world’s  time have mingled  old trees and monuments!  My memory
has fused together  such superimposed  images  to make a single  face,
which  is the face of my true native  land. And then I feel a pang
when I think that, for years now, your shadow  has been cast over
that vital, tortured face. Yet some of those places  are ones that you
and I saw together.  It never occurred  to me then that someday  we
should  have to liberate  them from you. And even now, at certain
moments  of rage and despair,  I am occasionally  sorry that the roses
continue  to grow in the cloister  of San Marco  and the pigeons  drop
in clusters  from the Cathedr al of Salzburg,  and the red geraniums
grow tirelessly in the little cemeteries of Silesia.
But at other moments,  and they are the only ones that count,  I
delight  in  this.  For  all  those  landscapes,  those  owers  and  those
plowed  elds,  the oldest  of lands, show you every spring  that there
are things  you cannot  choke  in blood.  That is the image  on which  I
can close. It would  not be enough  for me to think that all the great
shades  of the West and that thirty nations  were on our side; I could
not do withou t the soil. And so I know that  everything  in Europe,
both landscape  and spirit,  calmly  negates  you without  feeling  any
rash hatred, but with the calm strength  of victory.  The weapons  the
European  spirit can use against  you are the same as reside  in this
soil constantly  reawakening  in blossoms  and harvests.  The battle we
are waging is sure of victory because it is as obstinate as spring.
And,  nally,  I  know  that  all  will  not  be  over  when  you  are
crushed.  Europe will still have to be established.  It always has to be
established.  But at least it will still be Europe—in  other words,  what
I have just written  you. Nothing  will be lost. Just imagine  what we
are now, sure of our reasons,  in love with our country,  carried along
by  all  Europe,  and  neatly  balanced  between  sacrice   and  our
longing  for happiness,  between  the sword  and the spirit.  I tell you
once more because I must tell you, I tell you because  it is the truth
and because  it will show you the progress  my country  and I have

made  since  the  time  of  our  friendship:  henceforth  we  have  a
superiority that will destroy you.
April 1944

FOURTH LETTER
Man  is  mortal.  That  may  be;  but
let us die resisting;  and if our lot is
complete  annihilation,  let  us  not
behave  in such a way that it seems
justice!
O BERMANN , Letter 90
ow the momen t of your defeat is approaching.  I am writing
you from a city known  throughout  the world  which  is now N
preparing  against you a celebration  of freedom.  Our city knows  this
is not easy and that rst  it will have to live through  an even darker
night than the one that began, four years ago, with your coming.  I
am writing  you from a city deprived  of everything,  devoid of light
and devoid  of heat, starved,  and still not crushed.  Soon something
you can’t even imagine  will iname  the city. If we were lucky,  you
and I should  then stand face to face. Then we could ght  each other
knowing  what is at stake. I have a fair idea of your motivations  and
you can imagine mine.
These  July nights  are both light and heavy.  Light along the Seine
and in the trees, but heavy  in the hearts  of those who are awaiting
the only dawn they now long for. I am waiting  and I think of you; I
still have one more  thing to tell you—and  it will be the last. I want
to tell you how it is possible  that, though  so similar,  we should  be
enemies  today, how I might have stood beside  you and why all is
over between us now.
For a long time we both thought that this world  had no ultimate
meaning  and that consequently  we were cheated.  I still think so in a
way. But I came to dierent  conclusions  from the ones you used to

talk about, which, for so many years now, you have been trying  to
introduce  into history.  I tell myself  now that if I had really followed
your reasoning,  I ought  to approve what you are doing.  And this is
so serious  that I must stop and consider  it, during  this summer  night
so full of promises for us and of threats for you.
You  never  believed  in  the  meaning  of  this  world,  and  you
therefore  deduced  the idea that everything  was equivalen t and that
good  and  evil  could  be  dened  according  to  one’s  wishes.  You
supposed  that in the absence  of any human  or divine  code the only
values  were those of the animal  world—in  other words,  violence
and cunning.  Hence  you concluded  that man was negligible  and that
his soul could be killed,  that in the maddest  of historie s the only
pursuit  for the individual  was the adventure  of power  and his only
morality,  the realism  of conquests. And, to tell the truth, I, believing
I thought  as you did, saw no valid argument  to answer  you except  a
erce  love of justice  which,  after all, seemed  to me as unreasonable
as the most sudden passion.
Where  lay  the  dierence?  Simply  that  you  readily  accepted
despair  and I never yielded  to it. Simply  that you saw the injustice
of our condition  to the point of being  willing  to add to it, whereas  it
seemed  to me that man must exalt justice  in order to ght  against
eternal  injustice,  create  happiness  in  order  to  protest  against  the
universe  of  unhappiness.  Because  you  turned  your  despair  into
intoxication,  because  you  freed  yourself  from  it  by  making  a
principle  of it, you were willing  to destroy  man’s  works  and to ght
him  in  order  to  add  to  his  basic  misery.  Meanwhile,  refusing  to
accept  that despair  and that tortured  world,  I merely  wanted  men to
rediscover  their  solidarity  in  order  to  wage  war  against  their
revolting fate.
As you see, from the same principle  we derived  quite dierent
codes,  because   along  the  way  you  gave  up  the  lucid  view  and
considered  it more convenie nt (you would  have said a matter  of
indierence)  for  another  to  do  your  thinking  for  you  and  for
millions  of Germans.  Because  you were tired of ghting  heaven,  you
relaxed  in that exhausting  adventure  in which  you had to mutilate

souls and destroy  the world.  In short,  you chose injustice  and sided
with the gods. Your logic was merely apparent.
I, on the contrary, chose justice  in order to remain  faithful  to the
world.  I  continue  to  believe  that  this  world  has  no  ultimate
meaning.  But I know that something  in it has a meaning  and that is
man, because  he is the only creature  to insist on having  one. This
world  has at least the truth of man, and our task is to provide  its
justications  against  fate itself. And it has no justication  but man;
hence  he must be saved if we want to save the idea we have of life.
With your scornful smile you will ask me: what do you mean by
saving  man? And with all my  being I shout to you that I mean not
mutilating  him and yet giving  a chance  to the justice  that man alone
can conceive.
This is why we are ghting.  This is why we rst  had to follow you
on a path we didn’t  want and why at the end of that path we met
defeat.  For  your  despair  constituted  your  strength.  The  moment
despair  is alone,  pure, sure of itself, pitiless  in its consequences,  it
has  a  mercile ss  power.  That  is  what  crushed  us  while  we  were
hesitating  with our eyes still xed  on happy  images.  We thought
that happiness  was the greatest  of conquests,  a victory  over the fate
imposed upon us. Even in defeat this longing did not leave us.
But you did what was necessary,  and we went down  in history.
And for ve  years it was no longer  possible  to enjoy the call of birds
in the cool of the evening.  We were forced  to despair.  We were cut
o   from the world  because  to each moment  of the world  clung a
whole  mass of mortal  images . For ve  years the earth has not seen a
single  morning  without  death  agonies,  a  single  evening  without
prisons,  a single noon without  slaughters.  Yes, we had to follow  you.
But our dicult  achievemen t consisted  in following  you into war
without  forgetting  happiness.  And  despite  the  clamors  and  the
violence,  we tried to preserve  in our hearts  the memory  of a happy
sea,  of  a  remembered  hill,  the  smile  of  a  beloved  face.  For  that
matter,  this was our best weapon,  the one we shall never put away.
For as soon as we lost it we should  be as dead as you are. But we
know now that the weapons  of happiness  cannot  be forged  without
considerable time and too much blood.

We had to enter into your philosophy  and be willing  to resemble
you somewhat.  You chose  a vague  heroism,  because  it is the only
value left in a world  that has lost its meaning.  And, having  chosen  it
for yourselves,  you chose it for everybody  else and for us. We were
forced  to imitate  you in order not to die. But we became  aware  then
that our superiority  over you consisted  in our having  a direction.
Now that all that is about  to end, we can tell you what we have
learned—that  heroism  isn’t  much  and  that  happiness  is  more
dicult.
At present  everything  must be obvious  to you; you know that we
are enemies. You are the man of injustice,  and there is nothing  in
the  world  that  my  heart  loathes  so  much.  But  now  I  know  the
reasons  for  what  was  once  merely  a  passion.  I  am  ghting  you
because  your logic is as criminal  as your heart.  And in the horror
you have lavished upon us for four years,  your reason  plays as large
a  part  as  your  instinct.  This  is  why  my  condemnatio n  will  be
sweeping;  you are already  dead as far as I am concerned.  But at the
very  moment  when  I  am  judging  your  horrible  behavior,  I  shall
remember  that you and we started  out from the same solitude,  that
you and we, with all Europe , are caught  in the same tragedy  of the
intelligence.  And, despite  yourselves,  I shall still apply  to you the
name of man. In order to keep faith with ourselves,  we are obliged
to respect  in you what you do not respect  in others.  For a long time
that was your great advantage  since you kill more easily than we
do. And to the very end of time that will be the advantag e of those
who resemble  you. But to the very end of time, we, who do not
resemble  you, shall have to bear witness  so  that mankind,  despite  its
worst errors, may have its justication and its proof of innocence.
This is why, at the end of this combat,  from the heart of this city
that has come to resemble  hell, despite  all the tortures  inicted  on
our  people,  despite  our  dis  gured  dead  and  our  villages  peopled
with orphans,  I can tell you that at the very moment  when we are
going  to destroy you without  pity, we still feel no hatred  for you.
And  even  if  tomorrow,  like  so  many  others,  we  had  to  die,  we
should  still be without  hatred.  We cannot  guarantee  that we shall
not  be  afraid;  we  shall  simply  try  to  be  reasonable.  But  we  can

guarantee  that we shall not hate anything.  And we have come to
terms with the only thing in the world  I could loathe  today,  I assure
you, and we want to destroy  you in your power  without  mutilating
you in your soul.
As for the advantage  you had over us, you see that you continue
to have it. But it likewise  constitutes  our superiority.  And it is what
makes  this night easy for me. Our strength  lies in thinking  as you do
about  the essence  of the world,  in rejecting  no aspect  of the drama
that is ours. But at the same time we have saved the idea of man at
the end of this disaster  of the intelligence,  and that idea gives us the
undying  courage to believe  in a rebirth.  To be sure, the accusation
we make against  the world  is not mitigated  by this. We paid so dear
for  this  new  knowledge  that  our  condition  continue s  to  seem
desperate  to  us.  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  assassinated  at
dawn,  the terrible  walls of prisons,  the soil of Europe  reeking with
millions  of  corpses  of  its  sons—it  took  all  that  to  pay  for  the
acquisition  of two or three slight  distinctions  which  may have no
other value than to help some among  us to die more nobly.  Yes, that
is heart-breaking.  But we have to prove  that we do not deserve  so
much injustice.  This is the task we have set ourselves;  it will begin
tomorrow.  In this night of Europe  lled  with the breath  of summer,
millions  of men, armed  or unarmed,  are getting  ready for the ght.
The dawn about  to break  will mark your nal  defeat.  I know that
heaven,  which  was  indierent  to  your  horrible  victories,  will  be
equally  indierent  to your just defeat.  Even now I expect  nothing
from heaven. But we shall at least have helped  save man from the
solitude  to which  you wanted  to relegate  him. Because  you scorned
such  faith  in  mankind,  you  are  the  men  who,  by  thousands,  are
going to die solitary. Now, I can say farewell to you.
July 1944

The Liberation of Paris

THE BLOOD OF FREEDOM
ARIS  is shooting  all her bullets  in the August  night.  In this vast
P setting  of  stones  and  waters,  all  around  this  river  that  has
reected  so much history,  the barricades  of freedom  have once more
been thrown  up. Once more justice  must be bought  with the blood
of men.
We know  this ght  too well, we are too involved  through  our
esh  and  our  hearts  to  accept  this  dreadful  condition  without
bitterness.  But we also know too well what is at stake to refuse  the
dicult fate that we must endure alone.
Time will bear witness  to the fact that the men of France  did not
want to kill and that their hands were clean when they entered  a
war  they  had  not  chosen.  Their  reasons  must  then  have  been
overwhelming  for  them  suddenly  to  seize  their  guns  and  shoot
steadily,  in the night,  at those soldiers  who for two years thought
the war was easy.
Yes, their reasons  are overwh elming.  They are as big as hope and
as deep as revolt.  They are the reasons  of the future  for a country
that others  tried so long to limit to the gloomy  rumination  of her
past. Paris is ghting  today so that France  may speak up tomorrow.
The people  are under  arms tonight because  they hope for justice  for
tomorrow.  Some go about saying that it is not worth  while and that
with a little patience  Paris will be liberated  without  eo  rt. But this
is because they vaguely  sense that this insurrection  threatens  many
things that would continue to stand if all took place otherwise.
Indeed,  this must be increasi ngly obvious:  no one can think that a
freedom  torn from such convulsions  will have the calm, tame aspect
that some enjoy imagining.  This dreadful  travail  will give birth to a
revolution.

No one can hope that men who have fought  in silence  for four
years and are now ghting  all day long in the din of bombs  and the
crackle  of guns will agree to the return  of the forces  of surrender
and injustice under  any circumstances.  No one can expect  that these
men—the  nation’s best—will  again accept  doing  what the best and
purest  did  for  twenty-ve  years—that  is,  loving  their  country  in
silence  and silently  despising  her leaders.  The Paris that is ghting
tonight  intends  to  command  tomorrow.  Not  for  power,  but  for
justice;  not for politics,  but for ethics;  not for the domination  of
France, but for her grandeur.
Our conviction  is not that this will take place,  but that this is
taking  place today  in the suering  and obstinacy  of the ght.  And
this is why, despite  men’s  suering,  despite  the blood  and wrath,
despite  the dead who can never be replaced,  the unjust  wounds,  and
the wild bullets, we must utter, not words  of regret,  but words  of
hope, of the dreadful hope of men isolated with their fate.
This huge Paris, all black and warm  in the summer  night, with a
storm  of bombers  overhead  and a storm  of snipers  in the streets,
seems  to us more brightly  lighted  than the City of Light the whole
world  used to envy us. It is bursting  with all the res  of hope and
suering,  it has the ame  of lucid courage  and all the glow, not only
of liberation, but of tomorrow’s liberty.
C OMBAT ,  24 August 1944

THE NIGHT OF TRUTH
HILE  the bullets  of freedom  are still whistling  throughout  the
W city, the cannons  of the liberation  are entering  the gates of
Paris amid shouts  and owers.  In the most beautiful  and hottest  of
August  nights,  the eternal  stars over Paris mingle  with the tracer
bullets,  the  smoke  of  res,  and  the  colored  rockets  of  a  mass
celebration.  This unparalleled  night marks  the end of four years of
monstrous  history and of an unspeakable  struggle  in which  France
came to grips with her shame and her wrath.
Those  who never despaired  of themselves  or of their country nd
their reward under this sky. This night is worth  a world;  it is the
night of truth. Truth under  arms and in the fray, truth sustained  by
force after having  so long been empty-handed  and unprot ected.  It is
everywhere  this  night  when  people  and  cannons  are  booming
simultaneously.  It is the very voice of the people  and the cannons;  it
wears  the  exhausted  face  of  the  street  ghters,  triumphal  under
their scars and sweat.  Yes, it is indeed  the night of truth, of the only
truth that matters, the truth that is willing to ght and conquer.
Four years ago men rose up amid ruins and despair  and calmly
declared  that nothing  was lost. They said we had to carry on and
that the forces of good could always  overcome  the forces  of evil if
we were willing  to pay the price.  They paid the price.  And, to be
sure, that price was heavy;  it had all the weight  of blood  and the
dreadful  heaviness of prisons.  Many of those men are dead, whereas
others  have been living  for years surrounded  by windowless  walls.
That was the price that had to be paid. But those same men, if they
could,  would  not blame  us for this terrible  and marvelous  joy that
sweeps us o our feet like a high tide.
For our joy has not broken  faith with them.  On the contrary, it
justies  them and declares  that they were right. United  in the same

suering  for four years,  we still are united  in the same intoxication;
we have won our solidarity.  And we are suddenly  astonis hed to see
during  this dazzling  night that for four years we have never  been
alone. We have lived the years of fraternity.
Harsh  combats  still await  us. But peace  will return  to this torn
earth and to hearts  tortured  by hopes  and memories.  One cannot
always  live  on  murders  and  violence.  Happiness  and  proper
aection  will  have  their  time.  But  that  peace  will  not  nd  us
forgetful.  And  for  some  among  us,  the  faces  of  our  brothers
disgured  by bullets,  the great virile brotherhood  of recent  years
will never forsake  us. May our dead comrades  enjoy by themselves
the peace  that is promised  us during  this panting  night, for they
have already won it. Our ght will be theirs.
Nothing  is given to men, and the little they can conquer  is paid
for with unjust deaths.  But man’s greatness  lies elsewhere.  It lies in
his decision  to be stronger  than his condition.  And if his condition  is
unjust,  he has only  one way of overcoming  it, which  is to be just
himself.  Our truth of this evening,  which  hovers  overhe ad in this
August  sky, is just what consoles  man. And our hearts  are at peace,
just as the hearts of our dead comrades  are at peace,  because  we can
say as victory  returns,  without  any spirit of revenge  or of spite: “We
did what was necessary.”
C OMBAT ,  25 August 1944

The Flesh

T WAS  hard for us to speak of René Leynaud  yesterday.  Those  who
I read in a corner of their newspaper  that a Resistance  journalist
with  that  name  had  been  shot  by  the  Germans  paid  but  eeting
attention  to what for us was a dreadful,  an atrocious  announcement.
And yet we must speak  of him. We must speak  of him so that the
memory  of the Resistance  will be kept alive, not in a nation that
may be forgetful,  but at least in a few hearts  that pay attention  to
human quality.
He had entered  the Resistance  during  the rst  months.  Everything
that  constitute d  his  moral  life,  Christianity  and  respect  for  one’s
promise,  had urged  him to take his place silently  in that battle  of
shadows.  He  had  chosen  the  pseudonym  that  corresponded  to
everything  purest  in  him;  to  all  his  comrades  on  Combat   he  was
known as Clair.
The only private  passion  he had kept—along  with that of personal
modesty—was  poetry.  He had written  poems  that only two or three
of us knew.  They had the quality  he himself  had—transparency.  But
in  the  daily  struggle  he  had  given  up  writing,  indulging  only  in
buying  the most varied  books  of poetry,  which  he was saving  to
read after the war. As for everything  else, he shared  our conviction
that a certain  language  and insistence  on  honesty  would  restore  to
our country  the noble  countenance  we cherished.  For months  his
place  was  waiting  for  him  on  this  newspaper,  and  with  all  the
blindness  of friendship  and aection  we refused  to accept  the news
of his death. Today that is no longer possible.
He will no longer  speak  that language  it was essential  to speak.
The absurd  tragedy  of the Resistance  is summed  up in this frightful
misfortune.  For  men  like  Leynaud  entered  the  struggle  with  the
conviction  that no one had a right to speak  until he had made a

personal  sacri   ce. The trouble  is that the unocial  war did not have
the dreadful  justice  of the regular  war. At the front, bullets  strike at
random,  killing the best and the worst.  But for four years behind  the
lines, it was the best who volunteered  and fell, it was the best who
earned the right to speak, and lost the ability to do so.
In any case, the man we loved will never  speak  again.  And yet
France  needed  voices  like  his.  His  exceptionally  proud  heart,
protected  by his faith and his sense of honor,  would  have found  the
words  we needed. But he is now forever  silent.  And some who are
not worthy  speak  of the honor  that was identied  with him, while
others  who are not trustworthy  speak in the name of the God he had
chosen.
It is possible today to criticize  the men of the Resistance,  to note
their shortcomings,  and to bring accusations  against  them. But this
is  perhaps  because  the  best  among  them  are  dead.  We  say  this
because  we are deeply  convinced  of it: if we are still here, this is
because  we did not do enough. Leynaud  did enough.  And today,
having  been returned  to the soil he enjoyed  for so short a time,
having  been cut o   from that passion  to which  he had sacriced
everything,  he may nd  consolation,  we hope,  in not hearing  the
words  of bitterness  and denigration  now being applied  to that poor
human adventure in which we took part.
Never  fear, we shall not make use of him, who never made use of
anyone.  He left the struggle  unknown  as he entered  it unknown.  We
shall keep for him what he would  have preferred—the  silence of our
hearts,  an  attentive  memory,  and  the  dreadful  sorrow  of  the
irreparable.  But he will forgive  us if we admit  bitterness  here where
we have always  tried to avoid  it, and indulge  in the thought  that
perhaps  the  death  of  such  a  man  is  too  high  a  price  to  pay  for
granting  others  the  right  to  forget  in  their  behavior  and  their
writings  what was achieved  during  four years by the courage  and
sacrice of a few Frenchmen.
C OMBAT ,  27 October 1944

N  THE   16th  of  May  1944,  René  Leynaud,  bearing  secret
O documents,  was arrested  by members  of the Vichy  Militia in
Place  Bellecou r  at  Lyon.  When  he  tried  to  ee,  a  rain  of  bullets
aimed  at his legs stopped  him. After a short stay in the hospital,  he
was  transferred  to  Fort  Montluc,  where  he  was  to  remain
incarcerated  until the 13th of June 1944.  That day the Germans
who  were  getting  ready  to  evacuate  Lyon  picked  out  nineteen
prisoners  at  Montluc  who  were  considered  to  have  played  an
important  part in the Resistance.  We know the names  of only eleven
of them. Between  ve  and six a.m., Leynaud  and eighteen  of his
fellow  prisoners  were gathere d together  in the courtyard.  They were
served  coee  and then handcued.  One by one, they climbed into a
truck,  which  took  them  to  the  Gestapo  headquarters  in  Place
Bellecour.  They waited  three quarters  of an hour in the cellar of that
building.  When  they  were  nally  called,  their  handcus  were
removed  and they were made to climb  into the truck again  with
some German  soldiers  armed  with machine  guns. The truck drove
out of Lyon in the direction  of Villeneuve.  At eleven  o’clock  it crept
through  Villeneuve  and encountered  a group  of children  returning
from a walk. The prisoners  and the children  looked  at each other for
a time but  didn’t  exchang e a word. Just beyond  Villeneuve,  opposite
a  grove  of  poplars,  the  truck  stopped,  the  soldiers  leaped  to  the
ground  and  commanded  the  men  to  get  out  and  go  toward  the
woods.  A rst  group  of six left the truck and started  toward  the
trees.  The  machine  guns  immediately  crackled  behind  them  and
mowed  them down.  A second  group  followed,  then a third.  Those
who were still breathing  were put out of their pain by a nal  shot.
One  of  them,  however,  though  frightfully  wounded,  managed  to
drag himself to a peasant’s  house. From him we learned  the details.
Leynaud’s  friends simply  wonder  whether  he was in the rst  group
or one of the later groups.

Leynaud  was thirty-four.  He was born on 24 August  1910 at Lyon-
Vaise of parents  from the Ardèche.  He had begun  his education  at
the public school and gone on to the Lycée Ampère  in Lyon. While
he was attending law school,  he had begun  as a journalist  on  Le
Progrès  of Lyon. It was probably  during  the years just before  the war
that  he  came  to  understand  his  love  of  poetry  and  his  profound
Christianity.
In September  1939 Leynaud  is mobilized,  ghts  in Lorraine,  then
in Belgium,  takes part in the Dunkerque  retreat,  and, being far away
from  the  ocial  evacuation,  nevertheless  manages  by  some
makeshift  means  to cross the Channel  to Plymouth.  He returns  to
France  and at the moment  of the armistice  he is at Agen,  sick and
exhausted.  I  should  like  to  point  out,  however,  that  none  of  his
friends  ever heard  Leynaud  talk of the part he had played in the
war.  We  get  these  details  from  his  wife.  Early  in  1942  Leynaud
made contact  with Resistance  groups  and was eventually  to become
local leader of the  Combat  movement  in Lyon under  the pseudonym
of Clair.
For all of us, Leynaud’s  death made an example  of him. Yet before
that we knew,  just from the kind of attachment  we felt for him, that
his life (and we have just told the short, sharp story of that life) was
exemplary.  Living very quietly,  absorbed  by the love of his wife and
his son, by the needs  of the combat,  he didn’t  have many friends.
But I have never known  a single person  who, loving  him, failed  to
love  him  without  reservation.  This  is  because  he  inspired
condence.  Insofar  as  it  is  possible  for  a  man,  he  gave  himself
completely  to  everything  he  did.  He  never  bargained  about
anything,  and this is why he was assassinated.  As solid as the short,
stocky  oaks  of  his  Ardèche,   he  was  both  physically  and  morally
strapping.  Nothing  could  make the slightest  dent in him when he
had once made up his mind what was fair. It took a burst of bullets
to subjugate him.
Up to now, I have spoken  of Leynaud  dryly and, so to speak,  in a
general  way. But if it is true that I shall probably  never again be

able to speak freely of the man who was my friend,  at least I can try
to set down now a few more vivid images  that I had already  begun
to put together.
He was only slightly  above  average  height,  with thick, curly hair,
a rough-hewn  face with gray eyes, a mobile  and rather  full mouth,  a
broad  nose, and a sharp jaw.  He dressed  carelessly,  but the shape of
his  body  tended  to  stretch  his  clothing  and  give  it  a  certain
elegance.
In 1943, on my way through  Lyon, I often stayed  in his little room
in  Rue  Vieille-Monnaie  which  his  friends  knew  so  well.  Leynaud
would  do the honors  rapidly,  fussing  about  the bedside  lamp and
then, rising, would  take cigarettes  out of an earthenware  pot and
share them with me. “I smoke less than you,” he would say, “and,
besides,  I prefer  my pipe.”  He would  take it out, in fact, and keep in
in his mouth for a time. In my memory,  those hours have remained
as classic examples  of friendship.  Leynaud,  who was going to sleep
somewhere  else,  would  stay  until  the  curfew.  All  around  us,  the
heavy  silence  of the Occupation  nights  would  settle down.  That big,
somber  city  of  conspiracy  that  Lyon  then  was  would  gradually
empty.  But we would  not speak  of the conspiracy.  As a matter  of
fact, Leynaud,  unless  he absolutely  had to, never  spoke  of it. We
would  exchan ge  news  of  our  friends.  Sometimes  we  spoke  of
literature.  He loved the poets of the sixteenth  century  and especially
the School of Lyon. His library, rare and precious,  which  surrounded
us then, was made up almost  exclusively  of poetry.  But the poems
came from all times and all places.  I did not have his competence.
Yet I ventured  to tell him the impatience  I felt when faced with the
short poem, the eeting  notation  cultivated  by so many  moderns.
We saw eye to eye on that point,  and it was then that he told me of
his plan for a long poem in which  he would  try to set down what he
had to say. Recovered  fragments  of that poem gure  in his volume
of poetry.
But  at  that  time  Leynaud  was  not  writing  anything.  He  had
decided  that he would  work  afterward.  From several  indications,  I
guessed  then that he was waiting impatiently  for that  afterward.  This
man  who  had  never  sidestepped  any  duty  was  to  be  especially

congratulated  because  it so happened  that he felt the full weight  of
duty. Fatigue  would  seize him at certain  moments  and give him that
set look that would  isolate  him from the world  for a time. He was
too close to all he loved—his  wife, his child, a certain  way of life—
not to dream  of a future  in which  his love would  not be endangered
and in which  he himself  could be what he really  was. “What  will
you do when it’s all over?”  he would  ask me. But then as now I had
no  imagination  and  my  replies  were  not  clear.  For  Leynaud,
everything  was simple;  he would resume  his life at the point where
he had left o,   for he found  it to his liking.  Then, he had a child to
raise. And though  he rarely  became  animated,  the name of his son
was enough to make his eyes shine.
At other times we had less serious  conversations.  I used to like to
see him laugh.  He did so rarely,  now that I stop to think about  it,
but then he would  do so heartily,  leaning  back on his chair.  The
next moment  he would  be standing  in a position  in which  I see him
often,  his feet apart,  rolling  his sleeves  high above  the elbows,  and
raising  his vigorous  arms to try to discipline  his always  tousled  hair.
We would  talk of boxing,  of swimming,  and of camping . He loved
the physical life, muscular  eort,  the fraternal  earth,  and all that in
silence,  just  as  he  used  to  eat,  with  a  lively,  uncommunicative
appetite.  As midnight  approa ched, he would  empty  his pipe, lay  out
more cigarettes  that he urged  me to smoke  during  the night,  and,
his coat over his arm, would  set forth energetically.  I could still hear
him on the stairs as I looked around me at what belonged to him.
I also had meetings with him at Saint-Etienne.  Between  trains,  we
would  spend a few hours in that hopeless  town. I recall very vividly
the rst  of those meetings,  in September  1943,  because  everything
about  it was a disappointment.  I had warned  Leynaud  that nothing
could  be accomplished  at Saint-Etienne,  where  I used to stop o
frequently  then—that  I was no good for anything  in a city where  I
never  felt  anything  but  the  most  unreasonable  torpor.  In  my
opinion,  if hell existed  it would have to look like those interminable
gray streets  where  everyone  was wearing  black.  Leynaud  assured  me
that I was exaggerating,  and we made an appointment  so that he
could meet one of my friends  whom  he wanted  to know.  The friend

was an energe tic and irreverent  Dominican  who claimed  to loathe
the Christian  Democrats  and dreamed  of a Nietzschean  Christianity.
Leynaud,  who  could  not  feel  drawn  to  the  cautious  forms  of
Christianity,  felt interested  in that soldier-monk.  Together  with the
priest,  I  was  to  wait  for  him  at  the  Saint-Etienne  station  buet.
Unfortunately  the  priest,  obliged  to  take  a  train  early  in  the
afternoon,  had to lunch  very early.  Leynaud  arrived  nally  during
the dessert, but, suering  from a very obvious  chest cold, he was
hardly  capable  of talking  coherently.  Five minutes  later my white-
robed  friend  had to dash toward the platform.  And Leynaud  and I,
whose  trains  did  not  leave  until  late  in  the  afternoon,  began  to
wander  in hell, drugged  with heat and boredom,  pausing  at regular
intervals  in  front  of  a  lemonade  sweetened  with  saccharine  in
deserted  cafés full of ies.  Meanwhile  he was stung  himself  with
aspirin.  Around four o’clock  we were nally  able to talk a little. A
bit later I took him to his train, and he was already  on the steps of
the car when we both broke out laughing.  “You see,” I said to him,
“it’s impossible  to accomplish  anything  here.”  He laughed  heartily
and, as the train started  up, he continued  to laugh as he waved  in
my direction.  Of all the images I have of him, this one is especially
dear to me.
Another  day, in Place Bellecour among  playing  children  and the
few pigeons  that had escaped  the inhabitants’  hunger,  Leynaud  and
I were talking  of morality  and were of the opinion  that, if I dare say
so, something  should  be done about it. That was the occasion  when
I had a chance  to measure  what particularly  distinguished  him, the
force and quality of his silence,  for we then spent more than half an
hour side by side apparently  absorbed  in watching  the passers-by
but completely absorbed in pursuing a common thought.
The last time I saw him was in Paris in the spring  of 1944.  We
were never closer  to each other than during  that last meeting.  We
had met in a restaurant  in Rue Saint-Benoît,  and afterward,  walking
along the quais in beautiful  weather,  we had spoken  at length of the
future.  We were in such deep agreement  that for the rst  time I felt
an absolute condence  in the future  of our country.  I cannot  set
down  here our conversation  although  I have it all clearly  in mind

and several of his letters  still remind  me that our words were as
important  to him as they were to me. We had decided  then to work
together  after  the  liberation.  Leynaud  was  to  settle  in  Paris  and
work for the same cause.  But now he no longer  belongs  to anyone,
and I shall take care not to give the impression  that at present  he
would  naturally  be working  with me. He left me that day at about
four p.m. on the Pont du Carrousel.  I am ashamed  to say that I don’t
recall his last words.  And I hadn’t the slightest  premonitio n as to his
death.  Sunk  in  stupid  human  condence,  sure  of  him  and  of  his
future,  I merely  waved  at him from one end of the bridge  to the
other as he waved at me, with one arm in the air.
A few weeks  before,  he had written  me: “May God grant us this
year and a few others,  and the joy of serving  the same truth. These
are my wishes  for 1944 that I voice for you and for me because  I am
eager  today  not  to  dissocia te  you  from  a  certain  idea  I  have  of
myself, which is not, I hope, the least noble.”
But that year was not granted him.
If I dared  paraphrase  one of his letters,  I should  say simply that I
often consult  in myself  an image he put there, or a virtue,  that bears
his name and his countenanc e. Truth needs witnesses.  Leynaud  was
one of them, and this is why I miss him today.  With him here, I saw
more clearly, and his death,  far from making  me better,  as the books
of consolation  say, made my revolt  more blind.  The nest  thing I
can say in his favor is that he would  not have followed  me in that
revolt.  But no good is done to men by killing  their friends,  as I know
only too well by now. And who can ever justify  that  dreadful  death?
What are duty, virtue,  honors  compared  to what was irreplaceable
in Leynaud? Yes, what are they but the paltry  alibis of those who
remain  alive?  We were cheated of a man three years ago, and since
then we have had a heavy  heart,  that is all I can say. For us who
loved him and for all those who, without  knowing  him, deserved  to
love him, this is a dead loss.
Introduction to  P OÉSIES POSTHUMES ,
by René Leynaud (1947)

Pessimism and Tyranny

PESSIMISM AND COURAGE
OR  some time now, articles  have been appearing  about  works
F that are supposed  to be pessimistic  and consequently  to lead
directly  to  the  most  coward ly  of  all  forms  of  subserv ience.  The
reasoning  is elementary.  A pessimistic  philosophy  is by its essence  a
philosophy  of discouragemen t, and those who don’t believe  that the
world  is good are therefore  said to be willing  to serve tyranny.  The
most eective  of those articles,  because  it was the best, was the one
by M. George  Adam  in  Les  Lett res  Françaises.  M. Georges  Rabeau  in
one of the recent issues  of  L’Aube  makes  the same accusation  under
the unacceptable title of “Nazism not dead?”
I see only one way of answering  such a campaign,  which  is to
answer  openly.  Although  the problem  goes beyond  me, although  it
is aimed at Malraux, Sartre,  and a few others  more important  than I,
it would seem to me sheer hypocrisy  not to speak in my own name.
Yet I shall not insist on the basis of the argument.  The idea that a
pessimistic  philosophy  is  necessarily  one  of  discouragement  is  a
puerile  idea, but one that needs  too long a refutation.  I shall speak
only of the method of thinking that inspired those articles.
Let me say at once that this method  is reluctant  to take facts into
account.  The writers  who are the butt of the  articles  have proved,  as
best as they could, that, though  they lacked  philosophical  optimism,
man’s duty, at least, was not alien to them. Hence  an objective mind
would  be  willing  to  say  that  a  negative  philosophy  was  not
incompatible,  in actual  fact, with an ethics  of freedom  and courage.
Such  a  mind  would  see  here  merely  an  opportunity   to  learn
something about the human heart.
That  objective  mind  would  be  right.  For  the  coexistence,  in
certain  minds,  of a philosophy  of negation  and a positiv e morality
illustrates,  in fact, the great problem  that is painfully  disturbing  the

whole  epoch.  In a word,  it is a problem  of civilization,  and it is
essential  for us to know whether  man, without  the help either  of the
eternal  or  of  rationalistic  thought,  can  unaided  create  his  own
values.  Such an undertaking  goes innitely  beyond  all of us. I say
this because I believe  it: France  and Europe  must now create  a new
civilization or else perish.
But civilizations  are not built by rapping  people  on the knuckles.
They are built up by the confrontation  of ideas,  by the blood of the
spirit,  by  suering  and  courage.  It  is  not  possible  that  concepts
which  have belonged  to Europe  for the past hundred  years should
be judged  in the twinkling  of an eye, in  L’Aube , by an editorialist
who, without  hesitation,  attributes  to Nietzsche  a lustful  appetite
and to Heideg ger the idea that existence  is useless.  I do not have
much  liking  for the too famous  existential  philosophy,  and, to tell
the truth, I think its conclusions  false. But at least it represents  a
great adventure  of the mind, and it is hard to see it subjected,  by M.
Rabeau, to the judgment of the most shortsighted conformism.
In reality, such concepts  and such undertakings  are not judged  at
this moment  according  to the rules of objectivity.  They are judged
not according  to facts but according  to a doctrine.  Our Communist
comrades  and our Christian  comrades  talk to us from the vantage
point of doctrines  we respect.  Their doctrines  are not ours, but it has
never occurred  to us to talk of them in the tone they have just used
toward  us and with the assurance  they show.  Let us pursue  then,
insofar  as  we  can,  our  experience  and  our  thought.  M.  Rabeau
blames  us for having an audience.  I believe  that is an exaggeration.
But this at least is true: the uneasiness  that concerns  us belongs  to a
whole  epoch  from which  we do not want to dissociate  ourselves.  We
want to think and live in our history.  We believe  that the truth of
this age can be found  only by living  through  the drama  of it to the
very end. If the epoch  has suered  from nihilism,  we cannot remain
ignorant  of nihilism  and still achieve  the moral  code we need. No,
everything  is not summed  up in negation  and absurdity.  We know
this. But we must rst  posit negation  and absurdity  because  they are
what our generation  has encountered  and what we must take into
account.

The men who are indicted  in these articles  are loyally  attempting
both in their work and in their lives to solve this problem.  Is it so
hard to realize  that one cannot settle in a few lines a question others
are  not  sure  of  solving  when  they  devote  themselves  to  it
altogether?  Can’t they be granted  the patience  that is granted  to any
sincere undertaking? Isn’t it possible to address them more humbly?
I shall end this protest  here. I hope I have been restraine d. But I
should  like my indignation  to be felt. Objective  criticism  is the best
of things, in my opinion,  and I can’t object  when someone  says that
a work is bad or that a philosophy  is not good for man’s fate. It is
only fair that writers  should  answer  for their writings.  That forces
them  to  reect,  and  we  all  have  a  dreadful  need  to  reect.  But
deriving  from such principle s judgments  as to this or that mind’s
disposition  toward slavery,  especially  when you have proof of the
contrary,  and  concluding  that  this  or  that  line  of  thought  must
necessarily  lead to Nazism  suggests  an image  of man which  I prefer
not  to  qualify   and  constitutes  very  paltry  proof  of  the  moral
advantages of optimistic philosophy.
C OMBAT ,  September 1945

DEFENSE OF INTELLIGENCE
(Speech  given  at  the  meeting
organized  by L’Amitié  Française  on
15 March 1945)
F THE  kind of French  friendship  with which  we are concerned  were
I to  be  but  an  eusion  of  feeling  among  people  who  get  along
together,  I should  not count  on it. That would  be the easiest,  but
also  the  least  useful,  form  of  friendship.  And  I  suppose  that  the
people  who founded  this society  called  L’Amitié  Française  wanted
something  else—a more dicult  form of friendship  that calls for
eort.  In order to avoid  yielding  to facility  and indulging  in self-
congratulation,  I should  like, in the ten minutes  allotted  me, merely
to  point  out  the  diculties  of  such  an  undertaking.  I  could  not
possibly  do this more eectively  than by speaking  of what always
stands  in  the  way  of  friendship—in  other  words,  falsehood  and
hatred.
We shall indeed  not accomplish  anything  for French  friendship  if
we  cannot  get  rid  of  falsehood  and  hatred.  In  a  way,  we  have
certainly  not got rid of them.  We have been learning  their lessons
for too long now. And perhaps  the last and most long-lived  victory
of Hitlerism  is to be found  in the shameful  scars made on the hearts
of  those  who  fought  Hitlerism  most  vigorously.  How  could  it  be
otherwise?  For  years  now,  this  world  has  been  subjected  to  an
unparalleled  outbreak  of hatred.  For four years we witnessed  here at
home the reasoned  expressio n of that hatred.  Men like you and me
who in the morning  patted  children  on the head would  a few hours
later  become  meticulous  executioners.  Such  men  became  the
bureaucrats  of  hatred  and  torture.  For  four  years  their

administration  functioned  by  creating  villages  of  orphans,  by
shooting  men’s  faces  full  of  holes  so  that  they  would  not  be
recognized,  by jamming  and stamping  children’s  bodies  into cons
too small for them,  by torturing  brothers  in their sisters’  presence,
by shaping  cowards  as in a mold, and by destroying  the proudest  of
souls. It seems  that such stories  are not believed  abroad.  But for four
years,  in  our  anguish,  we  could  not  avoid  believing  them.  Every
morning  for four years each Frenchman  received  his ration  of hatred
and  his  slap  in  the  face—when  he  opened  his  newspaper.
Necessarily,  some of that has remained  with us. We were left with
hatred.  We were left with the impulse  that the other day in Dijon
made  a  fourteen-year-old  child  fall  upon  a  collaborator  who  had
been lynched  and disgure  his face. We were left with the rage that
consumes  our souls at the memory  of certain  images  and certain
faces. The executioners’  hatred  engendered  the victims’  hatred.  And
once  the  executioners  had  gone,  the  French  were  left  with  their
hatred  only partially  spent.  They still look at one another with a
residue of anger.
Well, this is what we must overcome  rst  of all. Our poisoned
hearts  must be cured.  And the most dicult  battle to be won against
the enemy  in the future  must be fought  within  ourselves,  with an
exceptional  eort   that will transform  our appetite  for hatred  into a
desire  for  justice.  Not  giving  in  to  hatred,  not  making  any
concessions  to violence,  not allowing  our passions  to become  blind
—these  are  the  things  we  can  still  do  for  friendship  and  against
Hitlerism.  Even today  certain  newspapers  still indulge  in violence
and insult.  But that is simply  still giving  in to the enemy.  Instead,  it
is essential  that we never  let criticism  descend  to insult;  we must
grant  that  our  opponent  may  be  right  and  that  in  any  case  his
reasons,  even though  bad, may be disinterested.  It is essential,  in
short, that we remake our political mentality.
What does this mean,  if we stop to think about  it? It means  that
we must save intelligence.  A few years ago, when the Nazis had just
seized  power,  Goering  gave  a  fair  idea  of  their  philosophy  by
declaring:  “When  anyone  talks to me of intelligence,  I take out my
revolver.”  And that philosophy  was not limited  to Germany.  At the

same time throughout  civilized  Europe  the excesses  of intelligence
and  the  faults  of  the  intellectual  were  being  pointed  out.
Intellectuals  themselves,  by an interesting  reaction,  were not the last
to  join  the  attack.  Everywhere  philosophies  of  instinct  were
dominant  and,  along  with  them,  the  spurious  romanticism  that
prefers  feeling  to understand ing as if the two could  be separated.
Since then intelligence  has regularly  been blamed.  The war came
and then the defeat.  Vichy taught  us that the chief responsibility  lay
with the intelligence.  Our peasants  had read too much Proust.  And
everyone  knows  that  Paris-Soir ,  Fernandel,  and  trade-association
banquets  are signs of intelligence.  It seems  that the mediocrity  of
her leaders which was killing France had its source in books.
Even now intelligence  is ill-treated.  This proves  simply  that the
enemy  is  not  yet  conquere d.  If  you  merely  make  an  eort  to
understand  without  preconceptions,  if  you  merely  talk  of
objectivity,  you  will  be  accused  of  sophistry  and  criticized  for
having  pretens ions. No, we can’t have that! That is what must be
reformed.  For I know as well as anyone  the excesses  of intelligence,
and I know as well as anyone  that the intellectual  is a dangerous
animal  ever  ready  to  betray.  But  that  is  not  the  right  kind  of
intelligence.  We are speaking  of the kind that is backed  by courage,
the kind that for four years paid whatever  was necessary  to have the
right  to  respect.  When  that  intelligence  is  snued  out,  the  black
night of dictatorship  begins.  This is why we must maintain  it with
all its duties  and all its rights.  At that price, and only at that price,
will  French  friendship  have  a  meaning.  For  friendship  is  a
knowledge  acquired  by free men. And there is no freedom  without
intelligence or without mutual understanding.
In  conclusion,   I  shall  speak  directly  to  you  students  who  are
gathered  here.  I  am  not  one  to  preach  virtue  to  you.  Too  many
Frenchmen  confuse virtue  with bloodlessness.  If I had any right to
do so, I should  rather  preach  the passions  to you. But I should  like
those  who  will  represent  French  intelligence  in  the  future  to  be
resolved  at least never to yield on one or two points.  I should  like
them not to give in when they are told that  intelligence  is always
unwelcome  or  that  it  is  permissible  to  lie  in  order  to  succeed.  I

should  like them not to give in to guile, to violence,  or to inertia.
Then perhaps a French  friendship  will be possible  that will be more
than  idle  talk.  Then  perhaps,  in  a  nation  that  is  free  and
passionately  attached  to truth,  man will begin  again to have that
feeling  for man, without  which the world  can never  be but a vast
solitude.

The Unbeliever and Christians

(Fragments  of  a  statement  made  at  the
Dominican  Monastery  of  Latour-Maubourg
in 1948)
NASMUCH  as you have been so kind as to invite a man who does not
I share  your  convictions  to  come  and  answer  the  very  general
question  that you are raising  in these conversations,  before  telling
you what I think unbelievers  expect  of Christians,  I should  like rst
to  acknowledge  your  intellectual  generosity  by  stating  a  few
principles.
First,  there  is  a  lay  pharisaism  in  which  I  shall  strive  not  to
indulge.  To me a lay pharisee  is the person  who pretends  to believe
that Christianity  is an easy thing and asks of the Christian,  on the
basis  of  an  external  view  of  Christianity,  more  than  he  asks  of
himself.  I believe  indeed  that the Christian  has many obligations  but
that it is not up to the man who rejects  them himself  to recall their
existence  to  anyone  who  has  already  accepted  them.  If  there  is
anyone  who can ask anything of the Christian,  it is the Christian
himself.  The conclusion  is that if I allowed  myself  at the end of this
statement  to  demand  of  you  certain  duties,  these  could  only  be
duties  that it is essential  to ask of any man today,  whether  he is or is
not a Christian.
Secondly,  I wish to declare  also that, not feeling  that I possess any
absolute  truth  or  any  message,  I  shall  never  start  from  the
supposition  that Christian  truth is illusory,  but merely from the fact
that I could not accept  it. As an illustration  of this position,  I am
willing  to  confess  this:  Three  years  ago  a  controversy  made  me
argue  against  one among  you, and not the least formidable.  The
fever of those years,  the painful  memory  of two or three friends
assassinated  had given me the courage  to do so. Yet I can assure  you
that,  despite  some  excessive  expressions  on  the  part  of  François
Mauriac,  I have not ceased  meditating  on what he said. At the end
of this reection—and  in this way I give you my opinion  as to the
usefulness  of the dialogue  between  believer  and unbeliever—I  have

come to admit to myself,  and now to admit  publicly  here, that for
the  fundamentals  and  on  the  precise  point  of  our  controversy
François Mauriac got the better of me.
Having  said that, it will be easier for me to state my third and last
principle.  It is simple  and obvious.  I shall not try to change anything
that I think or anything  that you think (insofar  as I can judge of it)
in order to reach a reconciliation  that would  be agreeable  to all. On
the contrary,  what I feel like telling  you today  is that the world
needs  real dialogue,  that falsehood  is just as much the opposite  of
dialogue  as is silence,  and that the only possible  dialogue  is the kind
between  people  who remain  what they are and speak  their minds.
This  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  the  world  of  today  needs
Christians  who remain  Christians.  The other day at the Sorbonne,
speaking  to a Marxist  lecturer,  a Catholic  priest said in public  that
he too was anticlerical.  Well, I don’t like priests  who are anticlerical
any more than philosophies  that are ashamed  of themselves.  Hence  I
shall  not,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  try  to  pass  myself  o   as  a
Christian  in your  presence.  I share with you the same revulsion  from
evil. But I do not share your hope, and I continue  to struggle  against
this universe in which children suer and die.
And why shouldn’t  I say here what I have written  elsewhere?  For
a long time during those frightful  years I waited  for a great voice to
speak  up in Rome.  I, an unbeliever?  Precisely.  For I knew that the
spirit would  be lost if it did not utter a cry of condemna tion when
faced with force. It seems  that that voice did speak up. But I assure
you that millions  of men like me did not hear it and that at that
time believers  and unbeliever s alike shared  a solitude  that continued
to spread as the days went by and the executioners multiplied.
It  has  been  explained  to  me  since  that  the  condemnation  was
indeed  voiced.  But that it was in the style of the encyclic als, which
is not at all clear.  The condemnation  was voiced  and it was not
understood!  Who could fail to feel where  the true condemnation  lies
in this case and to see that this example  by itself gives part of the

reply,  perhaps  the whole  reply,  that you ask of me. What the world
expects  of Christians  is that Christians  should  speak  out, loud and
clear, and that they should  voice their condemnation  in such a way
that never a doubt,  never the slightest  doubt,  could rise in the heart
of the simples t man. That they should  get away from abstraction
and confront  the blood-stained  face history  has taken on today.  The
grouping  we need is a grouping  of men resolved  to speak out clearly
and to pay up personally.  When  a Spanish  bishop  blesses  political
executions,  he ceases to be a bishop  or a Christian  or even a man; he
is a dog just like the one who, backed  by an ideology,  orders that
execution  without  doing the dirty work himself.  We are still waiting,
and I am waiting,  for a grouping  of all those who refuse  to be dogs
and are resolved  to pay the price that must be paid so that man can
be something more than a dog.
And now, what can Christians do for us?
To begin with, give up the empty quarrels,  the rst  of which is the
quarrel  about  pessimism.  I  believe,  for  instance,  that  M.  Gabriel
Marcel  would  be  well  advised  to  leave  alone  certain  forms  of
thought  that fascinate  him and lead him astray.  M. Marcel  cannot
call himself  a democrat  and at the same time ask for a prohibition  of
Sartre’s  play. This is a position that is tiresome  for everyone.  What
M. Marcel wants  is to defend  absolute  values,  such as modesty  and
man’s  divine  truth, when the things  that should  be defended  are the
few provisional  values  that will allow M. Marcel  to continue  ghting
someday, and comfortably, for those absolute values....
By what right, moreover,  could  a Christian  or a Marxist  accuse
me,  for  example,  of  pessim ism?  I  was  not  the  one  to  invent  the
misery  of  the  human  being  or  the  terrifying  formulas  of  divine
malediction.  I  was  not  the  one  to  shout  Nemo  bonus   or  the
damnation  of unbaptized  children.  I was not the one who said that
man was incapable  of saving  himself  by his own means  and that in
the depths of his degradation  his only hope was in the grace of God.
And as for the famous  Marxis t optimism!  No one has carried distrust

of  man  further,  and  ultimately  the  economic  fatalities  of  this
universe seem more terrible than divine whims.
Christians  and  Communists  will  tell  me  that  their  optimism  is
based  on a longer range,  that it is superior  to all the rest, and that
God or history,  according  to the individual,  is the satisfying  end-
product  of their dialectic.  I can indulge  in the same reasoning.  If
Christianity  is pessimistic  as to man, it is optimistic  as to human
destiny.  Well, I can say that, pessimistic  as to human  destiny,  I am
optimistic  as  to  man.  And  not  in  the  name  of  a  humanism  that
always  seemed  to me to fall short,  but in the name of an ignorance
that tries to negate nothing.
This means that the words  “pessimism”  and “optimism”  need to
be  clearly  dened  and  that,  until  we  can  do  so,  we  must  pay
attention to what unites us rather than to what separates us.
That, I believe , is all I had to say. We are faced with evil. And, as
for me, I feel rather  as Augustine  did before  becoming  a Christian
when he said: “I tried to nd  the source  of evil and I got nowhere.”
But it is also true that I, and a few others,  know what must be done,
if not to reduce evil, at least not to add to it. Perhaps  we cannot
prevent  this  world  from  being  a  world  in  which  children  are
tortured.  But we can reduce  the number  of tortured  children. And if
you don’t help us, who else in the world can help us do this?
Between  the forces  of terror  and the forces  of dialogue,  a great
unequal  battle has begun.  I have nothing  but reasonable  illusions  as
to the outcome  of that battle.  But  I believe  it must be fought,  and I
know that certain  men at least have resolved  to do so. I merely  fear
that they will occasionally  feel somewhat  alone,  that they are in fact
alone,  and that after an interval  of two thousand  years we may see
the sacrice  of Socrates  repeated  several  times.  The program  for the
future  is either  a permanent  dialogue  or the solemn  and signicant
putting  to  death  of  any  who  have  experienced  dialogue.  After
having  contributed  my reply, the question  that I ask Christians  is

this: “Will Socrates  still be alone and is there nothing  in him and in
your doctrine that urges you to join us?”
It  may  be,  I  am  well  aware,  that  Christianity  will  answer
negatively.  Oh, not by your mouths,  I am convinced.  But it may be,
and  this  is  even  more  probable,  that  Christianity  will  insist  on
maintaining  a compromise  or else on giving  its condemnations  the
obscure  form of the encyclic al. Possibly  it will insist on losing  once
and for all the virtue  of revolt  and indignation  that belonged  to it
long ago. In that case Christians  will live and Christianit y will die.
In that case the others  will in fact pay for the sacrice.  In any case
such a future  is not within  my province  to decide,  despite  all the
hope  and  anguish  it  awakens  in  me.  I  can  speak  only  of  what  I
know.  And what I know—w hich sometimes  creates  a deep longing
in me—is that if Christians  made up their minds  to it, millions  of
voices—millions,  I say—throughout  the world  would  be added  to
the appeal of a handful  of isolated individuals  who, without  any sort
of aliation,  today intercede  almost  everywhere  and ceaselessly  for
children and for men.

Why Spain?
(Reply to Gabriel Marcel)

SHALL  reply here to but two passages  in your article  on my  State of
I Siege   in  the  Nouvelles  Littéraires.   But  I  have  no  intention  of
replying  to the criticisms  that you or others  made of the play as a
dramatic  work. When one indulges  in publishing  a book or staging  a
play, one has to accept  the criticism  it evokes.  Whateve r one may
have to say, one must keep silent.
Yet you went beyond  the critic’s  prerogatives  when you expressed
surprise  that  a  play  about  totalitarian  tyranny  would  be  laid  in
Spain,  whereas  you would  have been more inclined  to imagine  it in
Eastern  Europe . And when you state that the setting  shows a lack of
courage  and fairness,  you are asking  for a reply. To be sure, you are
kind enough  to think that I am not responsible  for the choice  (this
can be interpreted  to mean that everything  is the fault of Barrault,
already  so besmirched  with crimes).  Unfortunately,  the play takes
place in Spain  because  I alone chose,  after much  thought,  that it
should  take place there. Consequently,  I must take upon myself  your
accusations  of  opportunism  and  unfairness.  And,  under  the
circumstances,  you  will  not  be  surprised  that  I  feel  obliged  to
answer you.
It is likely,  moreover,  that I should  not defend  myself  against even
these accusations  (to whom  can one justify  oneself  today?)  if you
had not touched  on a subject  as serious  as that of Spain.  For there is
certainly  no need for me to say that I did not aim to atter  anyone
by  writing  State  of  Siege.   I  wanted  to  attack  a  kind  of  political
society  that  set  itself  up,  or  is  setting  itself  up,  on  a  totalitarian
model,  both on the Right and on the Left. No one in good faith can
fail  to  see  that  my  play  defends  the  individual,  the  esh  in  its
noblest  aspects—in  short, human love—against  the abstractions  and
terrors  of  the  totalitarian  state,  whether  Russian,  German,  or
Spanish.  Every  day  pundits  reect  about  the  decadence  of  our
society  and look for its basic causes.  Most likely such causes  exist.
But for the simpler among  us the evil of our times can be dened  by
its eects  rather  than by its causes.  That evil is the State, whether  a

police  state or a bureaucratic  state. Its proliferation  in all countries
under  cover of the most varied  ideological  pretexts,  the revolting
security  granted  it  by  mechanical  and  psychological  means  of
repression  make of the State a mortal  danger  for everyth ing that is
best in each of us. From this point of view, contemporary  political
society,  in any form, is despicable.  This is just what I said, and this
is why  State of Siege  represents a break that aims to spare nothing.
Once this has been stated  clearly,  why Spain?  May I confess  that I
am somewhat  ashamed  to ask the question  for you? Why Guernica,
Gabriel  Marcel ? Why that event which  for the rst  time, in the face
of a world still sunk in its comfort  and its wretched  morality,  gave
Hitler,  Mussolini,  and Franco  a chance  to show even children  the
meaning  of  totalitarian  technique?  Yes,  why  that  event,  which
concerned  us too? For the rst time men of my age came face to
face with injustice triumphin g in history.  At that time the blood  of
innocence  owed  amid a chatter  of pharisees,  which,  alas, is still
going on. Why Spain?  Because  there are some of us who will never
wash their hands  of that blood.  Anti-communism,  whatever  reasons
there may be for embracing  it (and I know some good ones),  will
never  gain acceptance  among  us if it forgets  the injustice  that is
going on with the complicity  of our governments.  I have stated  as
vigorously  as I could  what I thought  of the Russian  concentration
camps.  But they will not make me forget  Dachau,  Buchenwald,  and
the  nameless  agony  of  millions,  nor  the  dreadful  repression  that
decimated  the Spanish  Republic.  Yes, despite  the commiseration  of
our political  leaders,  all this together  must be denounced  at one and
the same time. And I cannot  forgive  that hideous  plague  in the West
of Europe  because  it is also ravaging  the East on a vaster  scale. You
write that, for the well-inform ed, Spain is not now the source  of the
news most likely to spread  despair  among  men who respect  human
dignity.  You are not well informed,  Gabriel  Marcel.  Just yesterday
ve political opponents were condemned to death there. But you did
everything  you could  to be ill informed  by developing  the art of
forgetting.  You have forgotte n that the rst  weapons  of totalitarian

war were bathed  in Spanish  blood.  You have forgotten  that in 1936
a rebellious general,  in the name  of Christ,  raised  up an army of
Moors,  hurled  them against  the legally  constituted  government  of
the  Spanish  Republic,  won  victory  for  an  unjust  cause  after
massacres  that  can  never  be  expiated,  and  initiated  a  frightful
repression  that has lasted  ten years and is not yet over. Yes, indeed,
why Spain? Because you, like so many others, do not remember.
And  also  because,  togethe r  with  a  small  number  of  fellow
Frenchmen,  I am still occasionally  not proud  of my country.  I do not
know that France  ever delivered up to the Russian  government  any
anti-Stalinists  who  had  taken  refuge  here.  This  will  probably
happen,  for our leaders  are ready for anything.  In the case of Spain,
however,  the deed is already  done. By virtue  of the most disgraceful
clause  of  the  armistice,  we  handed  over  to  Franco,  on  Hitler’s
orders,  many  Spanish  republicans—among  them  the  great  Luis
Companys.  And Companys  was shot while  that frightfu l deal was
going  on. By Vichy,  to be sure, and not by us. We merely put the
poet Antonio  Machado,  back in 1938,  into a concentration  camp
which  he left only to die. But at that time when the French State
rounded  up victims  for the totalitarian  executioners,  who voiced  a
protest?  No one. That was probably,  Gabriel  Marcel,  because  those
who might  have protested  shared  your feeling  that all that was a
small matter  compared  to what they most loathed  in the Russian
system.  So, after all, what did they care about one more man being
shot by the r ing squad?  But the face of a man who has been shot
by the ring  squad  is an ugly wound,  and eventually  gangrene  sets
in. The gangrene has spread.
Where  then are the assassins  of Companys?  In Moscow  or in our
country?  We must answer:  in our country.  We  must admit  that we
shot Companys , that we are responsible  for what followed.  We must
declare  that we are ashamed , and that our only way of making  up
for this will be to preserve  the memory  of a Spain that was free and
that we betrayed  as best we could,  in our own petty way. And it is
true that no power  failed to betray  Spain,  except  Germany  and Italy

—and  they  shot  Spaniards  in  open  combat.  But  this  can  be  no
consolation,  and  free  Spain  continues,  by  its  very  silence,  to  ask
amends  of us. I did what I could, within  the limits of my power,  and
this is what shocks  you. If I had had more talent,  the amends  would
have been greater;  that is all I can say. But if I had compromised,
that would  have been cowardice  and deceit.  I shall not continue
with  this  subject,  however,  and  I  shall  stie    my  feelings  out  of
regard  for you. At most let me add that no man of sensitivity  should
have been astonished  that when I wanted  to make a people  of esh
and pride speak out against  the shame  and ghosts  of dictatorship,  I
chose  the  Spanish  people.  I  couldn’t,  after  all,  choose  the
international  public of  Reader’s  Digest  or the readers  of  Samedi-Soir
and  France-Dimanche.
But you are doubtless  eager for me to explain  myself  as to the role
I  gave  the  Church  to  play.  On  this  point  I  shall  be  brief.  You
1 consider  that role to be odious whereas  it was not so in my novel.
But in my novel I had to do justice  to those of my Christian friends
whom  I met during the Occupation  in a combat  that was just. In my
play,  on  the  other  hand,  I  had  to  say  what  was  the  role  of  the
Spanish  Church.  And if I made it odious,  I did so because  in the eyes
of the world  the role of the Spanish  Church  was  odious. However
unpleasant  this truth may be for you, you can console  yourself  with
the  thought  that  the  scene  that  bothers  you  lasts  but  a  minute
whereas  the one that still oends  the conscience  of Europe  has been
going  on  for  ten  years.  And  the  entire  Church  would  have  been
sullied  by the unbelievable  scandal  of Spanish  bishops  blessing  the
ring  squad’s ries   if during  the very rst  days two great Christians
—Bernanos,  who  is  now  dead,  and  José  Bergamin,  who  is  now
exiled  from  his  country—had  not  protested.  Bernanos  would  not
have written  what you have written  on this subject.  He  knew that
the line with which  my scene ends—“Spanish  Christians,  you have
been abandoned”—does  not insult your faith.  He  knew that if I had
said something else or kept silent, I should then have insulted truth.

If I had to rewrite  State of Siege , I should  still set it in Spain;  that is
my conclusion.  And, now and in the future,  it would  be obvious  to
everyone  that the judgment  pronounced  in it transcends  Spain and
applies  to  all  totalitarian  societies.  And  no  shameful  complicity
would  have been involved.  This is the way, and absolutely  the only
way, we can maintain  the right to protest  against  a reign of terror.
This is why I cannot  share your opinion  that we are in complete
agreement  in matters  of politics.  For you are willing  to keep silent
about one reign of terror in order the better  to combat  another  one.
There  are  some  of  us  who  do  not  want  to  keep  silent  about
anything.  It is our whole  political  society  that nauseates  us. Hence
there will be no salvation  until all those who are  still worth while
have  repudiated  it  utterly  in  order  to  nd,  somewhere  outside
insoluble  contradictions,  the  way  to  a  complete  renewal.  In  the
meantime  we  must  struggle.  But  with  the  knowledge  that
totalitarian  tyranny is not based on the virtues  of the totalitarians.  It
is  based  on  the  mistakes  of  the  liberals.  Talleyrand’s  remark  is
contemptible,  for  a  mistake  is  not  worse  than  a  crime.  But  the
mistake  eventually  justies  the crime  and provides  its alibi. Then
the mistake  drives  its victims  to despair,  and that is why it must not
be  condoned.  That  is  just  what  I  cannot  forgive  contemporary
political society: it is a mechanism for driving men to despair.
It will probably  seem to you that I am getting  very excited  about a
small matter.  Then let me, for once, speak  in my own name.  The
world  I live in is loathsome  to me, but I feel one with the men who
suer   in it. There  are ambitions that are not mine, and I should  not
feel  at  ease  if  I  had  to  make  my  way  by  relying  on  the  paltry
privileges  granted to those who adapt themselves  to this world.  But
it seems to me that there is another  ambition  that ought to belong  to
all writers:  to bear witness  and shout aloud,  every time it is possible,
insofar  as our talent  allows,  for those who are enslaved  as we are.
That is the very ambition  you questioned  in your article,  and I shall
consistently  refuse you the right to question  it so long as the murder
of a man angers you only when that man shares your ideas.
C OMBAT ,  December 1948

1   The Plague.

Defense of Freedom

BREAD AND FREEDOM
(Speech  given  at  the  Labor  Exchange  of
Saint-Etienne on 10 May 1953)
F  WE  add up the examples  of breach  of faith and extortion  that
I have just been pointed  out to us, we can foresee  a time when,  in
a Europe of concentration  camps,  the only people  at liberty will be
prison  guards  who will then have to lock up one another.  When
only one remains,  he will be called  the “supreme  guard,”  and that
will  be  the  ideal  society  in  which  problems  of  opposition,  the
headache  of all twentieth-century  governments,  will be settled  once
and for all.
Of course, this is but a prophecy  and, although  governm ents and
police  forces  throughout  the  world  are  striving,  with  great  good
will, to achieve such a happy situation,  we have not yet gone that
far. Among  us, for instance,  in Western  Europe,  freedom  is ocially
approved.  But  such  freedom  makes  me  think  of  the  poor  female
cousin  in certain  middle-cla ss families.  She has become  a widow;
she has lost her natural  protector. So she has been taken in, given a
room  on  the  top  oor,  and  is  welcome  in  the  kitchen.  She  is
occasionally  paraded  publicly  on  Sunday,  to  prove  that  one  is
virtuous  and not a dirty dog. But for everything  else, and  especially
on state occasions,  she is requested  to keep her mouth shut. And
even if some policeman  idly takes liberties  with her in dark corners,
one doesn’t  make a fuss about it, for she has seen such things before,
especially  with the master  of the house,  and, after all, it’s not worth
getting  in  bad  with  the  legal  authorities.  In  the  East,  it  must  be
admitted,  they are more forthright.  They have settled  the business  of
the female  cousin  once and for all by locking  her up in a closet with
two solid bolts on the door. It seems  that she will be taken out fty
years from now, more or less, when the ideal society  is denitively
established.  Then there will be celebrations  in her honor.  But, in my

opinion,  she  may  then  be  somewhat  moth-eaten,  and  I  am  very
much afraid that it may be impossible  to make use of her. When  we
stop to think that these two conceptions  of freedom,  the one in the
closet and the other in the kitchen,  have decided  to force themselves
on each other and are obliged  in all that hullabaloo  to reduce  still
further  the female  cousin’s  activity,  it will be readily  seen that our
history  is rather  one of slavery  than of freedom  and that the world
we live in is the one that has just been described,  which  leaps out at
us from the newspaper  every morning  to make of our days and our
weeks a single day of revolt and disgust.
The  simplest,  and  hence  most  tempting,  thing  is  to  blame
governments  or some obscure  powers  for such naughty  behavior.
Besides,  it is indeed  true that they are guilty  and that their guilt is
so solidly  established  that we have lost sight of its beginnings.  But
they  are  not  the  only  ones  responsible.  After  all,  if  freedom  had
always  had to rely on governments  to encourage  her growth,  she
would  probably  be still in her infancy  or else denitively  buried
with  the  inscription  “another  angel  in  heaven.”  The  society  of
money  and exploitation  has never  been charged,  so far as I know,
with assuring  the triumph  of freedom  and justice.  Police  states have
never been suspected  of opening schools  of law in the cellars  where
they interrogate  their subjects. So, when they oppress  and exploit,
they are merely  doing their job, and whoever  blindly  entrusts  them
with the care of freedom  has no right to be surprised  when she is
immediately  dishonored.  If  freedom  is  humiliated  or  in  chains
today,  it is not because  her enemies  had recourse  to treachery.  It is
simply  because  she has lost her natural  protector.  Yes, freedom  is
widowed,  but it must be added  because  it is true: she is widowed  of
all of us.
Freedom  is  the  concern  of  the  oppressed,  and  her  natural
protectors  have always  come from among  the oppressed.  In feudal
Europe  the communes  maintained  the ferments  of freedom;  those
who assured  her eeting  triumph  in 1789 were the inhabitants  of
towns  and  cities;  and  since  the  nineteenth  century  the  workers’
movements  have  assumed  responsibility  for  the  double  honor  of
freedom  and justice,  without  ever dreaming  of saying  that they were

irreconcilable.  Laborers,  both manual  and intellectual,  are the ones
who gave a body to freedom  and helped  her progress  in the world
until  she  has  become  the  very  basis  of  our  thought,  the  air  we
cannot  do without,  that we breathe  without  even noticing it until
the time comes  when,  deprived  of it, we feel that we are dying.  And
if freedom  is regressing  today  throughout  such a large part of the
world,  this is probably  because  the devices  for enslavement  have
never been so cynically  chosen or so eective,  but also because  her
real defenders,  through  fatigue, through  despair,  or through  a false
idea of strategy  and eciency,  have turned  away from her. Yes, the
great event of the twentieth  century  was the forsaking  of the values
of freedom  by the revolutionary  movement,  the progressive  retreat
of socialism  based on freedom  before  the attacks  of a Caesarian  and
military  socialism.  Since  that  moment  a  certain  hope  has
disappeared  from the world  and a solitude  has begun  for each and
every free man.
When,  after Marx,  the rumor began  to spread  and gain strength
that freedom was a bourgeois  hoax, a single  word was misplaced  in
that denition,  and we are still paying  for that mistake  through  the
convulsions  of our time. For it should  have been said merely  that
bourgeois  freedom  was a hoax—and  not all freedom.  It should  have
been said simply  that bourgeois  freedom  was not freedom  or, in the
best of cases,  was not yet freedom.  But that there were liberties  to
be won and never to be relinquished  again.  It is quite true that there
is no possible  freedom  for the man tied to his lathe all day long
who,  when  evening  comes,   crowds  into  a  single  room  with  his
family.  But this fact condem ns a class, a society  and the slavery  it
assumes,  not freedom  itself,  without  which  the poorest  among  us
cannot  get along.  For even if society  were suddenly  transformed  and
became  decent  and comforta ble for all, it would  still be a barbarous
state unless  freedom  triumphed.  And because  bourgeois  society  talks
about freedom  without  practicing it, must the world  of workers  also
give up practic ing it and boast  merely  of not talking  about  it? Yet
the  confusion  took  place  and  in  the  revolutionary  movement
freedom  was gradually  condemned  because  bourgeois  society  used it
as a hoax. From a justiable  and healthy  distrust  of the way that

bourgeois  society  prostituted  freedom,  people  came  to  distrust
freedom  itself. At best, it was postponed  to the end of time, with the
request  that meanwhile  it be not talked  about.  The contention  was
that we needed  justice  rst  and that we would  come to freedom
later on, as if slaves  could ever hope to achieve  justice.  And forceful
intellectuals  announced  to the worker  that bread  alone  interested
him rather  than freedom,  as if the worker  didn’t know that his bread
depends  in part on his freedom. And, to be sure, in the face of the
prolonged  injustice  of  bourgeois  society,  the  temptation  to  go  to
such extremes  was great.  After all, there is probably  not one of us
here who, either  in deed or in thought,  did not succumb.  But history
has progressed,  and what we have seen must now make us think
things  over. The revolution  brought  about  by workers  succeeded  in
1917 and marked  the dawn of real freedom  and the greatest  hope
the  world  has  known.  But  that  revolution,  surrounded   from  the
outside,  threatened  within  and without,  provided  itself with a police
force. Inheriting  a denition  and a doctrine  that pictured  freedom  as
suspect,  the  revolution  little  by  little  became  stronger,  and  the
world’s  greatest  hope  hardened  into  the  world’s  most  ecient
dictatorship.  The false freedom  of bourgeois  society  has not suered
meanwhile.  What was killed  in the Moscow  trials and elsewhere,
and  in  the  revolutionary  camps,  what  is  assassinated  when  in
Hungary  a  railway  worker is shot for some professional  mistake,  is
not bourgeois  freedom  but rather  the freedom  of 1917.  Bourgeois
freedom  can meanwhile  have recourse  to all possible  hoaxes.  The
trials and perversions  of revolutionary  society  furnish  it at one and
the same time with a good conscience  and with arguments  against
its enemies.
In conclusion,  the characteristic  of the world we live in is just that
cynical  dialectic  which  sets up injustice  against  enslavement  while
strengthening  one by the other.  When  we admit  to the palace  of
culture  Franco,  the friend  of Goebbels  and of Himmler—Franco,  the
real victor of the Second  World  War—to  those who protest  that the
rights  of  man  inscribed  in  the  charter  of  UNESCO  are  turned  to
ridicule  every day in Franco’s  prisons  we reply without  smiling  that
Poland  gures  in UNESCO  too and that, as far as public  freedom  is

concerned,  one is no better  than the other.  An idiotic  argument,  of
course!  If  you  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  marry  o   your  elder
daughter  to a sergeant  in a battalion  of ex-convicts,  this is no reason
why you should  marry  o   her younger  sister to the most elegant
detective  on  the  society  squad;  one  black  sheep  in  the  family  is
enough.  And  yet  the  idiotic  argument  works,  as  is  proved  to  us
every  day. When  anyone  brings  up the slave in the colonies  and
calls  for  justice,  he  is  reminded  of  prisoners  in  Russian
concentration  camps,  and vice versa.  And if you protest  against  the
assassination  in Prague  of an opposition  historian  like Kalandra,  two
or  three  American  Negroes  are  thrown  in  your  face.  In  such  a
disgusting  attempt  at outbidding,  one thing only does not change—
the victim,  who is always  the same.  A  single  value  is constantly
outraged  or  prostituted—freedom—and  then  we  notice  that
everywhere, together with freedom, justice is also profaned.
How then can this infernal  circle be broken?  Obviously,  it can be
done only by reviving  at once, in ourselves  and in others,  the value
of  freedom—and  by  never  again  agreeing  to  its  being  sacriced,
even temporarily,  or separated from our demand  for justice.  The
current  motto  for  all  of  us  can  only  be  this:  without  giving  up
anything  on  the  plane  of  justice,  yield  nothing  on  the  plane  of
freedom.  In particular,  the few democratic  liberties  we still enjoy
are not unimportant  illusions  that we can allow to be taken from us
without  a protest.  They represent exactly  what remains  to us of the
great revolutio nary conquests  of the last two centuries.  Hence  they
are not, as so many clever  demagogues  tell us, the negation  of true
freedom.  There is no ideal freedom  that will someday  be given us all
at  once,  as  a  pension  comes  at  the  end  of  one’s  life.  There  are
liberties  to be won painfully,  one by one, and those we still have are
stages—most  certainly  inadequate,  but stages  nevertheless—on  the
way to total liberation.  If we agree  to suppress  them,  we do not
progress  nonetheless.  On the contrary,  we retreat,  we go backward,
and someday  we shall have to retrace  our steps along that road, but
that new eort   will once more be made in the sweat  and blood  of
men.

No,  choosing  freedom  today  does  not  mean  ceasing  to  be  a
proteer  of  the  Soviet  regime  and  becoming  a  proteer  of  the
bourgeois  regime.  For  that  would  amount,  instead,  to  choosing
slavery  twice and, as a na l condemnation,  choosing  it twice for
others.  Choosing  freedom  is not, as we are told, choosing  against
justice.  On the other hand,  freedom  is chosen  today  in relation  to
those  who  are  everywhere  suering  and  ghting,  and  this  is  the
only freedom that counts.  It is chosen  at the same time as justice,
and, to tell the truth, henceforth  we cannot  choose  one without  the
other.  If  someone  takes  away  your  bread,  he  suppresses  your
freedom  at the same time. But if someone  takes away your freedom,
you may be sure that your bread  is threatened,  for it depends  no
longer  on  you  and  your  struggle  but  on  the  whim  of  a  master.
Poverty  increases  insofar  as freedom  retreats  throughout  the world,
and vice versa. And if this cruel century  has taught  us anything  at
all, it has taught  that the economic  revolution  must be free just as
liberation  must  include  the  economic.  The  oppressed  want  to  be
liberated  not only from their hunger  but also from their masters.
They are well aware  that they will be eectively  freed of hunger
only when they hold their masters, all their masters, at bay.
I shall add in conclusion  that separating  freedom  from justice  is
tantamount  to separating  culture  and labor,  which  is the epitome  of
the social  sin. The confusion  of the workers’  movement  in Europe
springs  in part from the fact that it has lost its real home,  where  it
took comfort  after all defeats, which  was its faith in freedom.  But,
likewise,  the confusion  of European  intellectuals  springs  from the
fact  that  the  double  hoax,  bourgeois  and  pseudo-revolutionary,
separated  them from their sole source  of authenticity,  the work and
suering  of all, cutting  them o   from their sole natural  allies,  the
workers.  Insofar  as  I  am  concerned,  I  have  recognized  only  two
aristocracies,  that of labor and that of the intelligence,  and I know
now that it is mad and criminal  to try to make one dominate  the
other.  I know that the two of them constitute  but a single  nobility,
that  their  truth  and,  above  all,  their  eectiveness  lie  in  union;  I
know  that if they are separated,  they will allow  themse lves to be
overcome  gradually  by the forces  of tyranny  and barbarousness,  but

that united,  on the other hand,  they will govern  the world.  This is
why  any  undertaking  that  aims  to  loosen  their  ties  and  separate
them  is  directed  against  man  and  his  loftiest  hopes.  The  rst
concern  of any dictatorship  is, consequently,  to subjugate  both labor
and culture.  In fact, both must be gagged  or else, as tyrants  are well
aware,  sooner  or later one will speak up for the other.  Thus, in my
opinion,  there are two ways for an intellectual  to betray  at present,
and in both cases he betrays  because  he accepts  a single  thing—that
separation  between  labor and culture.  The rst  way is characteristic
of  bourgeois  intellectuals  who  are  willing  that  their  privileges
should  be paid for by the enslavement  of the workers.  They often
say that they are defending  freedom,  but they are defending  rst  of
1 all the privileges  freedom  gives to them,  and to them alone.  The
second  way  is  characteristic  of  intellectuals  who  think  they  are
leftist and who, through  distrust of freedom,  are willing  that culture,
and the freedom  it presupposes,  should  be directed,  under  the vain
pretext  of serving  a future  justice.  In both cases the proteers  of
injustice  and the renegades  of freedom  ratify and sanction the  of
intellectual  and  manual  labor  which  condemns  both  labor  and
culture  to  impotence.  They  depreciate  at  one  and  the  same  time
both freedom and justice.
It  is  true  that  freedom,  when  it  is  made  up  principally  of
privileges,  insults  labor and separates  it from culture.  But freedom  is
not made up principally  of privileges;  it is made  up especially  of
duties.  And the moment  each of us tries to give freedom’s  duties
precedence  over  its  privileges,  freedom  joins  together  labor  and
culture  and sets in motion  the only force that can eectively  serve
justice.  The rule of our action,  the secret  of our resistance  can be
easily  stated:  everything  that humiliates  labor also humiliates  the
intelligence,  and  vice  versa.  And  the  revolutionary  struggle,  the
centuries-old  straining  toward  liberation  can be dened  rst  of all as
a double and constant rejection of humiliation.
To tell the truth, we have not yet cast o   that humiliation . But the
wheel  turns, history  changes,  and a time is coming,  I am sure, when
we shall cease to be alone.  For me, our gathering  here today  is in
itself a sign. The fact that members  of unions  gather  together  and

crowd  around  our freedoms  to defend  them is indeed  reason  enough
for all to come here from all directions  to illustrate  their union  and
their hope. The way ahead  of us is long. Yet if war does not come
and mingle  everything  in its hideous  confusion,  we shall have time
at last to give a form to the justice  and freedom  we need. But to
achieve  that we must henceforth  categorically  refuse,  without  anger
but  irrevocably,  the  lies  with  which  we  have  been  stued.  No,
freedom  is  not  founded  on  concentration  camps,  or  on  the
subjugated  peoples  of the colonies,  or  on the workers ’ poverty!  No,
the  doves  of  peace  do  not  perch  on  gallows!  No,  the  forces  of
freedom  cannot mingle  the sons of the victims  with the executioners
of Madrid and elsewhere!  Of that, at least, we shall henceforth  be
sure, as we shall be sure that freedom  is not a gift received  from a
State or a leader but a possession to be won every day by the eort
of each and the union of all.
1  And, besides,  most of the time they do not even defend  freedom  the moment  there is
any risk in doing so.

HOMAGE TO AN EXILE
(Speech  delivered  7  December  1955  at  a
banquet  in  honor  of  President  Eduardo
Santos,  editor  of  El  Tiempo ,  driven  out  of
Colombia by the dictatorship)
ROUDLY  we receive  among us this evening an ambassador  who is
P not  like  other  ambassadors.  Indeed,  I  have  read  that  the
government  that had the sorry privilege  of suppressing  the greatest
newspaper  in  South  America  had  previously  oered  its  editor,
President  Eduardo  Santos,  an ambassadorship  to Paris. You refused
that honor,  Mr. President,  not out of scorn for Paris,  we are well
aware,  but  out  of  love  for  Colombia,  and  probably  because  you
know that governments  often look upon foreign  embassies  as places
of gilded  expatriation  for citizens  who are in the way. You remained
in Bogotá,  as your conscience  dictated;  hence  you were in the way,
and you were censored  without  diplomatic  respect  and in the most
cynical  fashion  possible.  But at the same time you were provided
with all the titles that justify  your being considered  today by all of
us as the true ambassador  of Colombia,  not only in Paris but in
every  capital  where  the  single  word  “liberty”  makes  hearts  beat
faster.
It is not so easy as people  think to be a free man. In  truth,  the
only ones who assert  that it is easy are those who have decided  to
forego  freedom.  For freedom  is refused  not because  of its privileges,
as some would have us believe, but because  of its exhausting  tasks.
For those, on the other hand, whose  function  and passion  consist  in
granting  liberty  all its rights  and duties,  know that this requires  a
daily e ort and a constant  vigilance  in which  pride and humility
play equal parts. If we are tempted  today,  Mr. President,  to express
all our aection  for you—at  the same time as to Mr. Roberto  García
Peñas—this  is  because  you  maintained  that  constant   vigilance

without  ever  sparing  yourse lf.  By  refusing  the  dishonor  that  was
oered  you  (which  amounted  to  taking  upon  yourself  the
repudiation  and penance  a government  dared to impose  on you), by
letting  your ne  newspaper  be destroyed  rather  than allowing  it to
serve  falsehood  and  despotism,  you  were  one  of  those
uncompromising  witnesses  who,  in  all  circumstances,  deserve
respect.  But that would  not yet suce  to make of you a witness  of
liberty.  Many  men have sacriced  everything  to errors,  and I have
always  though t  that  heroism  and  sacrice  were  not  enough  to
justify  a cause. Obstinacy  alone is not a virtue.  What,  on the other
hand, gives your resistance  its true meaning,  what makes  of you the
exemplary  companion  we are eager to greet, is that under the same
circumstances—when  you were the respected  President  of Colombia
—you  not only did not use your power  to censor  your adversaries
but you kept the newspaper  of your political  enemies  from being
suppressed.
That deed alone is enough  for us to recognize  in you a  real free
man. Liberty has sons who are not all legitimate  or to be admired.
Those  who  applaud  it  only  when  it  justies  their  privileges  and
shout nothing  but censorship  when it threatens  them are not on our
side. But those who, according  to Benjamin  Constant’s  remark,  are
willing  neither  to suer   nor to possess  the means  of oppression,  who
want freedom  both for themselves  and for others—they,  in an age
that poverty  or terror  condemns  to the excesses  of oppression,  are
the seeds beneath the snow of which  one of the greatest  among  us
spoke. Once the storm is over, the world will live o them.
Such men, we know,  are rare. Today  freedom  has not many allies.
I have been known  to say that the real passion  of the twentieth
century  was slavery.  That was a bitter remark  which  did an injustice
to all those men (you are one of them)  whose  sacrice  and example
every  day  help  us  to  live.  But  I  merely  wanted  to  express  that
anguish  I feel every  day when faced with the decrease  of liberal
energies,  the prostituting  of words,  the slandered  victims , the smug
justication  of oppression,  the insane  admiration  of force. We see a
multiplication  of those minds  of whom  it has been said that they
seemed  to count  an inclination  toward  slavery  as an ingredient  of

virtue.  We see the intelligenc e seeking  justications  for its fear, and
nding  them readily,  for every cowardice  has its own philosophy.
Indignation  is  measured,  silences  take  counsel  from  one  another,
and  history  has  ceased  to  be  anything  but  Noah’s  cloak  that  is
spread  over  the  victims’  obscenity.  In  short,  all  ee   real
responsibility,  the eort   of being consistent  or of having  an  opinion
of one’s own, in order to take refuge  in the parties  or groups  that
will think for them,  express  their anger  for them,  and make their
plans  for  them.  Contemporary  intelligence  seems  to  measure  the
truth  of  doctrines  and  causes  solely  by  the  number  of  armored
divisions  that each can put into the eld.  Thenceforth  everything  is
good  that  justies  the  slaughter  of  freedom,  whether  it  be  the
nation,  the people,  or the grandeur  of the State. The welfare  of the
people  in  particular  has  always  been  the  alibi  of  tyrants,  and  it
provides  the further  advanta ge of giving  the servants  of tyranny  a
good conscience.  It would  be easy, however,  to destroy  that good
conscience  by shouting  to them:  if you want the happiness  of the
people,  let them speak  out and tell what kind of happiness they
want and what kind they don’t want!  But, in truth,  the very ones
who make use of such alibis know they are lies; they leave to their
intellectuals  on duty the chore of believing  in them and of proving
that  religion,  patriotism,  and  justice  need  for  their  survival  the
sacrice  of freedom.  As if freedom,  when it leaves  a certain place,
were not the last to go, after all that constituted  our reasons  for
living.  No, freedom  does not die alone.  At the same time justice  is
forever  exiled,  the  nation  begins  to  agonize,  and  innocence  is
crucied anew every day.
To be sure, freedom  is not the answer  to everything,  and it has
frontiers.  The freedom  of each nds  its limits  in that of others;  no
one has a right to absolute  freedom.  The limit where  freedom  begins
and ends, where  its rights  and duties  come together,  is called  law,
and the State itself must bow to the law. If it evades  the  law, if it
deprives  the citizens  of the benets  of the law, there is breach  of
faith. Last August  there was breach  of faith in Colombia,  just as
there has been breach  of faith in Spain  for the last twenty  years.

And there again your example  helps to remind  us that there is no
compromise with breach of faith. One has to reject it and ght it.
Your battleeld  was the press. Freedom  of the press is perhaps  the
freedom  that has suered  the most from the gradual  degradation  of
the idea of liberty. The press has its pimps  as it has its policemen.
The pimp debases  it, the policeman  subjugates  it, and each uses the
other as a way of justifying  his own abuses.  Those  gentlemen  vie
with  each  other  in  protectin g  the  orphan  and  giving  her  shelter,
whether  that  shelter  is  a  prison  or  a  house  of  prostitution.  The
orphan,  indeed , is justied  in declining  such eager oers   of help and
in deciding that she must ght alone and alone resolve her fate.
Not that the press in itself is an absolute  good. Victor  Hugo said in
a speech  that it was intelligence,  progress,  and I know not what else.
The already-old  journalist  I am knows  that it is nothing  of the sort
and that reality  is less consoling.  But in another  sense the press is
better  than intelligence  or progress;  it is the possibility  of all that
and of other things  as well. A free press can of course  be good or
bad, but, most certainly,  without  freedom  it will never be anything
but bad. When one knows  of what man is capable,  for better  and for
worse,  one also knows  that it is not the human  being himself who
must be protected  but the possibilities  he has within  him—in  other
words,  his  freedom.  I  confess,  insofar  as  I  am  concerned,  that  I
cannot  love all humanity  except  with a vast and somewhat  abstract
love.  But  I  love  a  few  men,  living  or  dead,  with  such  force  and
admiration  that I am always  eager to preserve  in others  what will
someday  perhaps  make  them  resemble  those  I  love.  Freedom  is
nothing  else but a chance  to be better,  whereas  enslavement  is a
certainty of the worst.
If  then,  despite  so  many  compromises  or  servilities,  we  are  to
continue  seeing  journalism,  when it is free, as one of the greatest
professions  of the time, this is only because  it allows  men like you
and your collaborators  to serve their country  and their time on the
highest  level.  With freedom  of the press,  nations  are not sure of
going toward justice  and peace.  But without  it, they are sure of not
going there. For justice  is done to peoples  only when their rights are
recognized,  and there is no right without  expression  of that right.

On this point we can take the word of Rosa Luxembourg,  who said:
“Without  unlimited  freedom  of the press, without  absolute  freedom
of  association,   the  dominant  power  of  large  popular  masses  is
inconceivable.”
Consequently,  we  must  be  adamant  as  to  the  principle  of  that
freedom.  It is not merely  the basis of cultural  privileges,  as people
try hypocritically  to convince  us. It is also the basis for the rights of
labor.  Those  who,  the  better  to  justify  their  tyrannies,  set  in
opposition  labor and culture  will not make us forget  that whatever
subjects  the  intelligence  enchains  labor,  and  vice  versa.  When
intelligence  is gagged,  the worker  is soon subjugated,  just as when
the proletariat  is enslaved  the intellectual  is soon reduced  to silence
or  to  lies.  In  short,  whoever  does  violence  to  truth  or  to  its
expression  eventually  mutilates  justice,  even though  he thinks he is
serving  it. From this point of view, we shall deny to the very end
that  a  press  is  true  because  it  is  revolutionary;  it  will  be
revolutionary  only if it is true, and never otherwise.  So long as we
keep  in  mind  these  facts,  your  resistance,  Mr.  President,  will
preserve  its real meaning,  and, far from being a solitary  example,  it
will throw light on the long struggle  that you will be helping  us not
to abandon.
The Colombian  government  accused  El  Tiem po  of being a super-
State within  the State, and you were right to refute  that argument.
But your government  was right too, although  in a way that it could
not accept. For, by saying  that, it paid homage  to the power of the
printed  word.  Censorship  and  oppression  prove  that  the  word  is
enough  to make the tyrant  tremble—but  only if the word is backed
up by sacrice.  For only the word fed by blood and heart can unite
men,  whereas  the  silence  of  tyrannies  separates  them.  Tyrants
indulge  in  monologues  over  millions  of  solitudes.  If  we  reject
oppression  and  falsehood,  on  the  other  hand,  this  is  because  we
reject solitude.  Every insubor dinate  person,  when he rises up against
oppression,  rearms  thereby  the solidarity  of all men. No, it is not
you  or  a  distant  newspaper  that  you  defended  by  resisting
oppression,  but the entire  community  that unites  us over and above
frontiers.

Is it not true, moreover,  that throughout  the world  your name has
always  been linked  to the cause  of freedom?  How can we fail to
recall  here  that  you  were  and  still  are  one  of  the  most  faithful
friends  of  our  Spain,  of  Republican  Spain,  today  scattered
throughout  the world,  betrayed  by its allies and its friends,  forgotten
by all, humiliated  Spain which  stands  erect solely  by the force of its
protest?  The day when the other Spain,  the Spain of churches  and
prisons,  enters with its jailers  and its censors  into the organization
of so-called  free nations,  I know that on that day you will stand with
all  of  us,  silently  but  with  no  spirit  of  revenge,  beside  free  and
suering Spain.
For  such  delity  let  me  thank  you  in  the  name  of  my  second
country  and in the name of all those who, gathered  here, bespeak
their gratitude  and their friendship.  We thank  you for being among
those few who, in a time of enslavement  and fear, stand rm  on
their  right.  People  are  complaining  almost  everywhere  that  the
sense of duty is disappearing.  How could it be otherwise  since no
one  cares  any  more  about  his  rights?  Only  he  who  is
uncompromising  as to his rights  maintains  the sense of duty. The
great citizens  of a country  are not those who bend the knee before
authority  but rather  those who, against  authority  if need be, are
adamant  as to the honor  and freedom  of that country.  And your
country  will always  recogni ze in you its great citizen,  as we are
doing here, because you, scorning  all opportunism,  manag ed to bear
up  against  the  total  injustice  that  was  inicted  upon  you.  At  a
moment  when the most shortsighted  realism,  a debased  conception
of power, the passion  for dishonor,  and the ravages  of fear disgure
the world, at the very momen t when it is possible  to think that all is
lost,  something  on  the  other  hand  is  beginning,  since  we  have
nothing  more  to  lose.  What  is  beginning  is  the  period  of  the
indomitable  men devoted  to the unconditional  defense  of liberty.
This is why your attitude  serves as an example  and a comfort  to all
those who, like me, have now broken  with many of their traditional
friends  by rejecting  any complicity,  even temporary,  even and above
all tactical, with regimes  or parties  whether  of the Right or of the

Left that justify,  however  little, the suppression  of a single  one of
our liberties!
In conclusion,  allow  me to say that, reading  the other day the
wonderful  message  you addressed  to your people,  I appreciated  not
only your steadfastness  and constancy  but also the long suering
you must have experienced.  When  oppression  wins out, as we all
know here, those who nevertheless  believe  that their cause is just
suer  from a sort of astonis hment  upon discovering  the apparent
impotence  of justice.  Then come the hours of exile and solitude  that
we have all known. Yet I should like to tell you that, in my opinion,
the worst thing that can happen  in the world  we live in is for one of
those men of freedom  and courage I have described  to stagger under
the weight  of isolation  and prolonged  adversity,  to doubt himself
and what he represents.  And it seems  to me that at such a moment
those who are like him must come toward  him (forgettin g his titles
and all devices  of the ocial  orator)  to tell him straight  from the
heart that he is not alone and that his action  is not futile, that there
always  comes  a day when the palaces  of oppression  crumble,  when
exile comes  to an end, when liberty  catches  re.  Such calm hope
justies  your action.  If, after all, men cannot  always  make history
have a meaning,  they can always  act so that their own lives have
one. Believe  me when I tell you that across thousands  of miles,  all
the  way  from  far-o  Colombia,  you  and  your  collaborators  have
shown  us a part of the dicu   lt road we must travel together toward
liberty.  And  allow  me,  in  the  name  of  the  faithful  and  grateful
friends  receiving  you  here,  to  greet  fraternally  in  you  and  your
collaborators the great companions of our common liberation.

Algeria

PREFACE TO ALGERIAN REPORTS
ERE  is a group of selected  articles  and texts concerning  Algeria.
H They  are  spaced  out  over  a  period  of  twenty  years— from
1939, when almost  no one in France  was interested  in that country,
until 1958, when everyone  talks about it. A volume  would  not have
been enough to contain  all the articles.  It was necessary  to eliminate
the repetitions  and too general  commentaries  and preserve  the facts,
gures,  and suggestions  that may still be useful.  As they stand, these
texts sum up the position  of a man who, faced very young with the
misery  of Algeria,  in vain multiplied  his warnings  and, long aware
of  his  country’s  responsibilities,  cannot  approve  a  policy  of
preservation  or oppression  in Algeria.  But I have long been alert to
Algerian  realities and cannot  approve,  either,  a policy  of surrender
that would  abandon  the Arab people  to an even greater  misery,  tear
the French  in Algeria  from their century-old  roots, and favor,  to no
one’s advantage,  the new imperialism  now threatening  the liberty  of
France and of the West.
Such a position  satises  no one today,  and I know in advance  how
it will be received  by both sides. I sincerely  regret  it, but I cannot  do
violence  to what I feel and what I believe.  Besides,  on this subject
no one satises  me either.  This is why, nding  it impossible  to join
either  extreme  camp,  faced with the gradual  disappearance  of that
third  camp  in  which  it  was  still  possible  to  keep  a  cool  head,
doubting  my certainties  and the things  I thought  I knew,  convinced
in short that the real cause of our follies  is to be found  in the habits
and functioning  of our intellectual  and political  society,  I decided  to
take no further  part in the constant  polemics  that have had no result
other  than  to  harden  the  uncompromising  points  of  view  at
loggerheads  in  Algeria  and  to  split  even  wider  a  France  already
poisoned by hatreds and sects.

There is indeed  a spitefulness  in the French,  and I refuse  to add to
it. I know only too well what it has cost us and still costs us. For the
past twenty  years the French  have loathed  their political  opponent
to the point of preferring  anything  to him, even foreign  dictatorship.
The French  apparently  never tire of such potentially  fatal games.
They  are  indeed  the  strange  people  who,  according  to  Custine,
would  rather  depict  themse lves  as  ugly  than  be  forgotten.  But  if
their country disappeared,  she would  be forgotten,  howev er she had
been depicted;  and in a subjugated  nation  we should  not even have
the liberty of continuing  to insult each other.  Until such truths  are
admitted,  we must be resigne d to giving  a purely  personal  testimony
with all necessary precaution s. And, personally,  I am interested  only
in the actions  that here and now can spare useless  bloodshed  and in
the solutions  that guarantee  the future  of a land whose  suering  I
share too much to be able to indulge in speechmaking about it.
Still other reasons  keep me from playing  such public  games.  To
begin with, I lack the assurance  that allows  one to settle everything.
On  this  point  terrorism  as  it  is  practiced  in  Algeria  greatly
inuenced  my attitude.  When  the fate of men and women of one’s
own blood is bound,  directly  or indirectly,  to the articles  one writes
in the comfort  of the study,  one has a right to hesitate  and to weigh
the pros and cons. In my case, if I am aware  that in criticizing  the
course  of the rebellion  I risk justifying  the most brazen  instigators  of
the Algerian  drama,  I never cease fearing  that, by pointing out the
long  series  of  French  mistakes,  I  may,  without  running  any  risk
myself,  provide  an alibi for the insane  criminal  who may throw  his
bomb into an innocent  crowd that includes  my family.  I went so far
as  to  admit  this  fact  baldly  in  a  recent  declaration  which  was
commented  upon most strangely. But anyone  who does not know
the  situation  I  am  talking  about  can  hardly  judge  of  it.  And  if
anyone,  knowing  it, still thinks  heroically  that one’s brother  must
die rather  than one’s principles,  I shall go no farther  than to admire
him from a distance. I am not of his stamp.
This  does  not  mean  that  principles  have  no  meaning.  An
opposition  of ideas is possibl e, even with weapons  in hand, and it is
only  fair  to  recognize  one’s  opponent’s  reasons  even  before

defending  oneself against  him. But on both sides a reign of terror,  as
long as it lasts, changes  the scale of values.  When  one’s own family
is in immediat e danger  of death, one may want to instill in one’s
family  a feeling  of greater  generosity  and fairness,  as these articles
clearly  show;  but (let there be no doubt  about  it!) one still feels a
natural  solidarity  with the family  in such mortal  danger  and hopes
that it will survive  at least and, by surviving,  have a chance  to show
its fairness.  If that is not honor  and true justice,  then I know nothing
that is of any use in this world.
Only from such a position  have we the right and the duty to state
that  military  combat  and  repression  have,  on  our  side,  taken  on
aspects  that we cannot  accept.  Reprisals  against  civilian  populations
and the use of torture  are crimes  in which  we are all involved.  The
fact that such things  could take place among  us is a humiliation  we
must henceforth  face. Meanw hile, we must at least refuse  to justify
such methods,  even on the score of ecacy.  The moment  they are
justied,  even  indirectly,  there  are  no  more  rules  or  values;  all
causes  are equally  good, and war without  aims or laws sanctions  the
triumph  of  nihilism.  Willy-n illy,  we  go  back  in  that  case  to  the
jungle  where  the sole principle  is violence.  Even those who are fed
up with morality ought  to realize  that it is better  to suer  certain
injustices  than to commit  them even to win wars, and that such
deeds  do us more harm than a hundred  underground  forces  on the
enemy’s  side. When  excuses  are made,  for instance,  for those who
do  not  hesitate  to  slaughter   the  innocent  in  Algeria  or,  in  other
places,  to  torture  or  to  condone  torture,  are  they  not  also
incalculable  errors since they may justify  the very crimes  we want
to ght? And what is that ecacy  whereby  we manage  to justify
everything  that  is  most  unjustiable  in  our  adversary?
Consequently,  the chief argument  of those who are trying  to make
the best of torture  must be met head on. Torture  has perhaps  saved
some,  at the expense  of honor, by uncovering  thirty bombs,  but at
the same time it aroused  fty  new terrorists  who, operating  in some
other way and in another  place,  will cause the death of even more
innocent  people.  Even when accepted  in the interest  of realism  and
ecacy,  such a outing  of honor  serves  no purpose  but to degrade

our country in her own eyes and abroad.  Finally,  such ne  deeds
inevitably  lead  to  the  demoralization  of  France  and  the  loss  of
Algeria.  And  censorship,  always  stupid,  whether  resulting  from
shame  or cynicism,  will not change  anything  about these truths.  The
government’s  duty  is  not  to  suppress  protests,  even  interested
protests,  against  the  criminal  excesses  of  repression.  Its  duty  is
rather  to suppress  the excesses  and to condemn  them publicly  in
order  to  keep  each  individual  citizen  from  feeling  personally
responsible  for the actions  of a few and hence  obliged  to denounce
or approve them.
But, to be both useful  and equitable,  we must condemn  with equal
force and in no uncertain  terms the terrorism  applied  by the F.L.N.
to French  civilians  and indeed,  to an even greater  degree, to Arab
civilians.  Such terrorism  is a crime that can be neither  excused  nor
allowed  to  develop.  Under  the  form  it  has  assumed,  no
revolutionary  movement  has  ever  accepted  it,  and  the  Russian
terrorists  of 1905,  for instance, would  have died (they proved  this
statement)  rather  than  stoop  to  it.  It  would  be  impossible  to
transform  an  awareness  of  the  injustices  imposed  on  the  Arab
population  into  a  systematic  indulgence  toward  those  who
indiscriminately  slaughter  Arab and French  civilians  without regard
for age or sex. After all, Gandhi proved  that it is possible  to ght  for
one’s  people  and  win  without  for  a  moment  losing  the  world’s
respect.  Whatever  the  cause  being  defended,  it  will  always  be
dishonored  by the blind slaughter  of an innocent  crowd  when the
killer  knows  in  advance  that  he  will  strike  down  women  and
children.
I have never failed to state, as can be seen in these reports, that
these two condemnations  could not be separated  if we wanted  to be
eective.  This is why it seemed  to me both indecent  and harmful  to
protest  against  tortures  in  the  company  of  those  who  readily
accepted  Melouza  or the mutilation  of European  children.  Just as it
seemed  to me harmful  and indecent  to condemn  terrorism  in the
company  of those who are not bothered  by torture.  The truth, alas,
is that a part of French  opinion  vaguely  holds that the Arabs have in
a way earned  the right to slaughter  and mutilate  while another part

is willing to justify  in a way all excesses.  To justify  himself, each
relies on the other’s  crime.  But that is a casuistry  of blood,  and it
strikes  me that an intellectual  cannot  become  involved  in it, unless
he  takes  up  arms  himself.  When  violence  answers  violence  in  a
growing  frenzy  that  makes  the  simple  language  of  reason
impossible,  the role of intellectuals  cannot  be, as we read every day,
to excuse  from a distance  one of the violences  and condemn  the
other.  This has the double  result of enraging  the violent  group  that
is condemned  and encouragin g to greater  violence  the violent  group
that is exonerated.  If they do not join the combatants  themselves,
their role (less spectacular,  to be sure!)  must be merely  to strive for
pacication  so that reason  will again have a chance.  A perspicacious
Right,  without  giving  up any of its convictions,  would  thus have
attempted  to  persuade  its  members,  both  in  Algeria  and  in  the
government,  of  the  necessity  for  major  reforms  and  of  the
discreditable  nature  of certain forms of behavior.  An intelligent  Left,
without  giving  up  any  of  its  principles,  would  likewise  have
attempted  to  persuade  the  Arab  movement  that  certain  methods
were essentially  base. But not at all. Most often the Right ratied,  in
the name of French  honor,  what was most opposed  to that honor.
And most often the Left, in the name of justice,  excused  what was
an insult  to any real justice.  In this way the Right abandoned  the
monopoly  of the moral  ree  x to the Left, which  yielded to it the
monopoly  of the patriotic  reex.  The country  suered  doubly.  We
could  have used moralists  less joyfully  resigned  to their country’s
misfortune  and patriots  less ready  to allow torturers  to claim that
they were acting in the name of France.  It seems  as if metropolitan
France  was unable  to think of any policies  other than those which
consisted  in saying  to the French  in Algeria:  “Go ahead  and die;
that’s  what  you  deserve”  or  else  “Kill  them;  that’s  what  they
deserve.”  That makes  two dierent  policies  and a single  abdication,
for the question  is not how to die separately  but rather  how to live
together.
If I annoy  anyone by writing  this, I ask him merely  to think for a
moment  about  the  divergence  between  the  ideological  reexes.
Some want their country  to identify  itself wholly  with justice,  and

they are right.  But is it possible  to be just and free in a dead or
subjugated  nation?  And  does  not  absolute  purity  for  a  nation
coincide  with historical  death?  Others  want the very body of their
country  to be defended  against the whole  universe  if need be, and
they are not wrong. But is it possible  to  survive  as a people without
doing  reasonable  justice  to other peoples?  France  is dying  through
inability  to solve this dilemma.  The rst  want the universal to the
detriment  of the particular.  The others  want the particular  to the
detriment  of the universal.  But the two go together.  The way to
human  society  passes  through  national  society.  National  society  can
be preserved  only by opening  it up to a universal  perspective.  More
precisely,  if you want France alone to reign in Algeria  over eight
million  mutes,  she will die. If you want Algeria  to separate  from
France,  both of them will perish in the same way. If, on the other
hand,  French  and  Arabs  resolve  their  dierences  in  Algeria,  the
future  will have a meaning  for the French,  the Arabs,  and the whole
world.
But  to  achieve  that,  we  must  cease  looking  upon  the  mass  of
Arabs in Algeria as a nation  of butchers.  The great majori ty of them,
exposed  on all sides, feel a suering  that no one expresses  for them.
Millions  of men, crazed  with poverty  and fear, have dug themselves
in, and neither  Cairo nor Algiers  ever speaks  up for them.  You will
see that I have tried for a long time to point out something  of their
misery,  and my somber  descriptions  will probably  be held against
me. Yet I wrote  complaining  of Arab misery  when there was still
time to do something,  at a time when France  was strong  and when
there  was  silence  among  those  who  now  nd  it  easier  to  keep
heaping  abuse, even abroad,  upon their weakened  country.  If my
voice had been more widely  heard  twenty  years ago, there would
perhaps  be less bloodshed  at present.  The misfortune  (and I feel it to
be a misfortune)  is that events proved  me right. Today  the poverty
of the Algerian  peasants  may well increase  out of all proportion  as a
result  of  a  lightning  growth  in  population.  In  addition,  caught
between  the combatants,  they suer   from fear; they too, they above
all, need peace!  It is of them and of my family  that I continue  to
think as I write the name Algeria  and make a plea for reconciliation.

They  are  the  ones  to  whom  we  must  give  a  voice  and  a  future
liberated from fear and hunger.
But  to  achieve  that,  we  must  cease  condemning  the  French  in
Algeria  as a group. One body of opinion  in metropolitan  France,
which  insists  on  hating  them,  must  be  called  to  order.  When  a
French  partisan  of  the  F.L.N.  dares  to  write  that  the  French  in
Algeria  have  always  looked   upon  France  as  a  prostitute  to  be
exploited,  such an irresponsible  person  must be reminded  that he is
speaking  of men whose  grandparents,  for instance,  decided in favor
of  France  in  1871  and  left  their  Alsatian  soil  for  Algeria,  whose
fathers  died  together  in  the  east  of  France  in  1914,  and  who
themselves,  twice  mobilized  in  the  most  recent  war,  were
indefatigable,  along  with  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Moslems,  in
ghting  on  all  fronts  for  that  prostitute.  As  a  result,  they  can
doubtless  be considered  naïve,  but it is hard to call them pimps.  I
am summing  up here the story of the men of my family,  who, being
poor and free of hatred,  never exploited  or oppressed  anyone.  But
three quarters  of the French  in Algeria  resemble  them and, if only
they are provided  reasons  rather  than insults,  will be ready to admit
the necessity  of a juster and freer order.  There  have doubtless  been
exploiters  in Algeria,  but fewer than in metropolitan  France,  and the
rst  one to benet  from the colonial  system  is the entire  French
nation.  If  some  Frenchmen  consider  that,  as  a  result  of  its
colonizing,  France (and France  alone among  so many holy and pure
nations)  is in a state of sin historically,  they don’t have to point to
the French  in Algeria as scapegoats  (“Go ahead  and die; that’s what
we deserve!”);  they must oer   up themselves  in expiation.  As far as
I am concerned,  it seems  to me revolting  to beat one’s  mea  culpa,  as
our  judge-penitents  do,  on  someone  else’s  breast,  useless  to
condemn  several  centuries  of European  expansion,  and absurd  to
include  in  the  same  denunciation  Christopher  Columbus  and
Lyautey.  The period  of colonialism  is over; we simply  have to know
this and draw the conclusion s. And the West, which  within ten years
has granted  autonomy  to a dozen colonies,  deserves  more respect  in
this regard and, above  all, more patience  than Russia,  which  in the
same period of time has colonized or put under  a harsh protectorate

a dozen countries of great and ancient  civilization.  It is good for a
nation  to  be  strong  enough  in  tradition  and  honor  to  have  the
courage  to  point  out  its  own  mistakes.  But  it  must  not  forget
whatever  reasons  it still has for self-esteem.  It is danger ous in any
case to expect  that a nation  will confess  that it alone is guilty and to
condemn  it to perpetual  penance. I believe  in a policy  of reparation
in Algeria  rather  than in a policy  of expiation.  Problems  must be
seen in relation  to the future, without  endlessly  going back over the
errors  of  the  past.  And  there  will  be  no  future  that  does  not  do
justice at one and the same time to the two communities of Algeria.
Such a spirit of equity,  to be sure, seems  alien to the reality  of our
history,  in  which  relationsh ips  of  force  outline  another  sort  of
justice;  in our international  society  there is no good ethical  system
except  a nuclear  ethics.  Then the only guilty  one is the vanquished.
It is understandable  that many intellectuals  have consequently  come
to  the  conclusion  that  values  and  words  derive  their  meaning
altogether  from  force.  Hence  some  people  progress  without
transition  from speeches  about  the principles  of honor  or fraternity
to  adoring  the  fait  accompli   or  the  cruelest  party.  I  continue,
however,  to believe,  with regard  to Algeria  and to everything  else,
that such aberrations,  both on the Right and on the Left, merely
dene  the nihilism  of our epoch. If it is true that in history, at least,
values—whether  those of the nation  or those of humanity—do  not
survive  unless  they have been fought  for, the ght  is not enough  to
justify  them. The ght  itself must rather  be justied,  and elucidated,
by those values.  When  ght ing for your truth,  you must take care
not to kill it with the very arms you are using to defend  it—only
under  such  a  double  condition  do  words  resume  their  living
meaning.  Knowing  that,  the  intellectual  has  the  role  of
distinguishing  in  each  camp  the  respective  limits  of  force  and
justice.  That role is to clarify  denitions  in order to disintoxicate
minds  and to calm fanaticisms,  even when this is against  the current
tendency.
I have attempt ed the work of disintoxication  as best I could.  Let
us admit that up to now the results  have been nonexistent;  these
reports  are also the record  of a failure.  But the simplications  of

hatred  and prejudice,  which  are constantly  rotting  and reviving  the
Algerian  coni   ct, must be noted every day, and one man cannot  do
so  alone.  There would have to be a movement,  a press,  a ceaseless
action.  For  one  ought  to  note  likewise,  every  day,  the  lies  and
omissions  that obscure  the real problem.  Our governments  already
want  to  make  war  without  calling  it  by  name,  want  to  have  an
independent  policy  and  beg  money  from  our  allies,  and  want  to
invest  in  Algeria  while  protecting  the  standard  of  living  in
metropolitan  France.  They  think  they  can  be  uncompromising  in
public  and  come  to  terms  behind  the  scenes,  covering  up  the
stupidities  of  their  administrators  and  yet  disavowing  them  in  a
whisper.  But our parties  or sects that criticize  the governm ent are no
more brilliant.  No one says clearly  what he wants  or, if he does so,
draws  the  conclusions.  Those  who  advocate  the  military  solution
must know that it can only mean a reconquest  by means of an all-
out war which  will involve,  for example,  the reconquest  of Tunisia
in opposition  to the opinion,  and perhaps  the armed  resistance,  of a
part of the world. That is a policy,  to be sure, but it must be seen
and  presented   as  it  is.  Those  who,  in  purposely  vague  terms,
advocate  negotiation  with the F.L.N.  cannot  fail to be aware,  after
the  precise  statements  of  the  F.L.N.,  that  this  means  the
independence  of Algeria  under  the direction  of the most relentless
military  leaders  of the insurrection—in  other words,  the eviction  of
1,200,000  Europeans  from Algeria  and the humiliation  of millions
of Frenchmen,  with all the risks that such a humiliation  involves.
That is a policy, to be sure, but we must see it for what it is and stop
cloaking it in euphemisms.
The constant  polemics  that would  have to be carried  on for this
purpose  would  boomerang  in a political  society  where  the will to be
lucid and intellectual  independence  are becoming  rarer and rarer.
All that is left of a hundred  articles  written  on the subject  is the
adversary’s  distortion  of them.  At least a book, if it does not avoid
1 all misunderstandings,  makes  some of them impossible.  A book can
be  referred  to,  and  it  can  present  a  calmer  stateme nt  of  the
necessary  distinctions.  Hence,  wanting  to  satisfy  all  those  who
sincerely  ask me to state my position  once more, I have been able to

do so only by summing  up in this book twenty  years of experience,
which  may  inform  unprejud iced  minds.  By  experience  I  mean  a
man’s  facing up to a situatio n over a period  of years,  with all the
mistakes,  contradictions,  and hesitations  that such a confrontation
implies,  of which  many an example  will be found  in the following
pages.  My  opinion,  moreove r,  is  that  too  much  is  expected  of  a
writer  in such matters.  Even, and perhaps  especially,  when his birth
and his heart link him to the fate of a land like Algeria,  it is useless
to think he is blessed  with some kind of revelation  of the truth; his
personal  story, if it could  be truthfully  written,  would  be but the
story of successive  lapses,  sometimes  corrected  and committed  once
again.  I am quite ready to admit  my shortcomings  on this score and
the  errors  of  judgment  that  can  be  noted  in  this  volume.  But,
however  much it may pain me to do so, I at least thought  it possible
to gather together  the documents  of this long record  and to submit
them to the  reection  of those whose  minds  are not yet irrevocably
made up. The relaxation  of psychological  strain  that can be felt at
present  betwee n French  and Arabs  in Algeria  gives rise to the hope
that the language of reason may again be heard.
Consequently,  there will be found  in these records  a picture  (on
the occasion of a very serious  crisis in Kabylia)  of the economic
causes  of the Algerian  drama, a few references  for the specically
political  evolution  of that drama,  comments  on the complexity  of
the  present  situation,  a  prediction  of  the  impasse  to  which  the
revival  of terrorism  and repression  has led us, and, in conclusion,  an
outline  of the solution  that still seems  to me possible.  Recognizing
the end of colonialism,  my solution  excludes  dreams  of reconquest
or of maintaining  the  status  quo;  really  mere reactions  of weakness
and humiliation,  such dreams only prepare  for the denit ive divorce
and the double  misfortune  of France  and Algeria.  But my solution
also excludes  the dream  of uprooting  the French  in Algeria,  who, if
they haven’t  the right to oppress anyone,  do have the right not to be
oppressed  and to be their own masters  in the land of their birth.
There  are other ways of re-establishing  the necessary  justice  than
substituting one injustice for another.

In  this  regard  I  have  tried  to  dene  my  position  clearly.  An
Algeria  made  up  of  federated  settlements  and  linked  to  France
seems  to me preferable  (without  any possible  comparison  on the
plane of simple justice)  to an Algeria  linked  to an empire of Islam
which  would  bring  the  Arab  peoples  only  increased  poverty  and
suering  and which  would  tear the Algerian-born  French   from their
natural  home.  If the Algeria  I hope for still has a chance  of emerging
(and, in my opinion,  it has many chances),  I want to help it with all
my strength.  On the other hand, I consider  that I must not help even
for a second  in any way whatever  the establishment  of the other
Algeria.  If it came about  (and, necessarily,  against  the interests  of
France  or  without  consideration  for  France),  through  the  joint
operation  of  the  forces  of  surrender  and  the  forces  of  pure
conservation  (with the double retreat  they involve),  this would  be a
great misfortune  for me, and, with millions  of other Frenchmen,  I
should  have to suer   the consequences.  That, loyally  stated, is what
I think. I may be mistaken  or unable  to judge fairly of a drama  that
touches  me  too  closely.  But  if  the  reasonable  hopes  we  can  still
nourish  today should  fade away and we were faced with the serious
ensuing  events  for which—w hether  they do violence  to our country
or to humanity  as a whole—we  shall all be responsible  together,
each of us must stand up and declare  what he has done and what he
has said. This is my declaration, to which I shall add nothing.
March–April 1958
1  The entire  book entitled  Actuelles  III  was devoted  to Camus’s  “Algerian  Reports”  of the
years 1939–58, from among  which  he selected  for this volume  the present  “Preface”
and the three following essays. (Translator’s note)

LETTER TO AN ALGERIAN MILITANT
(M. Aziz Kessous, an Algerian  socialist  and
former  member  of  the  Party  of  the
Manifesto,  had planned,  after the rebellion
broke  out, to launch  a newspaper,  Algerian
Community,   which  would  rise  above  the
double  fanaticism  now  aicting  Algeria
and help establish a really  free community.
This letter appeared in the newspaper’s  rst
issue on the rst of October 1955.)
Y DEAR  K ESSOUS ,
M I found your letters  on returning from a vacation  and am
afraid  that my approval  may come very late. Yet I need to give it to
you. Believe  me when  I tell you that Algeria  is the cause  of my
suering  at present  as others might  say their chest is the cause of
their suering.  And since the 20th of August  I have been on the
verge of despair.
We  know  nothing  of  the  human  heart  if  we  imagine  that  the
Algerian  French  can now forget  the massacres  at  Philippeville  and
elsewhere.  And  it  is  another  form  of  madness  to  imagine  that
repression  can make the Arab masses  feel condence  and esteem  for
France.  Hence  we  are  pitted  against  each  other,  condemned  to
inicting  the greatest  possible  pain on each other,  inexpiably.  The
idea is intolerable to me and poisons each of my days.
Nevertheless,  you and I, who are so much alike—having  the same
background,  sharing  the same hope, having  felt like brothers  for so
long now, united in our love for our country—know  that we are not
enemies  and that we could  live happily  together  on this soil that
belongs  to us. For it is ours, and I can no more imagine  it without

you and your brothers  than you can probably  separate  it from me
and those who resemble me.
You  have  said  it  very  well,  better  than  I  can  say  it:  we  are
condemned  to live together.  The Algerian  French—and  I thank  you
for having  pointed  out that they are not all bloodthirsty  rich men—
have been in Algeria  for more than a century,  and there are more
than  a  million   of  them.  This  alone  is  enough  to  distinguish  the
Algerian  problem  from the problems  raised  in Tunisia  and Morocco,
where  the  French  settlement  is  relatively  new  and  weak.  The
“French  fact” cannot  be eliminated  in Algeria,  and the dream  of a
sudden  disappearance  of France is childish.  But there is no reason
either  why  nine  million  Arabs  should  live  on  their  land  like
forgotten  men; the dream  that the Arab masses  can be canceled  out,
silenced  and subjugated,  is just as mad. The French  are attached  to
the soil of Algeria by roots that are too old and too vigorous  for us
to think of tearing them up. But this gives the French  no right, in
my  opinion,  to  destroy  the  roots  of  Arab  culture  and  life.
Throughout  my  life  I  have  fought  for  sweeping  and  profound
reforms—and  you  know  that  I  paid  for  this  with  exile  from  my
country.  But people  refused  to believe  because  they cherished  the
dream  of power  that is supposedly  eternal  and forgot  that history
constantly  progresses;  and now those reforms  are needed  more than
ever. Those  which  you point out represent  an initial  eo  rt, and an
indispensable  one, to be made quickly,  before  its chance  of success
is drowned in French blood and Arab blood.
But saying  this today,  as I know by experience,  amounts  to taking
one’s stand in the no man’s  land between  two armies  and preaching
amid the bullets  that war is a deception  and that bloodshed,  if it
sometimes  makes  history  progress,  makes  it progress  toward  even
greater  barbar ism  and  misery.  If  anyone  dares  to  put  his  whole
heart and all his suering  into such a cry, he will hear in reply
nothing  but laughter  and a louder  clash of arms. And yet we must
cry it aloud,  and, since you plan to do so, I cannot  let you do such a
mad and necessary  thing without telling  you that I stand beside  you
like a brother.

Yes, the essential  thing is to leave room,  however  limited  it may
be, for the exchange  of views that is still possible;  the essential thing
is  to  bring  about  an  easing  of  the  situation,  however  slight  and
temporary  it may be. And to achieve  that, each of us must preach
pacication  to  his  people.  The  inexcusable  massacring  of  French
civilians  leads to equally  stupid destruction  of the Arabs  and their
possessions.  It is as if two insane  people,  crazed  with wrath,  had
decided  to turn into a fatal embrace  the forced  marriage  from which
they cannot  free themselves.  Forced  to live together  and incapable
of uniting,  they decide  at least to die together.  And because  each of
them by his excesses  strengthens  the motives  and excesses  of the
other,  the  storm  of  death  that  has  struck  our  country  can  only
increase  to  the  point  of  general  destruction.  In  that  ceaseless
attempt  to go one better,  the re  is spreading,  and tomorr ow Algeria
will be a land of ruins and dead which  no force,  no power in the
world, will be capable of reviving in this century.
We must put a stop to the attempt  at outbidding  each other; it is
the duty of all of us, Arabs  and Frenchmen,  who refuse to let go
each other’s hands.  We Frenchmen  must struggle  to keep repression
from becoming  general  so that French  law will continue  to have a
generous  and obvious  meaning in our country;  we must struggle  to
remind  our people  of their mistakes  and of the obligations  of a great
nation,  which  cannot,  without losing  its prestige,  answer  a racial
massacre  with a similar  outburst.  Finally,  we must strive to hasten
the necessary  and decisive  reforms  that will once more launch  the
Franco-Arab  community  of Algeria  on the road toward  the future.
You Arabs must spare no eort   to show your people  that, when they
kill civilian  populations,  terrorism  not only raises justiable  doubts
as to the political  maturity  of men capable  of such acts, but also
strengthens  the anti-Arab  elements,  reinforces  their arguments, and
silences  French  liberal  opinion  which  might  nd  and put through
some solution leading to reconciliation.
I  shall  be  told,  as  you  will  be  told,  that  it  is  too  late  for
reconciliation,  that the only thing to do is to wage war  and win. But
you and I know that this war will not have any real victors and that,
once it is over, we shall still have to go on living together  forever  on

the same soil. We know that our destinies  are so closely  linked  that
any action on the part of one calls forth a retort  from the other,
crime  engendering  crime,  madness  replying  to lunacy,  and, nally,
that if one stands  aloof the other suers  from sterility.  If you Arab
democrats  fail in your work of pacication,  the activity  of us French
liberals  will be doomed  to failure in advance.  And if we falter in our
duty, your poor words  will be swept away in the wind and ames  of
a pitiless war.
This is why I am with you in your eort,  my dear Kessous.  I wish
you, I wish us, luck. I want most earnestly  to believe  that peace will
rise over our elds,  our mountains,  our shores,  and that then at last
Arabs  and French,  reconciled  in freedom  and justice,  will make an
eort   to forget  the bloodshe d that divides  them today.  When  that
happens,  we  who  are  both  exiled  in  hatred  and  despair  shall
together recover our native land.

APPEAL FOR A CIVILIAN TRUCE IN ALGERIA
(Lecture given in Algiers in February 1956)
ADIES  and gentlemen,  despite  the need to surround  this meeting
L with precautions,  despite  the diculties  we have encountered,  I
shall speak this evening  not to divide  but to unite.  That is my most
ardent  wish.  Not  the  least  of  my  disappointments  (and  the
expression  is weak)  is to have to admit that everything  stands  in the
way of such a wish. For instance, a man and writer  who has devoted
a part of his life to serving  Algeria  is almost  deprived  of the right to
speak,  even before anyone  knows  what he intends  to say. But at the
same  time  this  emphasizes  the  urgency  of  the  eort  toward
pacication  that we must make. Consequently,  this meeting had to
take place to show at least that an exchange  of views is still possible
and  to  keep  people  from  accepting  the  worst  as  a  result  of  the
general discouragement.
My speaking  of “an exchange  of views”  suggests  that I did not
come to deliver  a formal  lecture.  To tell the truth,  in the present
circumstances  I should  not have the heart to do so. But it seemed  to
me possible, and I even considered  it my duty, to come and echo
among  you a  purely  humanitarian  appeal  that might,  at least on one
point,  silence  the fury and unite most Algerians,  both French  and
Arab, without  their having  to give up any of their convictions.  That
appeal,  endorsed  by the committee  that organized  this meeting,  is
addressed  to both camps  in the hope that they will accept  a truce
insofar as innocent civilians are concerned.
Hence  I have only to justify  such an enterprise  in your eyes. I
shall try to do so briey.
Let  me  insist  at  the  outset  that,  owing  to  the  force  of
circumstances,  our appeal  has nothing  to do with politics.  If it were
otherwise,  I should  not be qualied  to speak.  I am not a political
man, and my passions  and inclinations  do not lead me to public

platforms.  I  step  onto  the  podium  only  when  forced  to  by  the
pressure  of circumstances  and by my conception  of my function  as a
writer.  As  to  the  basis  of  the  Algerian  problem,  I  shall  probably
have, as events  multiply  and suspicions  increase  on both sides, more
doubts  than certainties  to express.  My only qualications  for taking
a stand are that I have lived through  the Algerian  calamity  as a
personal  tragedy and that I am incapable  of rejoicing  over any death
whatever.  For twenty  years,  with paltry  means,  I have done all I
could to contribute  to the understanding  of our two peoples. To be
sure,  one  can  laugh  at  the  expression  of  the  preacher  of
reconciliation  when history  answers  his preaching  by showing  him
the two people s he loved embraced  in a death grip. He himself,  in
any case, is not inclined  to laugh at it. Faced  with such a failure,  his
only  concern  must  be  to  spare  his  country  any  unnecessary
suering.
I must add that the men who took the initiative  of backing this
appeal  are not acting  in any political  capacity  either.  Among  them
are members of large religious  families  who were willing,  in keeping
with their lofty calling,  to support a humanitarian  duty. Others  are
men not singled out either  by profession  or by sensitivity  as the kind
who get involved  in public  aairs.  For most of them,  indeed, their
profession  or business,  which  served  a purpose  in the community,
suced  to ll  their lives. They could have stood on the sidelines,
like so many  others,  keeping  score and from time to time sighing
with  a  ne  note  of  melancholy.  But  they  thought  that  building,
teaching,  creating were functions  of life and of genero sity which
could not be pursued  in the realm  of hatred  and bloodshed.  Such a
decision,  heavy  with consequences  and commitments,  gives them no
special  rights  except  one—the  right of asking  that their suggestion
be seriously considered.
I  must  say  nally  that  we  don’t  want  to  get  you  to  agree  to
anything  politically. If we wanted to raise the problem  on a political
basis, we should run the risk of not getting  the agreemen t we need.
We  may  dier  as  to  the  necessary  solutions  and  even  as  to  the
means  of  achieving  them.  To  contrast  positions  that  have  been
dened  over and over and even distorted  would,  for the moment,

merely  add to the weight  of insults  and hatreds  under  which  our
country is stiing and struggling.
But one thing at least unites  all of us—and  that is our love of our
common  soil, and our anguish. Anguish  as we face a future  that
closes  up a little every  day, as we face the threat  of a degrading
struggle,  of an economic  disequilibrium  that is already  serious  and
is increasing  every day, that may reach the point where no eort
will be able to revive Algeria for a long time to come.
We want to address ourselves  to that anguish,  even—I  might  say,
especially—among  those  who  have  already  taken  sides.  For  even
among  the  most  militant,  in  the  thick  of  the  fray,  there  is  an
element,  I know,  that will not indulge  in murder  and hatred,  and
that dreams of a happy Algeria.
We are appeal ing to that element in each of you, French  or Arab.
We should  like to say to those who are unwilling  to see this great
country  break in two and go adrift that, without  recalling  again the
mistakes  of  the  past,  anxious  solely  for  the  future,  it  is  possible
today,  on  a  single  denite  point,  to  agree  rst  and  then  to  save
human  lives. In this way we may prepare  a climate  more favorable
to  a  discussion  that  will  at  last  be  reasonable.  The  intentional
modesty  of this objective,  and yet its importance,  make it worthy,  in
my opinion, of your broadest agreement.
What do we want?  Simply  to get the Arab movement  and the
French  author ities, without  having  to make contact  or to commit
themselves  to anything  else, to declare  simultaneously  that for the
duration  of  the  ghting  the  civilian  population  will  on  every
occasion  be respected  and protected.  Why this measure?  The rst
reason,  on which  I shall not insist much,  is, as I said, one of simple
humanity.  Whatever  the ancient  and deep origins  of the Algerian
tragedy,  one  fact  remains:  no  cause  justies  the  death  of  the
innocent.  Throughout  history,  men, unable  to suppress  war, have
made  an  eort  to  limit  its  eects;  and,  however  terrible  and
repulsive  the latest world  wars were, nevertheless  organizations  of
aid and solidarity  succeeded  in piercing  the darkness  with the feeble
ray of pity that keeps one from despairing  utterly  of mankind.  Such
a necessity  seems  even more urgent  in a struggle  that in many ways

has the appearance  of a fratricidal  war that makes  no distinction
between  men and women,  between  soldier  and worker.  From this
point of view, even if our present  initiative  saved but one innocent
life, it would be justied.
But it is also justied  for other reasons.  However  black it may
seem,  the  future  of  Algeria  is  not  yet  altogether  sealed.  If  each
individual,  Arab  or  French,  made  an  eort  to  think  over  his
adversary’s  motives, at least the basis of a fruitful  discussion would
be  clear.  But  if  the  two  Algerian  populations,  each  accusing  the
other of having  begun  the quarrel,  were to hurl themselves  against
each other in a sort of xenophobic  madness,  then any chance  for
understanding  would  be drowned  in blood.  It may be, and this is
our greatest source  of anguish,  that we are heading  toward  such
horrors.  But  we  Arabs  and  French  who  reject  mad,  nihilistic
destruction  cannot let this happen without  launching  a nal  appeal
to reason.
Reason  clearly  shows  that on this point,  at least, French  and Arab
solidarity  is inevitable,  in death as in life, in destruction  as in hope.
The  frightful  aspect  of  that  solidarity  is  apparent  in  the  infernal
dialectic  that  whatever  kills  one  side  kills  the  other  too,  each
blaming  the  other  and  justifying  his  violences  by  the  opponent’s
violence.  The eternal  questio n as to who was rst  responsible  loses
all  meaning  then.  And  because  they  could  not  manage  to  live
together,  two populations,  similar and dierent  at the same time but
equally  worthy  of respect,  are condemned  to die together,  with rage
in their hearts.
But there is also a community  of hope that justies  our appeal.
That common  hope is rmly  based on realities  over which  we have
no control.  On this soil there are a million  Frenchmen  who have
been  here  for  a  century,  millions  of  Moslems,  either  Arabs  or
Berbers,  who  have  been  here  for  centuries,  and  several  vigorous
religious  communities.  Those  men  must  live  together  at  the
crossroads  where  history  put them.  They can do so if they will take
a few steps toward  each other in an open confrontation.  Then our
dierences  ought to help us instead  of dividing  us. As for me, here
as  in  every  domain,  I  believe  only  in  dierences  and  not  in

uniformity.  First of all, because  dierences  are the roots without
which  the tree of liberty,  the sap of creation  and of civilization,
dries up. Nevertheless,  we stand facing  each other as if frozen,  as if
struck  with a paralysis  that can be cured  only by brutal  and brief
outbursts  of violence.  This is because  the struggle  has assumed  an
irrevocable  aspect  that rouses  on both sides towering  indignations
and passions aspiring to outdo each other.
“No  further  discussion  is  possible”—that  is  the  slogan  that
sterilizes  any future  and any possibility  of life. After that there is
nothing  but blind warfare  in which  the Frenchman  makes  up his
mind to know nothing  of the Arab, even though  he feels, somewhere
within  him, that the Arab’s  claim to dignity  is justied,  and the Arab
makes  up his mind to know nothing  of the Frenchman,  even though
he feels, somewhere  within  him, that the Algerian  French  likewise
have a right to security  and dignity  on our common  soil. Locked  up
in his rancor  and hatred,  neither  one can listen to the other.  Any
proposal,  whichever  side it comes  from, is received  with distrust,
distorted  at once and made unserviceable.  We are gradually  getting
caught  in a tangle of old and new accusations,  of xed  vendettas,  of
relentless  rancors  alternating  with  one  another.  It’s  like  an  old
family  lawsuit   in  which  grievances  and  arguments  pile  up  for
generations  until  even  the  most  humane  and  upright  judges  can
make neither  head nor tail of the matter.  It is hard to imagine the
end  of  such  a  situation,  and  our  hope  for  a  Franco-Arabic
association,  for a peaceful  and creative  Algeria,  becomes  dimmer
every day.
Consequently,  if we want to preserve  some of that hope, at least
until discussion  about the fundamentals  gets under  way, if we want
to help such a discussion  get somewhere  by making  a joint eort
toward  unders tanding,  we must act upon the very character  of the
struggle.  We are too much hampered  by the scope of the drama  and
the complexity  of the passions  it has loosed  to hope to achieve  a
cessation  of hostilities  at once. Such an action  would  indeed  imply
the taking of purely  political  positions  which,  at the moment,  might
divide us even more.

But we can at least exert some action  on the most hateful  aspect
of the ght:  we can propose,  without  making  any change  in the
present  situatio n, that we refrain  from what makes  it unforgivable—
the murder  of the innocent.  The fact that such an agreem ent would
unite French and Arabs,  both of them eager not to cause irreparable
suering,  would  give  it  a  serious  chance  of  succeeding  in  both
camps.
If our proposal  had a chance  of being accepted—and  it does have
such a chance—we  should  not only have saved precious  human  lives
but also have re-created  a proper climate  for a healthy  discussion
that would  not be spoiled  by ridiculously  uncompromising  attitudes;
we  should  have  prepared   the  ground  for  a  fairer,  subtler
understanding  of the Algerian  problem.  By bringing  about  such a
slight  thaw  on  a  single  point,  we  may  hope  someday   to  break
altogether  the block of hatreds and crazy demands  in which  we are
all caught. Then the various  policies  would  have a hearing  and each
individual  would again have the right to defend  his own convictions
and to explain his dierence.
That, in any case, is the narrow position  on which  we may hope,
as a beginning , to get together.  Any broader  platform  would, for the
moment,  provide us only an additional  eld  of discord.  We must be
patient with ourselves.
But I do not believe  that any Frenchman  or any Arab would  refuse
to  agree  to  such  limited  and  yet  capital  action.  To  convince
ourselves  of this we have only to imagine  what would  happen  if this
enterprise,  cautious and limited  as it is, were to fail. We should  have
to face a denitive  break,  the destruction  of all hope, and a carnage
of which  we have so far had only a slight foretaste.  Those of our
Arab friends  who courageous ly stand beside  us in the no man’s  land
where  we are threatened  on both sides and who are torn within
themselves  would  be  forced  to  adopt  a  policy  of  retaliation  that
would  kill all possibility  of free discussion.  The essential  dialogue
between  us could not take place. Directly  or indirectly,  they would
enter  the  fray,  whereas  they  could  have  been  artisans  of  peace.
Every Frenchm an’s interest,  therefore,  is to help them escape  such a
dilemma.

But, on the other hand, the direct interest  of Arab moderates  is to
help us escape  another  dilemma.  For if we fail in our undertaking
and give proof of our impote nce, the French  liberals  who think that
French  and Arabs  can be made  to coexist,  who believe  that such
coexistence  will do justice  to the rights  of both sides, who are sure
in any case that it alone can save the people  of this country  from
calamity, will be given the lie.
Instead  of the broad  commu nity they long for, they will have to
fall back on the only living  community  that justies  them—France.
In other words,  by our silence  or by the stand we take, we too shall
enter the fray. I cannot  speak  in the name of our Arab friends  to
illustrate  both sides of that fearful evolution  which  gives an urgency
to our action.  But I have seen how possible  such an evolution is in
France.  Just as I have felt here the Arab’s  distrust  of whatever  is
proposed  to him, one can feel in France,  as you are well aware,  a
growing  doubt  and  similar  distrust.  The  doubt  and  distrust  may
become  permanent  if  the  French,  already  disturbed  by  the
continuation  of  the  Rif  war  after  the  Sultan’s  return  and  by  the
revival  of  the  Fellagha  movement  in  Tunisia,  are  forced  by  the
spread  of a relentless struggle  to think that the aim of the struggle  is
not  only  the  Arab  claim  to  justice  but  also  the  achievement  of
foreign  ambitions—at  the expense  of France  and her complete  ruin.
Many  Frenchmen  would  then indulge  in reasoning  exactly as the
majority  of  Arabs  would  reason  if,  losing  all  hope,  they  had  to
accept  the inevitable.  The French  reasoning  would  run like this: “We
are French. Regard for what is just in the cause of our adversaries
will not lead us to do injustice to everything  good and deserving  in
France  and her people.  We cannot  be expected  to applaud  all forms
of nationalism  except  French  nationalism,  to forgive  all sins except
those of France.  In the extremity  to which  we have been driven  and
since a choice  is necessary,  we cannot  choose  anything  else but our
own country.”
Thus,  through  the  same  reasoning  operating  in  contrary
directions,  our  two  peoples  would  separate  once  and  for  all  and
Algeria  would  become  for a long time a mass of ruins,  whereas  a

mere eort   of reection  today  could still change  things  and avoid
catastrophe.
This is the double danger  that threatens  us, the mortal  risk with
which  we are faced.  Either  we shall succeed,  on one point at least,
in getting together to limit the havoc  and shall in this way bring
about  a  satisfactory  outcome,  or  we  shall  fail  to  unite  and  to
persuade—and  our  failure  will  inuence  the  whole  future.  Our
enterprise  needs no other justication;  the urgency  is evident.  This
is why my appeal will be as emphatic  as possible.  If I had the power
to give a voice to the solitud e and anguish  in each of us, that is the
voice  with  which  I  should  address  you.  As  for  me,  I  have
passionately  loved  this  land  where  I  was  born,  I  drew  from  it
whatever  I am, and in forming  friendships  I have never made any
distinction  among  the  men  who  live  here,  whatever  their  race.
Although  I have known  and shared  every form of poverty in which
this country abounds,  it is for me the land of happiness,  of energy,
and  of  creation.  And  I  cannot  bear  to  see  it  become  a  land  of
suering and hatred.
I know that the great tragedies  of history  often fascinate  men with
approaching  horror.  Paralyzed,  they cannot  make up their minds  to
do anything  but wait. So they wait, and one day the Gorgon  devours
them. But I should  like to convince  you that the spell can be broken,
that there is only an illusion  of impotence,  that strength  of heart,
intelligence,  and  courage  are  enough  to  stop  fate  and  sometimes
reverse  it. One has merely  to will this, not blindly,  but with a rm
and reasoned will.
People  are too readily  resigned to fatality.  They are too ready to
believe  that, after all, nothin g but bloodshed  makes  history  progress
and  that  the  stronger  always  progresses  at  the  expense  of  the
weaker.  Such fatality  exists perhaps.  But man’s  task is not to accept
it or to bow to its laws. If he had accepted  it in the earliest  ages, we
should  still be living in prehistoric  times.  The task of men of culture
and faith, in any case, is not to desert  historical  struggles  nor to
serve the cruel and inhuman  elements  in those struggles.  It is rather
to remain  what they are, to help man against  what is oppressing
him, to favor freedom against the fatalities that close in upon it.

That  is  the  condition  under  which  history  really  progresses,
innovates—in  a word,  creates.  In everything  else it repeats  itself,
like a bleeding  mouth  that merely  vomits  forth a wild stammering.
Today  we  are  at  the  stage  of  stammering,  and  yet  the  broadest
perspectives  are opening  up for our century.  We are at the stage of a
duel with daggers, or almost,  while the world  is progressing  at the
speed of supersonic  planes.  The same day that our newspapers  print
the dreadful  story of our provincial  squabbles,  they announce  the
European  atomic pool. Tomorrow,  if only Europe  can come to an
internal  agreem ent, oods  of riches  will cover  the continent  and,
overowing  even to us, will make our problems  out of date and our
hatreds null and void.
For  that  still  unimaginable  but  not  so  distant  future  we  must
organize  and stand together.  The absurd  and heart-breaking  aspect
of the tragedy  we are living through  comes  out in the fact that, in
order  someday  to  reach  those  world-wide  perspectives,  we  must
now  gather  together  in  paltry  fashion  to  beg  merely,  without
making  any other claims  yet, that on a single  spot of the globe a
handful  of innocent  victims  be spared.  But since that is our task,
however  obscure  and  ungrateful  it  may  be,  we  must  tackle  it
decisively  in order to deserve  living someday  as free men—in  other
words, as men who refuse either to practice or to suer terror.

ALGERIA 1958
(For the sake of those who still ask me what
future  can be expected  for Algeria,  I have
attempted,  in  the  shortest  possible  space
and  staying  as  close  as  possible  to  the
Algerian  reality,  to  draw  up  a  brief
statement.)
F THE  Arab demand s, as they are expressed  today,  were altogether
I legitimate,  it is probable  that Algeria  would  now be autonomous,
with  the  approval  of  French  opinion.  If  that  opinion  nonetheless
accepts  war  and,  even  among  Communists  or  Communist
sympathizers,  is limited  to platonic  protests,  this is because,  among
other reasons,  the Arab demands  are equivocal.  That ambiguity,  and
the  confused  reactions  it  arouses  among  our  governments  and
throughout  the  country,  explains  the  ambiguity  of  the  French
reaction,  the omissions  and the uncertainties  the French  use as an
excuse.  The  rst  thing  to  do  is  to  bring  some  clarity  to  those
demands  in order to try to frame  clearly  the reply that should  be
made.
A. What is legitimate in the Arab demands.
They are right, and every Frenchman  knows  this, to point out and
reject:
1) Colonialism and its abuses, which are man-made.
2)  The  perenn ial  lie  of  constantly  proposed  but  never  realized
assimilation,  a lie that has compromised  every evolution  since the
establishment  of  colonialism.  The  faked  elections  of  1948  in
particular  both illustrated  the lie and utterly  discouraged  the Arab
people.  Until that date the Arabs all wanted  to be French.  After that
date a large part of them no longer wanted to be.

3)  The  obviou s  injustice  of  the  agrarian  allocation  and  of  the
distribution  of  income  (sub-proletariat)—injustices  that  are,
moreover,  being  irreparably  aggravated  by  a  rapid  increase  in
population.
4)  The  psychological  suering:  the  often  scornful  or  ohand
manner  of  many  French,  and  the  development  among  the  Arabs
(through  a series of stupid  measures)  of the complex  of humiliation
that is at the center of the present drama.
The events of 1945 should  have been a warning  signal;  the pitiless
repression  of  the  area  around  Constantine,  on  the  contrary,
emphasized  the  anti-French   movement.  The  French  authorities
judged  that such repression  put an end to the rebellion.  In fact, it
gave the rebellion a starting signal.
It  is  beyond  doubt  that  the  Arab  demands  on  all  these  points,
which  in  part  summed  up  the  historic  condition  of  the  Arabs  of
Algeria  until  1948,  are  thoroughly  legitimate.  The  injustice  from
which  the  Arab  population  has  suered  is  linked  to  colonialism
itself, to its history  and its administration.  The French  central power
has never  been in a position  to make French  law dominate  in its
colonies.  It is beyond  doubt, in short,  that signal  amends  must be
made to the Algerian  people  which  will restore  to them both dignity
and justice.
B. What is illegitimate in the Arab demands.
The wish to recover  a life of dignity  and freedom,  the total loss of
condence  in  any  political  solution  guaranteed  by  France,  the
romanticism  too that is natural  to very young  insurgents  without
political  background  have combined  to lead certain  combatants  and
their general sta    to call for national  independence.  However  well
disposed  one may be toward  the Arab demands,  one has to admit
that,  as  far  as  Algeria  is  concerned,  national  independ ence  is  a
conception  springing  wholly  from  emotion.  There  has  never  yet
been  an  Algerian  nation.  The  Jews,  the  Turks,  the  Greeks,  the
Italians,  the  Berbers  would  have  just  as  much  right  to  claim  the
direction  of that virtual  nation. At present  the Arabs  do not alone

make  up  all  of  Algeria.  The  size  and  seniority  of  the  French
settlement,  in particular,  are enough  to create  a problem  that cannot
be  compared  to  anything  in  history.  The  Algerian  French  are
likewise,  and in the strongest  meaning  of the word,  natives.  It must
be added that a purely  Arab Algeria  could not achieve  the economic
independence  without  which  political  independence  is  but  a
deception.  However  inadequate  the French  eort  may be, it is so
far-reaching  that  no  country,  at  the  present  moment,  would  be
willing  to take over. For this question  and the problems  it raises,  I
1 refer the reader to Germaine Tillion’s admirable book.
2 The Arabs  can at least claim kinship,  not in a nation,  but in a
sort of Moslem  empire,  either spiritual  or temporal.  Spiritually  that
empire  exists,  its adhesive  force and doctrine  being Islam.  But there
also exists a Christian  empire,  at least as important,  which there is
no question of bringing  back as such into temporal  history.  For the
moment,  the Arab empire  does not exist except  in the writings  of
Colonel  Nasser , and it could  not come about  without  world-wide
upheavals  that would  mean the Third World  War in a short time.
The claims  for Algerian  national  independence  must be seen in part
as one of the manifestations  of this new Arab imperialism  in which
Egypt,  overesti mating  its strength,  aims to take the lead and which,
for the moment,  Russia  is using for its anti-Western  strategy.  The
Russian  strategy,  which  can  be  read  on  every  map  of  the  globe,
consists  in calling  for the  status quo  in Europe  (in other words,  the
recognition  of its own colonial system)  and in fomenting  trouble  in
the Middle East and Africa  to encircle  Europe  on the south.  The
happiness  and freedom  of the Arab populations  are of little account
in the whole  aair.  One has only to think of the slaughter  of the
Chechenzes  or of the Tartars  in the Crimea  or of the destruction  of
the Arab culture  in the once Moslem  provinces  of Daghestan.  Russia
merely  takes advantage  of such dreams  of empire  to serve her own
designs.  Those nationalistic  or, in the strictest  sense of the word,
imperialistic  claims  must  in  any  case  be  responsibl e  for  the
unacceptable  aspects  of the Arab rebellion—chiey,  the systematic
murder  of  French  civilians  and  Arab  civilians  killed  without

discrimination  and solely because  they were French  or friends  of the
French.
Consequently,  we are faced with ambiguous  demands,  which  we
can  approve  as  to  their  basic  causes  and  as  to  some  of  their
formulations,  but which  we can in no manner  accept  in certain  of
their developments.  The mistake of the French  government  from the
beginning  was  never  to  make  any  distinctions  and  consequently
never  to  speak  out  clearly,  and  this  justied  every  form  of
skepticism  and retaliation  on the part of the Arab masses.  The result
was  to  strengthen  the  extremist  and  nationalist  factions  on  both
sides.
The only chance  of getting  somewhere  with the problem,  today as
yesterday,  is  therefore  to  speak  clearly.  If  the  elements  of  the
problem are:
1) The amends  that must be made  to eight million  Arabs who
have lived until now under a particular form of oppression;
2) The right of 1,200,000  autochthonous  French  people  to exist,
and to exist in their native  land without  ever again being subjected
to the discretion of fanatical military leaders;
3) The strategic interests that condition the freedom of the West:
then the French government must make it clearly known:
1)  That  it  is  ready  to  grant  complete  justice  to  the  Arabs  of
Algeria and to liberate them from the colonial system;
2) That it will give up none of the rights of the Algerian French;
3) That it is unwilling  for such justice  to mean a prelude  to a sort
of historical death for the French  nation,  and for the West the risk of
an encircling  that would  lead to the Kadarization  of Europe  and the
isolation of America.
Hence  it is possible  to imagine  a solemn  declaration  addressed
exclusively  to  the  Arabs  and  their  representatives  (it  is  worth
noticing  that since the beginning  of hostilities  no French  chief of
state or any governor  has spoken  directly  to the Arab population)
proclaiming:
1) That the era of colonialism  is over, and that France  (without
blaming  herself  any more than other nations  that grew up at the

same  time)  admits  her  past  and  present  mistakes  and  declares
herself ready to make amends;
2) That she refuses, however,  to yield to violence,  especially  the
forms it assumes  at present  in Algeria;  that she refuses,  in particular,
to serve the dream  of the Arab empire  at her own expense,  at the
expense  of the European  population  of Algeria,  and, nally,  at the
expense of the peace of the world;
3)  That  she  therefore  proposes  a  regime  of  free  association  in
3 which  every Arab, on the basis of the Lauriol  plan,  will truly nd
the privileges of a free citizen.
Of  course,  the  diculties  begin  here.  But  they  may  never  be
solved  if  this  preliminary  declaration  is  not  solemnly  made  and
directed  (as I have said) toward  the Arab population  by every means
of diusion  that a great  nation  possesses.  That declaration  would
doubtless  be heard  by the Arab masses,  who are today tired and
disoriented,  and, on the other hand, would  reassure  a large part of
the  Algerian  French  by  keeping  them  from  blindly  opposing  the
structural reforms that are indispensable.
It remains to dene the solution that might be suggested.
New Algeria
The only regime that, in the present  state of aairs,  would do justice
to  all  parts  of  the  population  has  long  seemed  to  me  to  be  a
federation  based  on  institutions  similar  to  those  of  the  Swiss
confederation,  which  make it possible  for dierent  nationalities  to
live in peace.  But I think that an even more original  system must be
devised.  Switzerland  is made up of dierent  population s living  in
dierent  territories.  Its  institutions  aim  simply  to  articulate  the
political  life of its cantons.  Algeria,  on the other hand,  oers  the
very rare example of dierent  populations  overlapping  in the same
territory.  Hence  it is essential  to associate  without  fusing  together
(since  federati on  is  to  begin  with  the  union  of  diere nces),  not
dierent  territories,  but  communities  with  dierent  personalities.
The  solution  proposed  by  M.  Marc  Lauriol,  Professor  of  Law  at
Algiers  (even  without  approving  all his  whereases ) seems  to me in

this regard particularly  adapted  to Algerian  realities  and likely  to
satisfy the need for justice and freedom felt by all the communities.
In the main, his plan combines  the advantages  of integration  and
federalism.  He proposes,  on the one hand, to respect  particularisms
and,  on  the  other,  to  associate  the  two  populations  in  the
administration  of  their  common  interest.  For  this  purpose  he
suggests  creating,  in  a  rst  stage,  two  sections  in  the  French
Parliament,  a metropolitan  section  and a Moslem  section.  The rst
would  include   those  elected  in  metropolitan  France  and  by  the
overseas  French  and  the  second  would  include  the  Moslems
adhering  to the Koran.  The rule of proportionality  would  be strictly
respected  in the election.  Thus it is probable  that, in a Parliament
made  up  of  six  hundred  Deputies,  there  would  be  about  fteen
Algerian  French  representatives  and  some  hundred  Moslems.  The
Moslem  section  would  deliberate  separately  on  all  questions
involving  Moslems  and  on  them  alone.  The  Parliame nt  in  full
session,  including  both French  and Moslems,  would  have authority
over  everythin g  concerning   the  two  communities  (for  instance,
taxation  and the budget)  or the two communities  and metropolitan
France  (for instance,  nationa l defense).  The other matters,  insofar  as
they involved  only metropolitan  France  (in civil law particularly)
would  fall under  the exclusive  authority  of the metropolitan  section.
Hence  laws involving  only the Moslems  would  be the work of the
Moslem  Deputies alone;  laws applying  to all would  be the work of
all; and laws applying  solely to the French  would  be the work of the
French  Deputie s alone.  Still in that initial  stage,  in other words,  the
government  would  be  responsible  to  each  section  or  to  the  two
together according to the nature of the questions raised.
During  a second  stage, after the trial period  necessary  to a general
reconciliation,  it would  be essential  to draw conclusions  from such
an innovation.  In fact, contrary  to all our practices,  contrary  above
all  to  the  deep-rooted  prejudices  inherited  from  the  French
Revolution,  we should  thus have sanctioned  within  the republic  two
equal but distinct  categories  of citizens.  From one point of view, this
would  mark a sort of revolut ion against  the regime  of centralization
and abstract individualism  resulting  from 1789,  which,  in so many

ways, now deserves  to be called  “ Ancien  Régime. ” M. Lauriol  is right,
in any case, to declare  that this is nothing  less than the birth of a
French  federal  structure  that  will  create  a  true  French
4 Commonwealth.  Such institutio ns must by nature  t  into a system
that could include  the countries of the Magrab  and those of black
Africa.  An Algerian  regional  Assembly  would  then express  whatever
was peculiar  to Algeria,  while  a federal  Senate,  in which  Algeria
would  be represented,  would  hold legislative  power  for everything
(army  and  foreign  aairs,  for  example)  involving  the  whole
federation  and would  elect a responsible  federal  govern ment.  It is
essential  to see that this system will not be incompatible  with the
European institutions that may come into being in the future.
This, in any case, should  be the French  proposal,  which  would
then be mainta ined permane ntly until a cease-re  is achieved. That
cease-re  is at present  made more dicult  by the uncom promising
attitude  of  the  F.L.N.  Their  uncompromising  attitude  is  in  part
spontaneous  and unrealistic  and in part inspired  and cynical.  Insofar
as it is spontaneous,  it can be understood  and an attempt  can be
made to neutralize  it by a really constructive  proposal.  Insofar  as it
is  inspired  from  the  outside,  it  is  unacceptable.  Under  foreign
prompting,  independence  can be achieved  only by a refusal  of any
kind of negotiation  and a challenge  to the worst  kind of warfare.
France  has no alternative,  in this case, but to continue  maintaining
the  proposal  of  which  I  have  spoken,  to  get  it  approved  by
international  opinion  and by ever larger  segments  of Arab opinion,
and to try to get it gradually accepted.
It  is  possible  to  imagine  something  like  this  for  the  immediate
future.  This solution  is not utopian  as far as Algerian  realities  are
concerned.  It is made uncertain  only by the state of French  political
society. It presupposes in fact:
1)  A  collective  will  in  metropolitan  France,  and  particularly
acceptance  of a policy  of austerity  that would  have to be borne  by
the  rich  (the  wage-earner s  already  bear  all  the  brunt  of  a
scandalously unjust system of taxation);

2) A governme nt that will reform the Constitution  (which,  by the
way, has been approved  by only a minority  of the French)  and that
is willing or able to inaugurate  the long, ambitious,  and tenacious
policy leading to a French federation.
These  two conditions  may make an objective  observer  skeptical.
Yet the appearance  in France and Algeria  of new and considerable
forces,  in men and material  resources,  justies  hope of a rebirth.  As
a result, such a solution  as the one just outlined  has a chance  of
winning  out. If not, Algeria  will be lost and the consequences  will be
dreadful  for the Arabs  and for the French.  This is the last warning
that a writer  who for twenty  years has been devoted  to the service
of Algeria feels he can voice before resuming his silence.
1   Algeria: The Realities  (New York: Alfred A. Knopf; 1958).
2  The Syrian  “nation ,” the moment  it got out from under  the French  protector ate, melted
away, like sugar in water, in Nasser’s Arab Republic.
3  See p. 149.
4   Le Fédéralisme et l’Algérie  (La Fédération, 9, rue Auber, Paris).

Hungary

KADAR HAD HIS DAY OF FEAR
The  Hungarian   Minister  of  State  Marosan,
whose  name  sounds  like  a  program,
declared  a few days ago that there would  be
no  further  counter-revolution  in  Hungary.
For once, one of Kadar’s  Ministers  has told
the  truth.  How  could  there  be  a  counter-
revolution  since  it  has  already  seized
power?  There  can be no other revolution  in
Hungary.
AM  not one of those who long for the Hungarian  people  to take up
I arms again in an uprising  doomed to be crushed  under  the eyes
of  an  international  society  that  will  spare  neither  applause  nor
virtuous  tears  before  returning  to  their  slippers  like  football
enthusiasts  on Saturday  evening after a big game.  There are already
too many dead in the stadium,  and we can be generous  only with
our own blood.  Hungarian  blood  has proved  to be so valuable  to
Europe and to freedom that we must try to spare every drop of it.
But  I  am  not  one  to  think  there  can  be  even  a  resigned  or
provisional  compromise  with a reign of terror that has as much right
to be called socialist  as the executioners  of the Inquisition  had to be
called  Christian s. And, on this anniversary  of liberty,  I hope with all
my strength  that the mute resistance  of the Hungarian  people  will
continue,  grow stronger,  and, echoed  by all the voices  we can give
it, get unanimous  international  opinion  to boycott  its oppressors.
And  if  that  opinion  is  too  abby  or  selsh  to  do  justice  to  a
martyred  people, if our voices also are too weak,  I hope that the
Hungarian  resistance  will continue  until the counter-rev olutionary
state collapses  everywhere  in the East under  the weight  of its lies
and its contradictions.

The Bloody and Monotonous Rites
For it is indeed  a counter-revolutionary  state. What else can we call
a  regime  that  forces  the  father  to  inform  on  his  son,  the  son  to
demand  the supreme  punish ment for his father,  the wife to bear
witness  against  her husband—that  has raised  denunciation  to the
level  of  a  virtue?  Foreign  tanks,  police,  twenty-year-old  girls
hanged,  committees  of workers  decapitated  and gagged,  scaolds,
writers  deported  and imprisoned,  the lying press, camps,  censorship,
judges  arrested,  criminals  legislating,  and the scaold  again—is  this
socialism, the great celebration of liberty and justice?
No, we have known,  we still know this kind of thing;  these are the
bloody  and monotonous  rites of the totalitarian  religion!  Hungarian
socialism  is in prison  or in exile today.  In the palaces  of the State,
armed  to the  teeth, slink the petty tyrants  of absolutism,  terried  by
the very word “liberty,”  maddened  by the word “truth”!  The proof is
that today, the 15th of March, a day of invincible  truth and liberty
for all Hungarians, was for Kadar simply a long day of fear.
For  many  years,  however,  those  tyrants,  aided  in  the  West  by
accomplices  who were not obliged  by anything  or anyone  to show
such zeal, cloaked  their true actions  in a heavy  smoke  screen.  When
something  could be seen through  the screen,  they or their Western
interpreters  explained  to us that everything  would  be all right in ten
generations  or so, that meanwhile  everyone  was joyfully  heading
toward  the  future,  that  the  deported  had  made  the  mistake  of
getting  in the way of trac    on the magnicent  road of progress,
that the executed  agreed  completely  as to their own suppression,
that the intellectuals  declared  themselves  delighted  with their pretty
gag  because  it  was  dialectical,  and  that  the  proletariat  were
charmed  with their own work because,  if they worked  overtime  for
wretched wages, this was in the proper direction of history.
Alas,  the  people  themselves   spoke  up!  They  began  to  talk  in
Berlin,  in Czechoslovakia,  in Poznan,  and eventually  in Budapest.
All  at  once,  everywhere,  intellectuals  tore  o   their  gags.  And
together,  with a single  voice, they said that instead  of progress  there
was regression,  that the killings  had been useless,  the deportations

useless,  the enslavements  useless,  and that henceforth,  to be sure of
making real progress, truth and liberty had to be granted to all.
Thus, with the rst  shout of insurrection  in free  Budapest,  learned
and  shortsighted  philosophies,  miles  of  false  reasonings  and
deceptively  beautiful  doctrines  were  scattered  like  dust.  And  the
truth, the naked truth, so long outraged,  burst upon the eyes of the
world.
Contemptuous  teachers,  unaware  that they were thereby  insulting
the working  classes,  had assured us that the masses  could readily  get
along without  liberty  if only they were given bread.  And the masses
themselves  suddenly  replied  that they didn’t  have bread  but that,
even if they did, they would  still like something  else. For it was not
a learned professor  but a Budapest blacksmith  who wrote: “I want to
be considered  an adult eager to think and capable  of thought.  I want
to be able to express  my thoughts  without  having  anything to fear
and I want, also, to be listened to.”
As for the intellectuals  who had been told and shouted  at that
there was no truth other than the one that served  the cause,  this is
the oath they took at the grave  of their comrades  assassinated  by
that cause:  “Never  again,  not even under  threat  and torture,  nor
under  a misunderstood  love of the cause,  will anything  but the truth
issue from our mouths.” (Tibor Meray at the grave of Rajk.)
The Scaold Does Not Become Any More Liberal
After that, the case is closed.  The slaughtered  people  are our people.
What Spain was for us twenty years ago Hungary  will be today.  The
subtle  distinctions,  the verbal  tricks,  and the clever  considerations
with which  people  still try to cloak the truth do not interest  us. The
competition  we  are  told  about  betwee n  Rakosi  and  Kadar  is
unimportant.  The two are of the same stamp.  They dier   only by the
number  of  heads  to  their  credit,  and  if  Rakosi’s  total  is  more
impressive, this will not be so for long.
In any event,  whether  the bald killer or the persecuted  persecutor
rules over Hungary  makes  no dierence  as to the freedom  of that
country.  I regret  having  to play the role of Cassandra  once more and

having  to  disappoint  the  fresh  hopes  of  certain  ever  hopeful
colleagues,  but  there  is  no  possible  evolution  in  a  totalitarian
society.  Terror  does not evolve  except  toward  a worse  terror,  the
scaold  does  not  become  any  more  liberal,  the  gallows  are  not
tolerant.  Nowhere  in the world has there been a party or a man with
absolute power who did not use it absolutely.
The rst  thing to dene  totalitarian  society,  whether  of the Right
or of the Left, is the single  party, and the single  party has no reason
to destroy  itself. This is why the only society  capable  of evolution
and liberalization,  the only one that deserves  both our critical  and
our active  support  is the society that involves  a plurality  of parties
as a part of its structure.  It alone allows  one to denounce,  hence  to
correct,  injustice and crime.  It alone today allows  one to denounce
torture,  disgraceful  torture,  as  contemptible  in  Algiers  as  in
Budapest.
What Budapest was Defending
The idea, still voiced  among  us, that a party,  because  it calls itself
proletarian,  can enjoy special  privileges  in regard  to history  is an
idea of intellectuals  tired of their advantages  and of their freedom.
History does not confer privileges: it lets them be snatched away.
And it is not the function  of intellectuals  or of workers  to glorify
even  slightly  the  right  of  the  stronger  and  the  fait  accompli.   The
truth is that no one, neither  individual  nor party,  has a right to
absolute  power  or  to  lasting  privileges  in  a  history  that  is  itself
changing.  And no privilege,  no supreme  reason  can justify  torture  or
terror.
On  this  point  Budapest  again  showed  us  the  way.  Hungary
conquered  and  in  chains  (which  our  false  realists  compare  with
commiseration  to Poland),  still on the edge of equilibrium,  has done
more for freedom and justice  than any people  in twenty  years.  But,
for that lesson to reach and convince  those in the West who close
their eyes and ears, the Hungarian  people  (and we shall never  be
consoled  for this) had to shed their own blood,  and it is already
drying up in people’s memories.

At least we shall try to be faithful to Hungary  as we have been to
Spain.  In Europe’s present  solitude,  we have but one way of being so
—which  is never to betray,  at home or abroad,  that for which  the
Hungarian  combatants  died and never to justify  even indirectly,  at
home or abroad, what killed them.
The untiring insistence  upon freedom  and truth, the community  of
the worker and the intellectual  (who are still stupidly  warring  here,
as  tyranny  aims  to  keep  them  doing),  and,  nally,  political
democracy  as  a  necessary  and  indispensable  (though  surely  not
sucient)  condition of economic  democracy—this  is what Budapest
was  defending.  And  in  doing  so,  the  great  city  in  insurrection
reminded  Western  Europe  of  its  forgotten  truth  and  greatness.  It
made short work of that odd feeling  of inferiority  that debilitates
most of our intellectuals but that I, for one, refuse to feel.
Reply to Shepilov
The defects  of the West are innumerable,  its crimes  and errors  very
real. But in the end, let’s not forget  that we are the only ones to
have the possibility  of improvement  and emancipation  that lies in
free genius.  Let’s not forget that when  totalitarian  society,  by its
very principles , forces  the friend  to denounce  his friend,  Western
society,  despite  its  wanderings  from  the  path  of  virtue,  always
produces  a race of men who uphold  honor  in life—I  mean men who
stretch  out  their  hands  even  to  their  enemy  to  save  him  from
suering or death.
When  Minister  Shepilov  on his return  from Paris dares to write
that “Western  art is bound  to tear the human  soul apart and to form
butchers  of every sort,” it is time to reply to him that at least our
writers  and artists  have never  butchered  anyone  and that yet they
are generous  enough  not to blame the theory  of socialist  realism  for
the massacres ordered by Shepilov and those who resemble him.
The truth is that there is room for everything  among  us, even for
evil, and even for Shepilov’s  writers.  There  is room also for honor,
for the freedom  to desire,  for the adventure  of the mind. Whereas
there  is  room  for  nothing  in  Stalinist  culture  except  for  edifying

sermons,  colorless  life, and the catechism  of propaganda.  To any
who still had any doubts  about this, the Hungarian  writers  have just
shouted  the truth before  choosing  permanent  silence  today  when
they are ordered to lie.
It will be hard for us to be worthy  of so many sacrices.  But we
must  try  to  do  so  in  a  Europe  at  last  united,  by  forgetting  our
quarrels,  by  getting  rid  of  our  own  errors,  by  multiplying  our
creations  and our solidarity.  And to those who wanted  to humble  us
and persuade us that history  could justify  a reign of terror,  we shall
reply  by  our  real  faith  that  we  share,  as  we  now  know,  with
Hungarian  writers,  Polish  writers,  and even, indeed,  with Russian
writers, who are also gagged.
Our faith is that throughout  the world,  beside  the impulse  toward
coercion  and  death  that  is  darkening  history,  there  is  a  growing
impulse  toward  persuasion  and life, a vast emancipatory  movement
called culture that is made up both of free creation and of free work.
Our daily task, our long vocation  is to add to that culture  by our
labors  and not to subtract,  even temporarily,  anything  from it. But
our proudest  duty is to defend personally  to the very end, against
the impulse  toward  coercion  and death,  the freedom  of that culture
—in other words, the freedom of work and of creation.
The Hungarian  workers  and intellectuals,  beside  whom  we stand
today  with  so  much  impotent  grief,  realized  that  and  made  us
realize  it. This is why, if their suering  is ours, their hope belongs  to
us  too.  Despite  their  destitution,  their  exile,  their  chains,  it  took
them but a single day to transmit to us the royal legacy  of liberty.
May we be worthy of it!
F RANC -T IREUR ,  18 March 1957

SOCIALISM OF THE GALLOWS
( INTERVIEW )
1) Do you think that it is still possible  to
link the cause of truth with a Party,  a State,
or any organiz ation whateve r and to have
complete  condence  in it as if it could not
possibly  fail in its mission?  Do you think it
is still possible,  in good faith, to speak of a
“camp  of  peace”?  Don’t  you  think  rather
that  such  an  attitude  stands  now  for  the
most  serious  form  of  “alienation”  of
conscience?
F  ABSOLUTE  truth belongs  to anyone  in this world,  it certainly  does
I not belong to the man or party that claims  to possess  it. When
historical  truth is involved,  the more anyone  claims  to possess  it the
more he lies. In the nal  analysis, he becomes  the murderer  of truth.
The  Hungarian  uprising  was  originally  directed  against  a
generalized  lie. Hence  it was necessary  to assassinate  the men who
were  ghting  the  lie  and  then  try  to  dishonor  them  through  a
reversed lie by calling them Fascists.
As for the “camp  of peace,”  it is better  to ask the questio n of the
former  “partisans  of  peace”  who  mobilized  at  the  time  of  the
Stockholm  appeal to outlaw  atomic  weapons  and who now have to
reconcile  this  with  Bulganin’s  ultimatum  threatening  England,
France,  and incidentally  Israel, with atomic  rockets.  It is better  to
ask them the question,  because apparently  they are not asking it of
themselves.
The truth is that no nation  has a monopoly  on peace.  Not even, as
we now know,  the “neutral”  nations  of the Orient.  The way in which
1 they—the  Arab  countries  (except  Tunisia),   and  especiall y  India
(yes,  the  India  of  Gandhi)—betrayed  Hungary  and  their  own

principles  puts them hencefo rth on the same footing  with the other
nations.  The nations  of the Bandung  group  could have helped  save a
great  Europea n  nation  from  slavery  and  death.  This  would  have
amounted  to admitting  and partially  rewarding  the eorts   of all free
Europeans  who freely argued  the cause of the colonized  peoples.  But
the Bandung  group  rapidly  became  realistic.  Apparently  it is easy to
become  an adult in history.  Consequently,  those new nations  must
henceforth  be judged  as adults, on the basis of their deeds,  without
any  special  indulgence.  And  their  attitude  toward  the  Hungarian
massacre  is inexcusable.  Most likely the future  will show that such a
self-centered  sidestepping  of the issue will not  pay o.   The moral
advantage  those nations  derived  from the fact that they had been
oppressed in the recent past was wasted by them in a few days.
Hence  we shall say that some nations  are merely  more bellicose
than others. It seems,  if I can believe  the progressive  newspapers
(which  previously  thought  or said the opposite),  that America  has
been  less  bellicose  than  Russia  of  late.  But  there  is  no  need  for
anyone  to show us that socialism can, quite as well as capitalism,
foment  wars.  All  it  takes  is  a  little  will  to  power,  and  there  is
scarcely  any nation  without  that (except  for those which have no
army,  and even then you can’t be sure).  This wasn’t  known  before
simply  becaus e  there  was  no  socialist  state.  Now  we  know.
Alienation  is in any case too noble a word to describe  the attitude  of
those  who  insist  on  seeing  nothing  but  doves  in  the  East  and
vultures  in  the  West.  Blindness,  frenzy  of  the  slave,  or  nihilistic
admiration of force seems to me a more exact term.
Truth Is Relative
2) Do you think that, despite  the
situation,  we  can  continue  to
attribute  more  weight  to
considerations  of  political
expediency  than  to  the  impulse
that makes us see the factual  truth

rst  of  all?  In  this  case  what  in
your  opinion  is  the  criterion  of
such expediency?
Expediencies  must  be  examined  to  see  the  dose  of  truth  they
contain,  the lesson  to be drawn  from them in order to correct what
had  previously  been  thought  right.  But  they  cannot  be  given  an
advantage  over the pursuit  of factual  truths.  Above  all, we cannot
grant  expedien cy  any  precedence  over  regard  for  truth,  as  the
Communists  do and the Leftist  intellectuals  who follow them,  for
such systemati c relativism  leads to the death of intelligence  and the
oppression  of the worker.  A press or a book is not true because  it is
revolutionary.  It has a chance  of being revolutionary  only if it tries
to tell the truth.  We have a right to think that truth with a capital
letter is relative.  But facts are facts. And whoever  says that the sky is
blue when it is gray is prostituting  words  and preparing  the way for
tyranny.
Expediency  for  a  Communist  newspaper  perhaps  amounts  to
saying  that the whole  population  of Hungary  is fascist  except  Kadar,
his policemen,  and his executioners.  But the factual  truth is that we
have  seen  a  revolt  of  workers,  intellectuals,  and  peasants  who
wanted  national  independence  and  personal  freedom.  The  real
fascism,  to speak  clearly,  is the fascism  of Kadar  and Khrushchev,
who  methodic ally  crushed  a  popular  revolt,  and  of  the  Russian
government, which permitted it.
I confess that I don’t unders tand either  the sense of expediency
that  urged  some  of  our  militant  progressives,  after  they  had
denounced  the  Soviet  intervention  in  Hungary,  to  recommend  in
their congress  a unied  action  with the French  Communists,  who
continually  insult  the insurgents.  Their recommendation  came at a
time when Hungarians  were still being hanged  (just yesterday  a girl
of twenty) and at the very moment  when  a representa tive of the
French  Communist  party  declared  that,  under  the  same
circumstances,  he  would  be  willing  for  the  U.S.S.R.  to  inict  on

France  the  same  treatment  it  is  giving  Hungary.  Such
obsequiousness  eventually  becomes  overwhelming.  Can  it  be  that
the  Communis ts  and  progressive  militants  feel  such  love  for  the
Russians  they have never seen? No, but they feel such a loathing  for
a part of the French, the part that loathed  them enough  to be willing
to serve the cause of Hitler.  If France  is to disappear,  rest assured
that she will die poisoned by these two hatreds.
The Intellectual Must Take Sides
3) If the contrary is true, what can
the intellectual  do today?  Does he
have  a  duty,  in  each  and  every
circumstance,  to express  his feeling
and  opinion  publicly  and  to
anyone  at all? Or else, because  of
the  seriousness  of  events  and  the
lack  of  valid  political  forces,  do
you feel that one can do no better
than to carry on one’s own work as
well as one can?
It is better  for the intellectua l not to talk all the time. To begin with,
it  would  exhaust  him,  and,  above  all,  it  would  keep  him  from
thinking.  He must create  if he can, rst  and foremost,  especially  if
his  creation  does  not  sidestep  the  problems  of  his  time.  But  in
certain  exceptional  circumstances  (Spanish  war,  Hitlerian
persecutions  and  concentration  camps,  Stalinist  trials  and
concentration  camps,  Hungarian  war) he must leave no room for
doubt  as to the side he takes;  he must be very careful  not to let his
choice  be clouded  by wily distinctions  or discreet  balancing  tricks,
and to leave no question  as to his personal  determination  to defend
liberty.  Groupings  of  intellectuals  can,  in  certain  cases,  and
particularly  when  the  liberty  of  the  masses  and  of  the  spirit  is

mortally  threatened,  constitute  a strength  and exert an inuence;
Hungarian  intellectuals  have just proved  this. However,  it should  be
pointed  out for our own guidance  in the West that the continual
signing  of  manifestoes  and  protests  is  one  of  the  surest  ways  of
undermining  the ecacy  and dignity  of the intellectual.  There exists
a permanent  blackmail  that we all know and that we must have the
often solitary courage to resist.
Conformity Is on the Left
Subject  to these reservations , we must hope for a common  rallying.
But  rst  our  Leftist  intellectuals,  who  have  swallowed  so  many
insults  and may well have to begin doing  so again,  would  have to
undertake  a critique  of the reasonings  and ideologies  to which  they
have hitherto  subscribed,  which have wreaked  the havoc  they have
seen in our most recent  history.  That will be the hardest  thing.  We
must admit that today  conformity  is  on the Left. To be sure, the
Right  is  not  brilliant.  But  the  Left  is  in  complete  decadence,  a
prisoner  of words,  caught  in its own vocabulary,  capable  merely  of
stereotyped  replies,  constantly  at a loss when faced with the truth,
from which  it nevertheless  claimed  to derive  its laws. The Left is
schizophrenic  and  needs  doctoring  through  pitiless  self-criticism,
exercise  of the heart,  close reasoning,  and a little modesty.  Until
such an eort   at re-examinat ion is well under  way, any rallying  will
be useless and even harmful . Meanwhile,  the intellectual ’s role will
be to say that the king is naked when  he is, and not to go into
raptures over his imaginary trappings.
In order to strike a constructive  note, however,  I shall propose  as
one  of  the  preliminaries  to  any  future  gathering  the  unqualied
acceptance  of  the  followin g  principle:  none  of  the  evils  that
totalitarianism  (dened  by the single  party and the suppression  of
all opposition) claims to remedy is worse than totalitariansim itself.
In conclusion,  I believe  (as people  say: I believe  in God, creator  of
heaven  and earth)  that the indispensable  conditions  for intellectual
creation  and historical  justice  are liberty  and the free confronting  of
dierences.  Without  freedom,  no art; art lives only on the restraints

it imposes on itself, and dies of all others.  But without  freedom,  no
socialism either, except the socialism of the gallows.
D EMAIN , 21–27  February 1957
1  As for Algeria,  so far as I know only the M.N.A.  of Messali  Hadj protested  the Soviet
intervention  in Hungary  without  relinquishing  any of its own protests.  I was not aware
of any protest on the part of the F.L.N

Reections on the Guillotine

(From  the  book  Réexions  sur  la  peine
Capitale,   a  symposium  by  Arthur  Koestler
and Albert  Camus,  publishe d by Calmann-
Lévy in 1957)
HORTLY   before  the  war  of  1914,  an  assassin  whose  crime  was
S particularly  repulsive  (he had slaughtered  a family  of farmers,
including  the children)  was condemned  to death in Algiers.  He was
a farm worker  who had killed  in a sort of bloodthirsty  frenzy  but
had aggravated  his case by robbing  his victims.  The aai  r created  a
great stir. It was generally  thought  that decapitation  was too mild a
punishment  for such a monster.  This was the opinion,  I have been
told, of my father,  who was especially  aroused  by the murder  of the
children.  One of the few things  I know about  him, in any case, is
that he wanted  to witness  the execution,  for the rst  time in his life.
He got up in the dark to go to the place of execution  at the other
end  of  town  amid  a  great  crowd  of  people.  What  he  saw  that
morning  he never  told anyone.  My mother  relates  merely  that he
came rushing  home,  his face distorted,  refused  to talk, lay down for
a moment on the bed, and suddenly  began  to vomit.  He had just
discovered  the reality  hidden  under  the noble phrases  with which  it
was  masked.  Instead  of  thinking  of  the  slaughtered  children,  he
could think of nothing  but that quivering  body that had just been
dropped onto a board to have its head cut o.
Presumably  that  ritual  act  is  horrible  indeed  if  it  manages  to
overcome  the indignation  of a simple,  straightforward  man and if a
punishment  he considered  richly deserved  had no other eect   in the
end than to nauseate  him. When  the extreme  penalty  simply  causes
vomiting  on  the  part  of  the  respectable  citizen  it  is  supposed  to
protect,  how can anyone  maintain that it is likely,  as it ought to be,
to bring more peace  and order into the community?  Rather,  it is
obviously  no less repulsive  than the crime,  and this new murder,  far
from making  amends  for the harm done to the social  body, adds a
new blot to the rst  one. Indeed,  no one dares speak directly of the
ceremony.  Ocials  and journalists  who have to talk about it, as if

they were aware  of both its provocative  and its shameful  aspects,
have  made  up  a  sort  of  ritual  language,  reduced  to  stereotyped
phrases.  Hence  we  read  at  breakfast  time  in  a  corner  of  the
newspaper  that the condemned  “has paid his debt to society” or that
he has “atoned”  or that “at ve  a.m. justice  was done.”  The ocials
call the condemned  man “the interested  party”  or “the patient”  or
refer to him by a number.  People write of capital  punishment  as if
they were whispering.  In our well-policed  society  we recognize  that
an illness is serious  from the fact that we don’t dare speak  of it
directly.  For a long time, in middle-class  families  people  said no
more than that the elder daughter  had a “suspicious  cough” or that
the  father  had  a  “growth”  because  tuberculosis  and  cancer  were
looked  upon as somewhat  shameful  maladies.  This is probably  even
truer of capital  punishment  since everyone  strives  to refer to it only
through  euphemisms.  It is to the body politic  what cancer  is to the
individual  body, with this dierence:  no one  has ever spoken  of the
necessity  of cancer.  There is no hesitation,  on the other hand, about
presenting  capital  punishment  as a regrettable  necessity,  a necessity
that justies  killing  because  it is necessary,  and let’s not talk about
it because it is regrettable.
But it is my intention  to talk about  it crudely.  Not because I like
scandal,  nor, I believe,  because of an unhealthy  streak  in my nature.
As a writer,  I have always  loathed  avoiding  the issue; as a man, I
believe  that  the  repulsive  aspects  of  our  condition,  if  they  are
inevitable,  must  merely  be  faced  in  silence.  But  when  silence  or
tricks of language  contribute  to maintaining  an abuse  that must be
reformed  or a suering  that can be relieved,  then there is no other
solution  but to speak out and show the obscenity  hidden  under  the
verbal  cloak.  France  shares  with England  and Spain  the honor  of
being one of the last countri es this side of the iron curtain  to keep
capital  punishment  in its arsenal  of repression.  The survival  of such
a  primitive  rite  has  been  made  possible  among  us  only  by  the
thoughtlessness  or ignorance  of the public,  which  reacts only with
the  ceremonia l  phrases  that  have  been  drilled  into  it.  When  the
imagination  sleeps,  words  are  emptied  of  their  meaning:  a  deaf
population  absent-mindedly  registers  the condemnation  of a man.

But if people  are shown  the machine,  made to touch the wood and
steel  and  to  hear  the  sound  of  a  head  falling,  then  public
imagination,  suddenly  awakened,  will  repudiate  both  the
vocabulary and the penalty.
When  the  Nazis  in  Poland   indulged  in  public  executions  of
hostages,  to keep those hostages from shouting  words  of revolt  and
liberty  they muzzled  them with a  plaster-coated  gag. It would be
shocking  to compare  the fate of those innocent  victims  with that of
condemned  criminals.  But, aside from the fact that criminals  are not
the only ones to be guillotined  in our country,  the method  is the
same.  We smother  under  padded  words  a penalty  whose  legitimacy
we could assert  only after we had examined  the penalty  in reality.
Instead  of saying  that the death penalty  is rst  of all necessary  and
then adding that it is better  not to talk about it, it is essential to say
what it really  is and then say whether,  being what it is, it is to be
considered as necessary.
So  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  consider  it  not  only  useless  but
denitely  harmful, and I must record  my opinion  here before getting
to the subject  itself. It would  not be fair to imply that I reached  this
conclusion  as a result  of the weeks  of investigation  and research  I
have just devoted to this question.  But it would  be just as unfair  to
attribute  my  conviction  to  mere  mawkishness.  I  am  far  from
indulging  in  the  abby  pity  characteristic  of  humanitarians,  in
which  values  and responsibilities  fuse, crimes  are balanced  against
one another,  and innocence  nally  loses its rights.  Unlike many of
my well-known  contemporaries,  I do not think that man is by nature
a  social  animal.  To  tell  the  truth,  I  think  just  the  reverse.  But  I
believe,  and this is quite dierent,  that he cannot  live henceforth
outside  of society,  whose  laws are necessary  to his physical survival.
Hence  the  responsibilities  must  be  established  by  society  itself
according  to a reasonable  and workable  scale.  But the law’s nal
justication  is in the good it does or fails to do to the society  of a
given place and time. For years I have been unable  to see anything
in  capital  punishment  but  a  penalty  the  imagination  could  not
endure  and a lazy disorder  that my reason  condemned.  Yet I was
ready  to think that my imagination  was inuencing  my judgment.

But, to tell the truth, I found during  my recent  research  nothing  that
did  not  strengthen  my  conviction,  nothing  that  modied  my
arguments.  On the contrary,  to the arguments  I already  had others
were  added.  Today  I  share  absolutely  Koestler’s  conviction:  the
death  penalty  besmirches  our  society,  and  its  upholders  cannot
reasonably  defend  it.  Without  repeating  his  decisive  defense,
without  piling  up facts and gures that would  only duplicate  others
(and Jean Bloch-Michel’s  make them useless),  I shall merely  state
reasons  to  be  added  to  Koestler’s;  like  his,  they  argue  for  an
immediate abolition of the death penalty.
We all know that the great argument  of those who defend capital
punishment  is the exemplary  value of the punishment.  Heads  are cut
o   not only to punish  but to intimidate,  by a frightenin g example,
any  who  might  be  tempted  to  imitate  the  guilty.  Society  is  not
taking  revenge;  it merely  wants  to forestall.  It waves  the head in the
air so that potential murderers will see their fate and recoil from it.
This  argument  would  be  impressive  if  we  were  not  obliged  to
note:
1) that society  itself does not believe  in the exemplary  value it
talks about;
2) that there is no proof that the death penalty  ever made a single
murderer  recoil when he had made up his mind,  wherea s clearly  it
had no eect but one of fascination on thousands of criminals;
3) that, in other regards,  it constitutes  a repulsive  example,  the
consequences of which cannot be foreseen.
To begin with, society  does not believe  in what it says. If it really
believed  what it says, it would exhibit  the heads.  Society  would  give
executions  the benet  of the publicity  it generally  uses for national
bond issues or new brands  of drinks.  But we know that executions  in
our country,  instead  of taking place publicly,  are now perpetrated  in
prison  courtyards  before  a limited  number  of specialists.  We are less
likely  to  know  why  and  since  when.  This  is  a  relatively  recent
measure.  The  last  public  execution,  which  took  place  in  1939,
beheaded  Weidmann,  the  author  of  several  murders,  who  was

notorious  for his crimes.  That morning  a large crowd  gathered  at
Versailles,  including  a large number  of photographers.  Between  the
moment  when Weidmann  was shown  to the crowd  and the moment
when he was decapitated,  photographs  could be taken.  A few hours
later  Paris-Soir  published a page of illustrations  of that appetizing
event.  Thus  the  good  people  of  Paris  could  see  that  the  light
precision  instrument  used by the executioner  was as dierent  from
the historical  scaold  as a Jaguar  is from one of our old Pierce-
Arrows.  The  administration  and  the  government,  contrary  to  all
hope, took such excellent  publicity  very badly and protested  that the
press  had  tried  to  satisfy  the  sadistic  instincts  of  its  readers.
Consequently,  it was decided  that executions  would  no  longer  take
place publicly,  an arrangeme nt that, soon after, facilitated  the work
of the occupat ion authoritie s. Logic,  in that aair,  was not on the
side of the lawmaker.
On the contrary,  a special  decoration  should  have been awarded  to
the editor  of  Paris-Soir , thereby  encouraging  him to do better  the
next time. If the penalty  is intended  to be exemplary,  then, not only
should  the photographs  be multiplied,  but the machine  should  even
be set on a platform  in Place de la Concorde  at two p.m., the entire
population  should be invited,  and the ceremony  should  be put on
television  for those who couldn’t  attend.  Either  this must be done or
else there must be no more talk of exemplary  value.  How can a
furtive  assassin ation committed  at night in a prison  courtyard  be
exemplary?  At most, it serves the purpose  of periodically  informing
the citizens that they will die if they happen  to kill—a  future  that
can be promise d even to those who do not kill. For the penalty  to be
truly  exemplary  it  must  be  frightening.  Tuaut  de  La  Bouverie,
representative  of  the  people  in  1791  and  a  partisan  of  public
executions,  was  more  logical  when  he  declared  to  the  National
Assembly:  “It  takes  a  terrifying  spectacle  to  hold  the  people  in
check.”
Today  there is no spectacle,  but only a penalty  known  to all by
hearsay  and, from time to time, the news of an execution  dressed  up

in soothing  phrases.  How could a future  criminal  keep in mind,  at
the moment  of his crime,  a sanction  that everyone  strives  to make
more  and  more  abstract?  And  if  it  is  really  desired  that  he
constantly  keep that sanction  in mind so that it will rst  balance
and later reverse a frenzied  decision,  should  there not be an eort   to
engrave  that sanction  and its dreadful  reality  in the sensitivity  of all
by every visual and verbal means?
Instead  of vaguely  evoking  a debt that someone  this very morning
paid society,  would  it not be a more eective  example  to remind
each taxpayer  in detail of what he may expect?  Instead  of saying:  “If
you kill, you will atone for it on the scaold,”  wouldn’t  it be better
to  tell  him,  for  purposes  of  example:  “If  you  kill,  you  will  be
imprisoned  for months  or years,  torn between  an impossible  despair
and a constan tly renewed  terror,  until one morning  we shall slip
into your cell after removing  our shoes the better  to take you by
surprise  while you are sound  asleep  after the night’s  anguish.  We
shall fall on you, tie your hands behind  your back, cut with scissors
your shirt collar and your hair if need be. Perfectionists  that we are,
we shall bind your arms with a strap so that you are forced to stoop
and your neck will be more accessible.  Then we shall carry you, an
assistant  on each side supporting  you by the arm, with your feet
dragging  behind  through  the corridors.  Then, under  a night sky, one
of the executio ners will nally  seize you by the seat of your pants
and throw  you horizontally  on a board  while  another  will steady
your head in the lunette  and a third will let fall from a height  of
seven feet a hundred-and-twenty-pound  blade that will slice o   your
head like a razor.”
For the examp le to be even better,  for the terror  to impress  each
of us sucien tly to outweigh  at the right moment  an irresistible
desire  for murder, it would  be essential  to go still further.  Instead  of
boasting,  with the pretentio us  thoughtlessness  characteristi c of us,
1 of  having  invented  this  rapid  and  humane   method  of  killing
condemned  men,  we  should   publish  thousands  of  copies  of  the
eyewitness  accounts  and medical reports  describing  the state of the
body  after  the  execution,  to  be  read  in  schools  and  universities.
Particularly  suitable  for  this  purpose  is  the  recent  report  to  the

Academy  of Medicine  made  by Doctors  Piedelièvre  and Fournier.
Those  courageous  doctors,  invited  in  the  interest  of  science  to
examine  the bodies  of the guillotined  after the execution,  considered
it their duty to sum up their dreadful  observations:  “If we may be
permitted  to give our opinion,  such sights  are frightfully  painful.
The blood  ows  from the blood  vessels  at the speed  of the severed
carotids,  then  it  coagulates.  The  muscles  contract  and  their
brillation  is stupefying;  the intestines  ripple  and the heart moves
irregularly,  incompletely,  fascinatingly.  The  mouth  puckers  at
certain  momen ts in a terrible pout. It is true that in that severed
head the eyes are motionles s with dilated  pupils;  fortunately  they
look  at  nothing  and,  if  they  are  devoid  of  the  cloudiness  and
opalescence  of the corpse,  they have no motion;  their transparence
belongs  to life, but their xity  belongs  to death.  All this can last
minutes,  even hours,  in sound specimens:  death is not immediate....
Thus, every vital element  survives  decapitation.  The doctor is left
with  this  impression  of  a  horrible  experience,  of  a  murderous
2 vivisection, followed by a premature burial.”
I doubt that there are many readers  who can read that terrifying
report  without  blanching.  Consequently,  its exemplary  power  and its
capacity  to intimidate  can be counted  on. There  is no reason  not to
add to it eyewitness  accounts  that conrm  the doctors’  observations.
Charlotte  Corday’s  severed  head  blushed,  it  is  said,  under  the
executioner’s  slap. This will not shock  anyone  who listens  to more
recent  observers.  An executioner’s  assistant  (hence  hardly  suspect  of
indulging  in  romanticizing  and  sentimentality)  describes  in  these
terms  what he was forced  to see: “It was a madman  undergoing  a
real attack  of  delirium  tremens  that we dropped  under  the blade.  The
head dies at once. But the body literally  jumps  about in the basket,
straining  on the cords.  Twenty  minutes  later, at the cemetery,  it is
3 still quivering.”  The present  chaplain  of the Santé  prison,  Father
Devoyod  (who does not seem opposed  to capital  punishment),  gives
4 in his book,  Les  Déli nquants ,  an account  that goes rather  far and
renews  the story of Languille , whose  decapitated  head answered  the
5 call of his name:  “The morning  of the execution, the condemned
man  was  in  a  very  bad  mood  and  refused  the  consolations  of

religion.  Knowing his heart of hearts  and the aection  he had for his
wife, who was very devout,  we said to him: ‘Come  now, out of love
for your wife, commune  with yourself  a moment  before  dying,’ and
the condemned  man accepte d. He communed  at length  before  the
crucix,  then he seemed  to pay no further  attention  to our  presence.
When  he  was  executed,  we  were  a  short  distance  from  him.  His
head fell into the trough  in front of the guillotine  and the body was
immediately  put into the basket;  but, by some mistake,  the basket
was  closed  before  the  head  was  put  in.  The  assistant  who  was
carrying  the  head  had  to  wait  a  moment  until  the  basket  was
opened  again;  now, during  that brief space of time we could see the
condemned  man’s eyes xed  on me with a look of supplic ation, as if
to ask forgiven ess. Instinctively  we made  the sign of the cross to
bless the head, and then the lids blinked,  the expression  of the eyes
softened,  and nally  the look, that had remained  full of expression,
became  vague....”  The  reader  may  or  may  not,  according  to  his
faith, accept the explanation  provided  by the priest.  At least those
eyes that “had remained full of expression” need no interpretation.
I could adduce  other rst-h and accounts  that would  be just as
hallucinating.  But I, for one, could  not go on. After all, I do not
claim that capital  punishment  is exemplary,  and the penalty  seems
to me just what it is, a crude surgery  practiced  under conditions  that
leave nothing  edifying  about it. Society,  on the other hand, and the
State,  which  is not so impressionable,  can very well put up with
such details and, since they extol an example,  ought  to try to get
everyone  to put up with them so that no one will be ignorant  of
them and the population,  terrorized  once and for all, will become
Franciscan  one  and  all.  Whom  do  they  hope  to  intimidate,
otherwise,  by  that  example  forever  hidden,  by  the  threat  of  a
punishment  described  as easy and swift and easier  to bear, after all,
than  cancer,  by  a  penalty  submerged  in  the  owers  of  rhetoric?
Certainly  not those who are considered  respectable  (some of them
are) because they are sleeping  at that hour, and the great example
has not been announced  to them, and they will be eating  their toast
and marmalade  at the time of the premature  burial,  and they will be
informed  of  the  work  of  justice,  if  perchance  they  read  the

newspapers,  by an insipid  news item that will melt like sugar in
their memory.  And, yet, those peaceful  creatures  are the ones who
provide  the largest  percentage  of homicides.  Many such respectable
people  are potential  criminals.  According  to a magistrate,  the vast
majority  of murderers  he had known  did not know when shaving  in
the morning that they were going  to kill later in the day. As an
example  and for the sake of security,  it would  be wiser,  instead  of
hiding  the execution,  to hold up the severed  head in front of all who
are shaving in the morning.
Nothing  of the sort happens.  The State disguises  executions  and
keeps silent about these statements  and eyewitness  accounts.  Hence
it doesn’t  believe  in the exemplary  value of the penalty,  except  by
tradition  and  because  it  has  never  bothered  to  think  about  the
matter.  The  criminal  is  killed  because  this  has  been  done  for
centuries  and, besides,  he is killed in a way that was set at the end
of  the  eighteenth  century.  Out  of  habit,  people  will  turn  to
arguments  that  were  used  centuries  ago,  even  though  these
arguments  must be contradicted  by measures  that the evolution  of
public  sensitiv ity  has  made  inevitable.  A  law  is  applied  without
being thought out and the condemned  die in the name of a theory  in
which  the executioners  do not believe.  If they believed  in it, this
would  be  obvious  to  all.  But  publicity  not  only  arouses  sadistic
instincts  with  incalculable  repercussions  eventually  leading  to
another  murder; it also runs the risk of provoking  revolt  and disgust
in the public  opinion.  It would  become  harder  to execute  men one
after another,  as is done in our country  today,  if those executions
were translated  into vivid images  in the popular  imagination.  The
man who enjoys  his coee  while reading  that justice  has been done
would  spit it out at the least detail.  And the texts I have quoted
might  seem to vindicate  certain  professors  of criminal  law who, in
their obvious  inability  to justify  that anachronistic  penalty,  console
themselves  by declaring,  with the sociologist  Tarde,  that it is better
to cause death without  causing  suering  than it is to cause suering
without  causing death.  This is why we must approve  the position  of
Gambetta,  who, as an adversary  of the death penalty,  voted against
a bill involving  suppression  of publicity  for executions,  declaring:  “If

you  suppress  the  horror  of  the  spectacle,  if  you  execute  inside
prisons,  you  will  smother  the  public  outburst  of  revolt  that  has
taken place of late and you will strengthen the death penalty.”
Indeed,  one must kill publicly or confess  that one does not feel
authorized  to  kill.  If  society  justies  the  death  penalty  by  the
necessity  of  the  example,  it  must  justify  itself  by  making  the
publicity  necessary. It must show the executioner’s  hands each time
and force everyone  to look at them—the  over-delicate  citizens  and
all those who had any responsibility  in bringing  the executioner  into
being.  Otherwise,  society  admits that it kills without  knowing what
it  is  saying  or  doing.  Or  else  it  admits  that  such  revolting
ceremonies  can only excite  crime or completely  upset opinion.  Who
could  better  state this than a magistrate  at the end of his career,
Judge  Falco,  whose  brave  confession  deserves  serious  reection:
“The only time in my life when I decided  against  a commutation  of
penalty  and  in  favor  of  execution,  I  thought  that,  despite  my
position,  I could attend  the execution  and remain  utterly  impassive.
Moreover,  the criminal  was not very interesting:  he had tormented
his  daughter  and  nally  thrown  her  into  a  well.  But,  after  his
execution,  for weeks  and even months,  my nights  were haunted  by
that recollection....  Like everyone else, I served  in the war and saw
an innocent  generation  die, but I can state that nothing  gave me the
sort of bad conscience  I felt in the face of the kind of administrative
6 murder that is called capital punishment.”
But, after all, why should  society  believe  in that example  when it
does not stop crime,  when its eects,  if they exist, are invisible?  To
begin with, capital  punishment  could not intimidate  the man who
doesn’t  know that he is going to kill, who makes  up his mind to it in
a a sh and commits  his crime in a state of frenzy  or obsession,  nor
the man who, going to an appointment  to have it out with someone,
takes along a weapon  to frighten  the faithless  one or the opponent
and uses it although he didn’t  want to or didn’t  think he wanted  to.
In other words,  it could not intimidate  the man who is hurled into
crime  as if into a calamity.  This is tantamount  to saying  that it is
powerless  in the majority  of cases. It is only fair to point out that in

our country  capital  punishment  is rarely  applied  in such cases.  But
the word “rarely” itself makes one shudder.
Does it frighte n at least that race of criminals  on whom  it claims
to operate and who live o   crime?  Nothing  is less certain. We can
read in Koestler  that at a time when pickpockets  were executed  in
England,  other  pickpockets  exercised  their  talents  in  the  crowd
surrounding  the scaold  where  their colleague  was being  hanged.
Statistics  drawn up at the beginning  of the century  in England  show
that out of 250 who were hanged,  170 had previously  attended  one
or more executions.  And in 1886,  out of 167 condemned  men who
had gone through  the Bristol prison,  164 had witnessed  at least one
execution.  Such statistics  are no longer  possible  to gather  in France
because  of the secrecy  surrounding  executions.  But they give cause
to  think  that  around  my  father,  the  day  of  that  execution,  there
must have been a rather  large number  of future  criminals,  who did
not  vomit.  The  power  of  intimidation  reaches  only  the  quiet
individuals  who are not drawn  toward  crime  and has no eect   on
the hardened  ones who need to be softened.  In Koestler’s  essay and
in the detailed  studies  will be found  the most convincing  facts and
gures on this aspect of the subject.
It cannot be denied,  however,  that men fear death.  The privation
of life is indeed  the supreme  penalty  and ought  to excite  in them a
decisive  fear.  The  fear  of  death,  arising  from  the  most  obscure
depths  of the individual,  ravages him; the instinct  to live, when it is
threatened,  panics  and struggles  in agony.  Therefore  the legislator
was right in thinking  that his law was based  upon one of the most
mysterious  and most powerfu l incentives  of  human  nature.  But law
is always simpler  than nature.  When  law ventures,  in the hope of
dominating,  into  the  dark  regions  of  consciousness,  it  has  little
chance of being able to simplify the complexity it wants to codify.
If fear of death  is, indeed,  a fact, another  fact is that such fear,
however  great  it  may  be,  has  never  suced  to  quell  human
passions.  Bacon is right in saying  that there is no passion  so weak
that it cannot  confront  and overpower  fear of death.  Revenge,  love,
honor,  pain,  another  fear  manage  to  overcome  it.  How  could
cupidity,  hatred,  jealousy  fail  to  do  what  love  of  a  person  or  a

country,  what a passion  for freedom  manage  to do? For centuries
the death penalty,  often accompanied  by barbarous  renements,  has
been trying to hold crime in check;  yet crime persists.  Why? Because
the instincts that are warring  in man are not, as the law claims,
constant  forces in a state of equilibrium.  They are variable forces
constantly  waxing  and  waning,  and  their  repeated  lapses  from
equilibrium  nourish the life of the mind as electrical  oscillations,
when  close  enough,  set  up  a  current.  Just  imagine  the  series  of
oscillations,  from  desire  to  lack  of  appetite,  from  decision  to
renunciation,  through  which  each  of  us  passes  in  a  single  day,
multiply  these variations  innitely,  and you will have an idea of
psychological  proliferation.  Such  lapses  from  equilibrium  are
generally  too eeting  to allow a single  force to dominate  the whole
being.  But it may happen  that one of the soul’s forces  breaks loose
until it lls  the whole  eld  of consciousness;  at such a moment  no
instinct,  not  even  that  of  life,  can  oppose  the  tyranny  of  that
irresistible  force.  For capital  punishment  to be really  intimidating,
human  nature  would  have to be dierent;  it would  have to be as
stable  and serene  as the law itself. But then human  nature  would  be
dead.
It is not dead. This is why, however  surprising  this may seem to
anyone  who  has  never  observed  or  directly  experienced  human
complexity,  the murderer,  most of the time, feels innocent  when he
kills.  Every  criminal  acquits  himself  before  he  is  judged.  He
considers  himself,  if  not  within  his  right,  at  least  excused  by
circumstances.  He does not think or foresee;  when he thinks, it is to
foresee  that he will be forgiven  altogether  or in part. How could he
fear what he considers  highly  improbable?  He will fear death after
the  verdict  but  not  before  the  crime.  Hence  the  law,  to  be
intimidating,  should  leave  the  murderer  no  chance,  should  be
implacable  in  advance  and  particularly  admit  no  extenuating
circumstance. But who among us would dare ask this?
If  anyone  did,  it  would  still  be  necessary  to  take  into  account
another  paradox  of  human   nature.  If  the  instinct  to  live  is
fundamental,  it is no more so than another  instinct  of which  the
academic  psychologists  do not speak:  the death  instinct,  which  at

certain  momen ts calls for the destruction  of oneself  and of others.  It
is probable  that the desire  to kill often coincides  with the desire  to
7 die or to annihilate  oneself.  Thus, the instinct for self-preservation
is matched,  in variable  proportions,  by the instinct  for destruction.
The  latter  is  the  only  way  of  explaining  altogether  the  various
perversions  which,  from alcoholis m to drugs,  lead an individual  to
his death while he knows  full well what is happening.  Man wants  to
live,  but  it  is  useless  to  hope  that  this  desire  will  dictate  all  his
actions.  He also wants  to be nothing;  he wants  the irreparable,  and
death  for its own sake. So it happens  that the criminal  wants  not
only the crime but the suer  ing that goes with it, even (one might
say, especially)  if that suering  is exceptional.  When that odd desire
grows  and becomes  domina nt, the prospect  of being  put to death
not only fails to stop the criminal,  but probably  even adds to the
vertigo in which he swoons. Thus, in a way, he kills in order to die.
Such  peculiarities  suce  to  explain  why  a  penalty  that  seems
calculated  to frighten  normal  minds  is in reality  altogether  unrelated
to  ordinary  psychology.  All  statistics  without  exception,  those
concerning  countries  that have abolished  execution  as well as the
others,  show that there is no connection  between  the abolition  of
8 the  death  penalty  and  criminality.   Criminal  statistics  neither
increase  nor  decrease.  The  guillotine  exists,  and  so  does  crime;
between  the two there is no other apparent  connection  than that of
the law. All we can conclude  from the gures,  set down at length  in
statistical  tables, is this: for centuries  crimes  other than murder were
punished  with death,  and the supreme  punishment,  repeated  over
and  over  again,  did  not  do  away  with  any  of  those  crimes.  For
centuries  now,  those  crimes   have  no  longer  been  punished  with
death.  Yet  they  have  not  increased;  in  fact,  some  of  them  have
decreased.  Similarly,  murder  has been punished  with execution  for
centuries  and yet the race of Cain has not disappeared.  Finally,  in
the thirty-three  nations  that have abolished  the death penalty  or no
longer  use it, the number  of murders  has not increased.  Who could
deduce from this that capital punishment is really intimidating?
Conservatives  cannot  deny these facts or these gures.  Their only
and nal  reply is signicant . They explain  the paradoxical  attitude

of a society  that so carefully  hides the executions  it claims  to be
exemplary.  “Nothing  proves , indeed,”  say the conservatives,  “that
the death penalty  is exemplary;  as a matter  of fact, it is certain  that
thousands  of murderers  have not been intimidated  by it. But there is
no way of knowing  those it has intimidated;  consequent ly, nothing
proves  that it is not exempla ry.” Thus, the greatest  of punishments,
the  one  that  involves  the  last  dishonor  for  the  condemned  and
grants  the  supreme  privileg e  to  society,  rests  on  nothing  but  an
unveriable  possibility.  Death,  on the other hand, does not involve
degrees  or probabilities.  It solidies  all things,  culpability  and the
body, in a denitive  rigidity.  Yet it is administered  among  us in the
name  of  chance  and  a  calculation.  Even  if  that  calculation  were
reasonable,  should  there not be a certainty  to authorize  the most
certain  of deaths?  However,  the condemned  is cut in two, not so
much for the crime he committed  but by virtue  of all the crimes that
might  have been and were not committed,  that can be and will not
be  committed.  The  most  sweeping  uncertainty  in  this  case
authorizes the most implacable certainty.
I  am  not  the  only  one  to  be  amazed  by  such  a  dangerous
contradiction.  Even the State condemns  it, and such bad conscience
explains  in  turn  the  contrad iction  of  its  own  attitude.  The  State
divests  its executions  of all publicity  because  it cannot  assert,  in the
face of facts, that they ever served  to intimidate  criminals . The State
cannot  escape  the dilemma  Beccaria  described  when he wrote:  “If it
is  important  to  give  the  people  proofs  of  power  often,  then
executions  must be frequent ; but crimes  will have to be frequent
too, and this will prove  that the death  penalty  does not make the
complete  impression  that it should,  whence  it results  that it is both
useless  and necessary.”  What can the State do with a penalty that is
useless  and necessary,  except to hide it without  abolishing  it? The
State  will  keep  it  then,  a  little  out  of  the  way,  not  without
embarrassment,  in the blind hope that one man at least, one day at
least, will be stopped  from his murderous  gesture  by thought  of the
punishment  and, without  anyone’s  ever knowing  it, will justify  a
law that has neither  reason  nor experience  in its favor.  In order to
continue  claiming  that  the  guillotine  is  exemplary,  the  State  is

consequently  led  to  multiply  very  real  murders  in  the  hope  of
avoiding  a possible  murder  which,  as far as it knows  or ever will
know,  may never  be perpetrated.  An odd law, to be sure, which
knows  the  murder  it  commits  and  will  never  know  the  one  it
prevents.
What will be left of that power  of example  if it is proved that
capital  punishment  has another power,  and  a very real one, which
degrades men to the point of shame, madness, and murder?
It  is  already  possible  to  follow  the  exemplary  eect  s  of  such
ceremonies  on  public  opinion,  the  manifestations  of  sadism  they
arouse,  the hideous  vainglory  they excite  in certain  criminals. No
nobility  in the vicinity  of the gallows,  but disgust,  contem pt, or the
vilest  indulgence  of  the  senses.  These  eects  are  well  known.
Decency  forced the guillotine  to emigrate  from Place de l’Hotel  de
Ville to the city gates, then into the prisons.  We are less informed  as
to the feelings  of those whose  job it is to attend  such spectacles.  Just
listen then to the warden  of an English  prison  who confesses  to “a
keen sense of personal  shame”  and to the chaplain  who speaks  of
9 “horror,  shame, and humiliation.”  Just imagine  the feelings  of the
man who kills under  orders—I  mean the executioner.  What can we
think of those ocials  who call the guillotine  “the shunting  engine,”
the condemne d man “the client”  or “the parcel”?  The priest  Bela
Just, who accompanied  more than thirty  condemned  men, writes:
“The slang of the administrators  of justice  is quite as cynical  and
10 vulgar  as that of the criminals.”  And here are the remarks  of one
of  our  assistant  executione rs  on  his  journeys  to  the  provinces:
“When  we would  start on a trip, it was always  a lark, with taxis and
11 the  best  restaurants  part  of  the  spree!”   The  same  one  says,
boasting  of the executioner’s  skill  in releasing  the blade:  “You could
allow  yourself  the  fun  of pulling the client’s  hair.”  The dissoluteness
expressed  here  has  other,  deeper  aspects.  The  clothing  of  the
condemned  belongs  in  principle  to  the  executioner.  The  elder
Deibler  used to hang all such articles  of clothing  in a shed and  now
and  then  would  go  and  look  at  them.   But  there  are  more  serious

aspects.  Here is what our assistant  executioner  declares:  “The new
executioner  is batty about the guillotine.  He sometimes  spends  days
on  end  at  home  sitting  on  a  chair,  ready  with  hat  and  coat  on,
12 waiting for a summons from the Ministry.”
Yes, this is the man of whom  Joseph  de Maistre  said that, for him
to exist, there had to be a special decree  from the divine  power  and
that,  without  him,  “order  yields  to  chaos,  thrones  collapse,  and
society  disappears.”  This is the man through  whom  society  rids itself
altogether  of the guilty  man, for the executioner  signs the prison
release  and  takes  charge  of  a  free  man.  The  ne  and  solemn
example,  thought  up by our legislators,  at least produces  one sure
eect—to  depreciate  or to destroy  all humanity  and reason  in those
who take part in it directly.  But, it will be said, these are exceptional
creatures  who  nd  a  vocation  in  such  dishonor.  They  seem  less
exceptional  when we learn that hundreds  of persons  oer   to serve as
executioners  without  pay.  The  men  of  our  generation,  who  have
lived through  the history  of recent  years,  will not be astonished  by
this bit of information.  They know  that behind  the most peaceful
and familiar faces slumbers  the impulse  to torture  and  murder.  The
punishment  that aims to intimidate  an unknown  murderer  certainly
confers  a vocation  of killer on many another  monster  about  whom
there is no doubt.  And since we are busy justifying  our cruelest  laws
with probable  considerations , let there be no doubt that out of those
hundreds  of men whose  services  were declined,  one at least must
have  satised  otherwise  the  bloodthirsty  instincts  the  guillotine
excited in him.
If, therefore,  there is a desire  to maintain  the death penalty,  let us
at least be spared the hypocrisy  of a justication  by example.  Let us
be  frank  about  that  penalty  which  can  have  no  publicity,  that
intimidation  which  works  only  on  respectable  people,  so  long  as
they are respectable,  which  fascinates  those who have ceased  to be
respectable  and debases  or deranges  those who take part in it. It is a
penalty,  to be sure, a frightful  torture,  both physical  and moral,  but
it provides  no sure example  except  a demoralizing  one. It punishes,
but it forestalls  nothing;  indeed, it may even arouse  the impulse  to
murder.  It hardly  seems  to exist, except  for the man who suers  it—

in his soul for months  and years, in his body during  the desperate
and violent hour when he is cut in two without  suppressi ng his life.
Let us call it by the name which, for lack of any other nobility,  will
at least give the nobility  of truth, and let us recognize  it for what it
is essentially: a revenge.
A punishment  that penalizes  without  forestalling  is indeed  called
revenge.  It is a quasi-arithmetical  reply made by society  to whoever
breaks  its primordial  law. That reply is as old as man; it is called  the
law of retaliat ion.  Whoever  has done me harm must suer  harm;
whoever  has put out my eye must lose an eye; and whoever  has
killed  must die. This is an emotion,  and a particularly  violent  one,
not a principle.  Retaliation  is related  to nature  and instinct, not to
law. Law, by denition,  cannot  obey the same rules as nature.  If
murder  is in the nature  of man, the law is not intended  to imitate  or
reproduce  that nature.  It is intended  to correct  it. Now, retaliation
does no more than ratify and confer  the status  of a law on a pure
impulse  of nature.  We have all known  that impulse,  often to our
shame,  and we know its power,  for it comes  down to us from the
primitive  forests.  In  this  regard,  we  French,  who  are  properly
indignant  upon  seeing  the  oil  king  in  Saudi  Arabia  preach
international  democracy  and call in a butcher  to cut o  a thief’s
hand with a cleaver,  live also in a sort of Middle  Ages without  even
the  consolatio ns  of  faith.  We  still  dene  justice  according  to  the
13 rules  of  a  crude  arithmetic.   Can  it  be  said  at  least  that  that
arithmetic  is  exact  and  that  justice,  even  when  elementary,  even
when limited  to legal reveng e, is safeguarded  by the death penalty?
The answer must be no.
Let  us  leave  aside  the  fact  that  the  law  of  retaliation  is
inapplicable  and that it would seem just as excessive  to punish  the
incendiary  by setting  re  to his house  as it would  be insucient  to
punish  the thief by deducting  from his bank account  a sum equal to
his theft. Let us admit that it is just and necessary  to compensate  for
the  murder  of  the  victim  by  the  death  of  the  murderer.  But
beheading  is not simply  death. It is just as dierent,  in essence, from

the privation  of life as a concentration  camp is from prison.  It is a
murder,  to be sure, and one that arithmetically  pays for the murder
committed.  But  it  adds  to  death  a  rule,  a  public  premeditation
known  to the future  victim,  an organization,  in short,  which  is in
itself a source  of moral  suerings  more terrible  than death.  Hence
there is no equivalence.  Many laws consider  a premeditated  crime
more serious  than a crime of pure violence.  But what then is capital
punishment  but  the  most  premeditated  of  murders,  to  which  no
criminal’s  deed, however  calculated  it may be, can be compared?
For there to be equivalence,  the death penalty  would  have to punish
a criminal  who had warned  his victim  of the date at which  he would
inict  a horrible  death on him and who, from that moment  onward,
had conned  him at his mercy  for months.  Such a monster  is not
encountered in private life.
There,  too,  when  our  ocial  jurists  talk  of  putting  to  death
without  causing suering,  they don’t know  what they are talking
about  and,  above  all,  they  lack  imagination.  The  devastating,
degrading  fear  that  is  imposed  on  the  condemned  for  months  or
14 years  is a punishment  more terrible than death,  and one that was
not imposed on the victim.  Even in the fright caused  by the mortal
violence  being done to him, most of the time the victim  is hastened
to his death without  knowing  what is happening  to him. The period
of  horror  is  counted  out  with  his  life,  and  hope  of  escaping  the
madness  that has swept  down upon that life probably  never leaves
him. On the other hand, the horror  is parceled  out to the man who
is condemned  to death.  Torture  through  hope alternate s with the
pangs  of  animal  despair.  The  lawyer  and  chaplain,  out  of  mere
humanity,  and  the  jailers,  so  that  the  condemned  man  will  keep
quiet,  are unanimous  in assuring him that he will be reprieved.  He
believes  this with all his being and then he ceases  to believe  it. He
15 hopes  by day and despairs  of it by night.  As the weeks  pass, hope
and despair  increase  and become  equally  unbearable.  According  to
all accounts,  the color of the skin  changes,  fear acting  like an acid.
“Knowing  that you are going to die is nothing,”  said a condemned
man in Fresnes.  “But not knowing  whether  or not you are going to
live,  that’s  terror  and  anguish.”  Cartouche  said  of  the  supreme

punishment:  “Why,  it’s  just  a  few  minutes  that  have  to  be  lived
through.”  But  it  is  a  matter  of  months,  not  of  minutes.  Long  in
advance  the condemned  man knows  that he is going to be killed and
that the only thing that can save him is a reprieve,  rather similar,
for him, to the decrees  of heaven. In any case, he cannot  intervene,
make  a  plea  himself,  or  convince.  Everything  goes  on  outside  of
him. He is no longer  a man but a thing waiting  to be handled  by the
executioners.  He is kept as if he were inert matter,  but he still has a
consciousness which is his chief enemy.
When  the  o cials  whose  job  it  is  to  kill  that  man  call  him  a
parcel,  they  know  what  they  are  saying.  To  be  unable  to  do
anything  against  the  hand  that  moves  you  from  one  place  to
another,  holds you or rejects  you, is this not indeed  being a parcel,
or a thing,  or, better,  a hobbled  animal?  Even then an animal  can
refuse  to eat. The condemned  man cannot.  He is given the benet  of
a special  diet (at Fresnes,  Diet No. 4 with extra milk, wine, sugar,
jam, butter); they see to it that he nourishes  himself.  If need be, he
is forced to do so. The animal  that is going to be killed must be in
the best condition.  The thing or the animal  has a right only to those
debased  freedoms  that are called  whims.  “They  are very touchy,”  a
top-sergeant  at  Fresnes  says  without  the  least  irony  of  those
condemned  to death.  Of course,  but how else can they have contact
with  freedom  and  the  dignity  of  the  will  that  man  cannot  do
without?  Touchy  or  not,  the  moment  the  sentence  has  been
pronounced  the condemned  man enters  an imperturbable  machine.
For  a  certain  number  of  weeks  he  travels  along  in  the  intricate
machinery  that determines  his every gesture  and eventually  hands
him over to those who will lay him down  on the killing  machine.
The parcel is no longer  subject to the laws of chance  that hang over
the living creature  but to mechanical  laws that allow him to foresee
accurately the day of his beheading.
That day his being an object  comes  to an end. During  the three
quarters  of an hour separatin g him from the end, the certainty  of a
powerless  death sties  everything  else; the animal,  tied down  and
amenable,  knows  a hell that makes  the hell he is threatened  with
seem ridiculou s. The Greeks,  after all, were more humane  with their

hemlock.  They  left  their  condemned  a  relative  freedom,  the
possibility  of putting  o   or hastening  the hour of his death.  They
gave  him  a  choice  between  suicide  and  execution.  On  the  other
hand, in order to be doubly  sure, we deal with the culprit  ourselves.
But there could not really be any justice  unless  the condemned,  after
making  known  his decision  months in advance,  had approached  his
victim,  bound  him rmly,  informed  him that he would  be put to
death  in  an  hour,  and  had  nally  used  that  hour  to  set  up  the
apparatus  of death.  What criminal ever reduced  his victim  to such a
desperate and powerless condition?
This doubtless  explains  the odd submissiveness  that is customary
in the condemn ed at the moment  of their execution.  These men who
have nothing more to lose  could play their last card, choose  to die of
a chance bullet  or be guillotined  in the kind of frantic  struggle  that
dulls all the faculties.  In a way, this would  amount  to dying freely.
And yet, with but few exceptions,  the rule is for the condemned  to
walk toward  death passively  in a sort of dreary  desponden cy. That is
probably  what  our  journalists  mean  when  they  say  that  the
condemned  died courageousl y. We must read between  the lines that
the condemned  made no noise,  accepted  his status  as a parcel,  and
that  everyone   is  grateful  to  him  for  this.  In  such  a  degrading
business,  the  interested  party  shows  a  praiseworthy  sense  of
propriety  by keeping  the degradation  from lasting  too long. But the
compliments  and the certicates  of courage  belong  to the general
mystication  surrounding  the  death  penalty.  For  the  condemned
will  often  be  seemly  in  proportion  to  the  fear  he  feels.  He  will
deserve  the  praise  of  the  press  only  if  his  fear  or  his  feeling  of
isolation  is great enough  to sterilize  him completely.  Let there be no
misunderstanding.  Some  among  the condemned,  whether  political
or  not,  die  heroically,  and  they  must  be  granted  the  proper
admiration  and respect.  But the majority  of them know  only the
silence  of fear, only the impassivity  of fright,  and it seems  to me
that such terried  silence  deserves  even greater  respect.  When  the
priest Bela Just oers   to write to the family  of a young  condemned
man a few moments  before  he is hanged  and hears the reply: “I have
no courage, even for that,” how can a priest,  hearing  that confession

of weakness,  fail to honor  the most wretched  and most sacred  thing
in man? Those  who say nothing  but leave a little pool on the spot
from  which  they  are  taken—who  would  dare  say  they  died  as
cowards?  And how can we describe  the men who reduce d them to
such cowardic e? After all, every  murderer  when  he kills runs the
risk of the most dreadful  of deaths,  whereas  those who kill him risk
nothing except advancement.
No, what man experiences  at such times is beyond  all morality.
Not virtue,  nor courage,  nor intelligence,  nor even innocence  has
anything  to do with it. Society  is suddenly  reduced  to a state of
primitive  terrors where  nothing  can be judged.  All equity  and all
dignity  have  disappeared.  “The  conviction  of  innocence  does  not
immunize  against  brutal  treatment....  I have seen authentic  bandits
die  courageously  whereas  innocent  men  went  to  their  deaths
16 trembling  in  every  muscle. ”   When  the  same  man  adds  that,
according  to his experience,  intellectuals  show more weakness,  he is
not  implying  that  such  men  have  less  courage  than  others  but
merely  that  they  have  more  imagination.  Having  to  face  an
inevitable  death, any man, whatever  his convictions,  is torn asunder
17 from head to toe.  The feeling  of powerlessness  and solitude  of the
condemned  man,  bound  and  up  against  the  public  coalition  that
demands  his death,  is in itself an unimaginable  punishment.  From
this point of view, too, it would  be better  for the execution  to be
public.  The actor in every man could  then come to the aid of the
terried  animal  and help him cut a gure,  even in his own eyes. But
darkness  and secrecy  oer   no recourse.  In such a disaster,  courage,
strength  of soul, even faith may be disadvantages.  As a general  rule,
a man is undone by waiting  for capital  punishment  well before  he
dies. Two deaths are inicted  on him, the rst  being worse  than the
second,  whereas he killed  but once. Compared  to such torture,  the
penalty  of retaliation  seems like a civilized  law. It never  claimed
that the man who gouged  out one of his brother’s  eyes should  be
totally blinded.

Such a basic injustice  has repercussions,  besides,  on the relatives  of
the executed  man. The victim  has his family,  whose  suerings  are
generally  very great and who, most often, want to be avenged.  They
are, but the relatives  of the condemned  man then discover  an excess
of suering  that punishes  them beyond  all justice.  A mother’s or a
father’s  long  months  of  waiting,  the  visiting-room,  the  articial
conversations  lling  up  the  brief  moments  spent  with  the
condemned  man, the visions  of the execution  are all tortures  that
were not imposed  on the relatives  of the victim.  Whatev er may be
the feelings of the latter,  they cannot  want the revenge  to extend  so
far beyond the crime  and to torture  people  who share their own
grief. “I have been reprieved,  Father,”  writes  a condemned  man, “I
can’t  yet  realize  the  good  fortune  that  has  come  my  way.  My
reprieve  was signed  on April 30 and I was told Wednesday  as I came
back  from  the  visiting-room.  I  immediately  informed  Papa  and
Mama,  who  had  not  yet  left  the  prison.  You  can  imagine  their
18 happiness.”  We can indeed imagine  it, but only insofar  as we can
imagine  their  uninterrupted  suering  until  the  moment  of  the
reprieve,  and  the  nal  despair  of  those  who  receive  the  other
notication,  which  punishes,  in iniquity,  their innocence  and their
misfortune.
To cut short this question  of the law of retaliation,  we must note
that  even  in  its  primitive  form  it  can  operate  only  between  two
individuals  of  whom  one  is  absolutely  innocent  and  the  other
absolutely  guilty.  The victim, to be sure, is innocent.  But can the
society  that  is  supposed  to  represent  the  victim  lay  claim  to
innocence?  Is it not respons ible, at least in part, for the crime  it
punishes  so severely?  This theme has often been developed,  and I
shall  not  repeat  the  arguments  that  all  sorts  of  thinkers  have
brought  forth since the eighteenth century.  They can be summed  up
anyway  by saying  that every society  has the criminals  it deserves.
But insofar  as France  is concerned,  it is impossible  not to point out
the circumstances  that ought  to make our legislators  more modest.
Answering  an inquiry  of the  Figaro  in 1952 on the death penalty,  a

colonel  asserte d  that  establishing  hard  labor  for  life  as  the  most
severe  penalty  would  amoun t to setting  up schools  of crime.  That
high-ranking  ocer  seemed  to  be  ignorant,  and  I  can  only
congratulate  him, of the fact that we already  have our schools  of
crime,  which dier   from our federal  prisons  in this notable regard:  it
is possible  to leave them at any hour of the day or  night;  they are
the taverns  and slums,  the glory of our Republic.  On this point it is
impossible to express oneself moderately.
Statistics  show 64,000  overcrowded  dwellings  (from three to ve
persons  per room)  in the city of Paris alone.  To be sure, the killer of
children  is a particularly  vile creature  who scarcely  arouses  pity. It
is probable,  too (I say probable),  that none of my readers,  forced  to
live  in  the  same  conditions,  would  go  so  far  as  to  kill  children.
Hence  there  is  no  question  of  reducing  the  culpability  of  certain
monsters.  But those monsters,  in decent  dwellings,  would  perhaps
have had no occasion  to go so far. The least that can be said is that
they  are  not  alone  guilty,  and  it  seems  strange  that  the  right  to
punish  them should  be granted  to the very people  who subsidize,
not  housing,  but  the  growing  of  beets  for  the  production  of
19 alcohol.
But alcohol  makes  this scandal  even more shocking.  It is known
that  the  French  nation  is  systematically  intoxicated  by  its
parliamentary  majority,  for  generally  vile  reasons.  Now,  the
proportion  of  alcohol’s  responsibility  in  the  cause  of  bloodthirsty
crimes  is shocking.  A lawyer  (Maître  Guillon)  estimated  it at 60 per
cent. For Dr. Lagrie  the proportion  extends  from 41.7 to 72 per
cent. An investigation  carried out in 1951 in the clearing-center  of
the Fresnes  prison,  among  the common-law  criminals,  showed  29
per  cent  to  be  chronic  alcoholics  and  24  per  cent  to  have  an
alcoholic  inheritance.  Finally,  95 per cent of the killers  of children
are alcoholics.  These  are impressive  gures.  We can balance  them
with  an  even  more  magnicent  gure:  the  tax  report  of  a  rm
producing  apéritifs , which in 1953 showed  a prot  of 410 million
francs.  Comparison  of  these  gures  justies  informing  the
stockholders  of that rm  and the Deputies  with a nancial  interest
in alcohol  that they have certainly  killed  more children  than they

think.  As an opponent  of capital punishment,  I am far from asking
that they be condemned  to death.  But, to begin with, it strikes me as
indispensable  and urgent  to take them under  military  escort  to the
next execution  of a murderer  of children  and to hand them on their
way out a statistical report including the gures I have given.
20 The State that sows alcohol  cannot  be surprised  to reap crime.
Instead  of showing  surprise,  it simply  goes on cutting  o   heads into
which  it  has  poured  so  much  alcohol  It  metes  out  justice
imperturbably  and poses as a creditor:  its good conscience  does not
suer  at all. Witness  the alcohol  salesman  who, in answer to the
Figaro ’s inquiry,  exclaimed:  “I know just what the staunchest  enemy
of the death penalty would  do if, having  a weapon  within  reach,  he
suddenly  saw assassins  on the point of killing  his father,  his mother,
his children,  or his best friend. Well!”  That “well”  in itself seems
somewhat  alcoholized.  Naturally,  the staunchest  enemy  of capital
punishment  would  shoot those murderers,  and rightly  so, without
thereby  losing  any of his reasons  for staunchly  defending  abolition
of the death penalty.  But if he were to follow  through  his thinking
and the aforem entioned  assassins reeked  of alcohol,  he would then
go  and  take  care  of  those  whose  vocation  is  to  intoxicate  future
criminals.  It is even quite surprising  that the relatives  of victims  of
alcoholic  crimes  have never thought  of getting  some enlightenment
from the Parliament.  Yet nothing  of the sort takes place,  and the
State,  enjoying  general  condence,  even  supported  by  public
opinion,  goes  on  chastising  assassins  (particularly  the  alcoholics)
somewhat  in the way the pimp chastises  the hard-working  creatures
who assure his livelihood.  But the pimp at least does no moralizing.
The  State  does.  Although  jurisprudence  admits  that  drunkenness
sometimes  constitutes  an  extenuating  circumstance,  the  State  is
ignorant  of chronic  alcoholism.  Drunkenness,  however,  accompanies
only  crimes  of  violence,  which  are  not  punished  with  death,
whereas  the  chronic  alcoholic  is  capable  also  of  premeditated
crimes,  which  will bring about  his death.  Consequently , the State
reserves  the right to punish  in the only case in which  it has a real
responsibility.

Does this amount  to saying  that every alcoholic  must be declared
irresponsible  by  a  State  that  will  beat  its  breast  until  the  nation
drinks  nothing  but fruit juice?  Certainly  not. No more than that the
reasons  based  on  heredity  should  cancel  all  culpability.  The  real
responsibility  of  an  oender  cannot  be  precisely  measured.  We
know that arithmetic  is incapable  of adding  up the number of our
antecedents,  whether  alcoholic  or not. Going  back to the beginning
of time, the gure  would  be twenty-two  times,  raised  to the tenth
power,  greater  than the number  of present  inhabitants  of the earth.
The number of bad or morbid  predispositions  our antecedents  have
been able to transmit  to us is, thus, incalculable.  We come into the
world  laden  with  the  weight  of  an  innite  necessity.  One  would
have to grant us, therefore,  a general  irresponsibility.  Logic would
demand  that neither  punishment  nor reward  should  ever be meted
out, and, by the same token, all society  would  become  impossible.
The instinct of preservation  of societies,  and hence  of individuals,
requires  instead  that  individual  responsibility  be  postulated  and
accepted  without  dreaming  of an absolute  indulgence  that would
amount  to the death of all society. But the same reasoning  must lead
us to conclude  that there never exists  any total responsibility  or,
consequently,  any absolute  punishment  or reward.  No one can be
rewarded  completely,  not even the winners  of Nobel  Prizes.  But no
one  should  be  punished  absolutely  if  he  is  thought  guilty,  and
certainly  not if there is a chance of his being innocent.  The death
penalty,  which  really  neither  provides  an  example  nor  assures
distributive  justice,  simply  usurps  an  exorbitant  privilege  by
claiming  to punish  an always  relative  culpability  by a de nitive and
irreparable punishment.
If indeed capital  punishment  represents  a doubtful  example  and an
unsatisfactory  justice,  we must agree  with its defenders  that it is
eliminative.  The  death  penalty  denitively  eliminates  the
condemned  man. That alone,  to tell the truth, ought  to exclude,  for
its partisans especially,  the repetition  of risky arguments  which,  as
we  have  just  seen,  can  always  be  contested.  Instead,  one  might

frankly  say that it is denitive  because  it must be, and arm  that
certain  men  are  irremediable  in  society,  that  they  constitute  a
permanent  danger  for every  citizen  and for the social  order,  and
that therefore,  before  anything  else, they must be suppressed.  No
one, in any case, can refute  the existence  in society  of certain  wild
animals  whose  energy  and  brutality  nothing  seems  capable  of
breaking.  The death penalty,  to be sure, does not solve the problem
they create. Let us agree, at least, that it suppresses the problem.
I shall come back to such men. But is capital  punishment  applied
only to them?  Is there any assurance  that none of those executed  is
remediable?  Can it even be asserted  that none of them is innocent?
In both cases,  must it not be admitted  that capital  punishment  is
eliminative  only  insofar  as  it  is  irreparable?  The  15th  of  March
1957,  Burton  Abbott  was  executed  in  California,  condemned  to
death for having  murdered  a little girl of fourteen.  Men who commit
such  a  heinous  crime  are,  I  believe,  classied  among  the
irremediable.  Although  Abbott continually  protested  his innocence,
he  was  condemned.  His  execution  had  been  set  for  the  15th  of
March  at  ten  o’clock.  At  9:10  a  delay  was  granted  to  allow  his
21 attorneys  to make a nal  appeal.  At eleven o’clock  the appeal  was
refused.  At  11:15  Abbott  entered  the  gas  chamber.  At  11:18  he
breathed  in the rst  whis  of gas. At 11:20  the secretary  of the
Committee  on Reprieves  called  on the telephone.  The Committee
had changed its mind.  They had tried to reach the Governor,  who
was out sailing;  then they had phoned  the prison  directly.  Abbott
was taken from the gas chamber.  It was too late. If only it had been
cloudy  over California  that day, the Governor  would  not have gone
out sailing. He would  have telephoned  two minutes  earlier;  today
Abbott  would  be alive and would perhaps  see his innocence  proved.
Any  other  penalty,  even  the  harshest,  would  have  left  him  that
chance. The death penalty left him none.
This case is exceptional,  some will say. Our lives are exceptional,
too, and yet, in the eeting  existence  that is ours, this takes place
near us, at some ten hours’  distance  by air. Abbott’s  misfortune  is
less an excepti on than a news item like so many others,  a mistake
that  is  not  isolated  if  we  can  believe  our  newspaper s  (see  the

Deshays  case, to cite but the most recent  one). The jurist Olivecroix,
applying  the  law  of  probability  to  the  chance  of  judicial  error,
around  1860,  concluded  that  perhaps  one  innocent  man  was
condemned  in  every  two  hundred  and  fty-seven  cases.  The
proportion  is small?  It is small in relation  to average  penalties.  It is
innite  in relation  to capital  punishment.  When  Hugo writes  that to
22 him the name of the guillotine  is Lesurques,  he does not mean that
all those who are decapitated  are Lesurques,  but that one Lesurques
is  enough  for  the  guillotine  to  be  permanentl y  dishonored.  It  is
understandable  that Belgium  gave up once and for all pronouncing
the death penalty  after a judicial  error and that England  raised  the
question  of  abolition  after  the  Hayes  case.  It  is  also  possible  to
understand  the  conclusions  of  the  Attorney  General  who,  when
consulted  as to the appeal  of a very probably  guilty  criminal  whose
victim  had not been found,  wrote:  “The survival  of X ... gives the
authorities  the possibility  of examining  at leisure  any new clue that
23 might  eventually  be brought  in as to the existence  of his wife.  ...
On the other hand,  the execution,  by canceling  that hypothetical
possibility  of examination,  would,  I fear, give to the slightest clue a
theoretical  value, a power  of regret  that I think it inopportune  to
create.”  A  love  of  justice  and  truth  is  expressed  here  in  a  most
moving  way,  and  it  would  be  appropriate  to  quote  often  in  our
courts  that “power  of regret”  which  so vividly  sums up the danger
that faces every juror. Once the innocent  man is dead, no one can
do anything for him, in fact, but to rehabilitate  him, if there is still
someone  to ask for this. Then he is given back his innocen ce, which,
to tell the truth, he had never lost. But the persecution  of which  he
was a victim,  his dreadful  suerings,  his horrible  death  have been
given him forever. It remains  only to think of the innocent  men of
the future, so that these tortures  may be spared  them. This was done
in Belgium. In France consciences are apparently untroubled.
Probably  the French  take comfort  from the idea that  justice  has
progressed  hand  in  hand  with  science.  When  the  learned  expert
holds forth in court,  it seems as if a priest has spoken,  and the jury,
raised  in  the  religion  of  science,  expresses  its  opinion.  However,
recent  cases,  chief among  them the Besnard  case, have shown  us

what a comedy  of experts  is like. Culpability  is no better  established
for having been established  in a test tube, even a graduated  one. A
second  test tube will tell a dierent  story, and the persona l equation
loses none of its importance  in such dangerous  mathematics.  The
proportion  of learned  men who are really experts  is the same as that
of  judges  who  are  psychologists,  hardly  any  greater  than  that  of
serious  and objective  juries.  Today, as yesterday,  the chance  of error
remains.  Tomorrow  another  expert  testimony  will  declare  the
innocence  of  some  Abbott  or  other.  But  Abbott  will  be  dead,
scientically  dead, and the science  that claims  to prove innocence  as
well as guilt has not yet reached the point of resuscitating  those it
kills.
Among  the guilty themselves , is there any assurance  that none but
the irretrievable  have been killed?  All those who, like me, have at a
period  of their lives necessarily  followed  the assize courts  know that
a large element  of chance  enters  into any sentence.  The look of the
accused,  his  antecedents  (adultery  is  often  looked  upon  as  an
aggravating  circumstance  by jurors  who may or may not all have
been always faithful),  his manner  (which  is in his favor only if it is
conventional—in  other  words,  play-acting  most  of  the  time),  his
very elocution  (the old hands  know that one must neither stammer
nor  be  too  eloquent),  the  mishaps  of  the  trial  enjoyed  in  a
sentimental  key  (and  the  truth,  alas,  is  not  always  emotionally
eective):  so many  ukes  that inuence  the nal  decision  of the
jury. At the moment  of the death verdict,  one may be sure that to
arrive  at  the  most  denite  of  penalties,  an  extraordinary
combination  of uncertainties  was necessary.  When  it is known  that
the  supreme  verdict  depends  on  the  jury’s  evaluation  of  the
extenuating  circumstances,  when  it  is  known,  above  all,  that  the
reform  of 1832 gave our juries the power  of granting  indeterminate
extenuating  circumstances,  it is possible  to imagine  the latitude  left
to  the  passing   mood  of  the  jurors.  The  law  no  longer  foresees
precisely  the cases in which  death is to be the outcome;  so the jury
decides  after the event by guesswork.  Inasmuch  as there are never
two  comparable  juries,  the  man  who  is  executed  might  well  not
have been. Beyond reclaim  in the eyes of the respectable  people  of

Ille-et-Vilaine,  he would  have been granted  a semblance  of excuse
by the good citizens  of the Var. Unfortunately,  the same blade falls
in the two Départements. And it makes no distinction.
The temporal risks are added  to the geographical  risks to increase
the  general  absurdity.  The  French  Communist  workman  who  has
just been guillotined  in Algeria  for having  put a bomb  (discovered
before  it went o)   in a factory locker  room was condemned  as much
because  of the general  climate as because  of what he did. In the
present  state of mind in Algeria,  there was a desire  at one and the
same  time  to  prove  to  the  Arab  opinion  that  the  guillotine  was
designed  for  Frenchmen  too  and  to  satisfy  the  French  opinion
wrought  up  by  the  crimes   of  terrorism.  At  the  same  moment,
however,  the Minister  who approved  the execution  was accepting
Communist  votes in his electoral district.  If the circumstances  had
been dierent,  the accused  would  have got o   easy and his only
risk, once he had become  a Deputy  of the party,  would  be nding
himself  having  a drink at the same bar as the Minister  someday.
Such thoughts  are bitter,  and one would  like them to remain  alive in
the minds  of our leaders.  They must know that times and customs
change;  a day comes  when  the guilty  man, too rapidly  executed,
does not seem so black.  But it is too late and there is no alternative
but to repent  or to forget.  Of course,  people  forget.  Nonetheless,
society  is no less aected.  The unpunished  crime,  according  to the
Greeks,  infecte d the whole  city. But innocence  condemned  or crime
too severely punished,  in the long run, soils the city just as much.
We know this, in France.
Such,  it  will  be  said,  is  human  justice,  and,  despite  its
imperfections,  it is better  than arbitrariness.  But that sad evaluation
is  bearable  only  in  connection  with  ordinary  penalties.  It  is
scandalous  in  the  face  of  verdicts  of  death.  A  classic  treatise  on
French  law, in order to excuse  the death  penalty  for not involving
degrees,  states this: “Human  justice  has not the slightest  desire  to
assure  such a proportion.  Why?  Because  it knows  it is frail.”  Must
we therefore conclude  that such frailty  authorizes  us to pronounce
an  absolute  judgment  and  that,  uncertain  of  ever  achieving  pure
justice,  society  must  rush  headlong,  through  the  greatest  risks,

toward  supreme  injustice?  If justice  admits  that it is frail, would  it
not be better  for justice  to be modest  and to allow  its judgments
24 sucient  latitude  so that a mistake  can be corrected?  Could  not
justice  concede  to the criminal  the same weakness  in which  society
nds  a sort of permanent  extenuating  circumstance  for itself?  Can
the jury decently  say: “If I kill you by mistake,  you will forgive  me
when you consider the weaknesses  of our common  nature.  But I am
condemning  you to death without  considering  those weaknesses  or
that nature”? There is a solidarity of all men in error and aberration.
Must  that  solidarity  operate   for  the  tribunal  and  be  denied  the
accused?  No, and if justice  has any meaning  in this world,  it means
nothing  but the recognition  of that solidarity;  it cannot,  by its very
essence,  divorce  itself from compassion.  Compassion,  of course,  can
in this instance  be but awareness  of a common  suering  and not a
frivolous  indulgence paying  no attention  to the suerings  and rights
of  the  victim.  Compassion  does  not  exclude  punishment,  but  it
suspends  the nal  condemna tion. Compassion  loathes  the denitive,
irreparable  measure that does an injustice  to mankind  as a whole
because  of  failing  to  take  into  account  the  wretchedness  of  the
common condition.
To tell the truth,  certain  juries  are well aware  of this, for they
often admit  extenuating  circumstances  in a crime  that nothing  can
extenuate.  This  is  because  the  death  penalty  seems  excessive  to
them  in  such  cases  and  they  prefer  not  punishing  enough  to
punishing  too much.  The extreme  severity  of the penalty  then favors
crime  instead  of penalizing  it. There  is not a court session during
which  we do not read in the press that a verdict  is incoherent  and
that, in view of the facts, it seems  either  insucient  or excessive.
But  the  jurors  are  not  ignorant  of  this.  However,  faced  with  the
enormity  of  capital  punishment,  they  prefer,  as  we  too  should
prefer,  to look like fools rather than to compromise  their nights  to
come.  Knowing  themselves  to  be  fallible,  they  at  least  draw  the
appropriate  consequences.  And true justice  is on their side precisely
insofar as logic is not.
There  are,  however,  major  criminals  whom  all  juries  would
condemn  at any time and in any place whatever.  Their crimes  are

not open to doubt, and the evidence  brought  by the accusation  is
conrmed  by the confessions  of the defense.  Most likely,  everything
that is abnorm al and monstrous  in them is enough  to classify  them
as pathological.  But the psychiatric  experts,  in the majority  of cases,
arm  their responsibility.  Recently  in Paris a young  man, somewhat
weak in character  but kind and aectionate,  devoted  to his family,
was,  according   to  his  own  admission,  annoyed  by  a  remark  his
father  made  about  his  coming  home  late.  The  father  was  sitting
reading  at the dining-room  table. The young  man seized  an ax and
dealt his father several  blows from behind.  Then in the same way he
struck  down his mother,  who was in the kitchen.  He undressed,  hid
his bloodstained  trousers  in the closet,  went to make a call on the
family  of  his  ancée,  without  showing  any  signs,  then  returned
home  and  notied  the  police  that  he  had  just  found  his  parents
murdered.  The  police  immediately  discovered  the  bloodstained
trousers  and,  without  dic   ulty,  got  a  calm  confession  from  the
parricide.  The  psychiatrists  decided  that  this  man  who  murdered
through  annoyance  was responsible.  His odd indierence,  of which
he was to give other indications  in prison  (showing  pleasure  because
his  parents’  funeral  had  attracted  so  many  people—“They  were
much loved,” he told his lawyer), cannot,  however,  be considered  as
normal. But his reasoning power was apparently untouched.
Many  “monste rs” oer   equally  impenetrable  exteriors.  They are
eliminated  on the mere consideration  of the facts. Apparently  the
nature  or  the  magnitude  of  their  crimes  allows  no  room  for
imagining  that they can ever repent  or reform.  They must merely  be
kept  from  doing  it  again,  and  there  is  no  other  solution  but  to
eliminate  them. On this frontier,  and on it alone,  discussion about
the death penalty  is legitimate.  In all other cases the arguments  for
capital  punishment  do  not  stand  up  to  the  criticisms  of  the
abolitionists.  But in extreme  cases, and in our state of ignorance,  we
make a wager.  No fact, no reasoning  can bring together  those who
think that a chance  must always  be left to the vilest of men and
those who consider  that chance illusory.  But it is perhap s possible,
on  that  nal  frontier,  to  go  beyond  the  long  opposition  between
partisans  and  adversaries  of  the  death  penalty  by  weighing  the

advisability  of that penalty  today,  and in Europe.  With much  less
competence,  I shall try to reply to the wish expressed  by a Swiss
jurist,  Professor  Jean Graven , who wrote  in 1952 in his remarkable
study on the problem  of the death penalty:  “Faced  with the  problem
that is once more confrontin g our conscience  and our reason,  we
think that a solution  must be sought,  not through  the conceptions,
problems,  and arguments  of the past, nor through  the hopes  and
theoretical  promises  of the future,  but through  the ideas, recognized
25 facts,  and  necessities  of  the  present.”   It  is  possible,  indeed,  to
debate  endlessly  as to the benets   or harm attributable  to the death
penalty  through  the ages or in an intellectual  vacuum.  But it plays a
role here and now, and we must take our stand here and now in
relation  to the modern  executioner.  What does the death  penalty
mean to the men of the mid-century?
To simplify  matters,  let us say that our civilization  has lost the only
values  that, in a certain  way, can justify  that penalty  and, on the
other  hand,  suers  from  evils  that  necessitate  its  suppression.  In
other words,  the abolition  of the death penalty  ought to be asked for
by all thinking  members  of our society,  for reasons  both of logic and
of realism.
Of  logic,  to  begin  with.  Deciding  that  a  man  must  have  the
denitive  punishment  imposed  on him is tantamount  to deciding
that that man has no chance  of making  amends.  This is the point,  to
repeat  ourselves,  where  the arguments  clash blindly  and crystallize
in a sterile  opposition.  But it so happens  that none among  us can
settle the question,  for we are all both judges  and interested  parties.
Whence  our uncertainty  as to our right to kill and our inability  to
convince  each  other.  Without  absolute  innocence,  there  is  no
supreme  judge.  Now, we have all done wrong  in our lives even if
that wrong, without  falling  within  the jurisdiction  of the laws, went
as  far  as  the  unknown  crime.  There  are  no  just  people—merely
hearts  more or less lacking  in justice.  Living  at least allows  us to
discover  this and to add to the sum of our actions  a little of the good
that will make up in part for the evil we have added  to the world.

Such a right to live, which  allows a chance  to make amends,  is the
natural  right  of  every  man,  even  the  worst  man.  The  lowest  of
criminals  and the most upright of judges  meet side by side, equally
wretched  in their solidarity.  Without  that right, moral  life is utterly
impossible.  None among  us is authorized  to despair  of a single  man,
except  after his death,  which  transforms  his life into destiny  and
then permits  a denitive  judgment.  But pronouncing  the denitive
judgment  before  his death,  decreeing  the closing  of accounts  when
the creditor  is still alive, is no man’s  right. On this limit, at least,
whoever judges absolutely condemns himself absolutely.
Bernard  Fallot  of the Masuy  gang, working  for the Gestapo,  was
condemned  to  death  after  admitting  the  many  terrible   crimes  of
which  he  was  guilty,  and  declared  himself  that  he  could  not  be
pardoned.  “My  hands  are  too  red  with  blood,”  he  told  a  prison
26 mate.   Public  opinion  and  the  opinion  of  his  judges  certainly
classed  him  among  the  irremediable,  and  I  should  have  been
tempted  to agree if I had not read a surprising  testimony.  This is
what  Fallot  said  to  the  same  companion  after  declaring  that  he
wanted  to die courageously:  “Shall  I tell you my greatest  regret?
Well, it is not having known  the Bible I now have here. I assure  you
that I wouldn’t  be where  I now am.” There  is no question  of giving
in to some conventional  set of sentimental  pictures  and calling  to
mind  Victor  Hugo’s  good  convicts.  The  age  of  enlightenment,  as
people  say, wanted  to suppre ss the death penalty  on the pretext  that
man was naturally  good. Of course  he is not (he is worse  or better).
After twenty  years of our magnicent  history  we are well aware  of
this. But precisely  because  he is not absolutely  good, no one among
us  can  pose  as  an  absolute  judge  and  pronounce  the  denitive
elimination  of the worst among  the guilty,  because  no one of us can
lay claim to absolute  innoce nce. Capital  judgment  upsets the only
indisputable  human solidarit y—our  solidarity  against  death—and  it
can be legitim ized only by a truth or a principle  that is superior  to
man.
In fact, the supreme punishment  has always  been, throug hout the
ages, a religious  penalty.  Inicted  in the name of the king, God’s
representative  on  earth,  or  by  priests  or  in  the  name  of  society

considered  as a sacred  body, it denies,  not human  solidari ty, but the
guilty  man’s  membership  in the divine  community,  the only thing
that can give him life. Life on earth is taken from him, to be sure,
but his chance  of making  amends  is left him. The real judgment  is
not pronounced;  it will be in the other world.  Only religious  values,
and especially  belief in eternal  life, can therefore  serve as a basis for
the supreme punishment  because,  according  to their  own logic, they
keep  it  from  being  denitive  and  irreparable.  Consequ ently,  it  is
justied only insofar as it is not supreme.
The  Catholic  Church,  for  example,  has  always  accepted  the
necessity  of the death  penalty.  It inicted  that penalty  itself,  and
without  stint, in other periods.  Even today  it justies  it and grants
the  State  the  right  to  apply  it.  The  Church’s  position,  however
subtle,  contains  a very deep feeling  that was expressed  directly  in
1937  by  a  Swiss  National  Councillor  from  Fribourg   during  a
discussion  in  the  National  Council.  According  to  M.  Grand,  the
lowest  of  criminals  when  faced  with  execution  withdraws  into
himself.  “He  repents  and  his  preparation  for  death  is  thereby
facilitated.  The Church  has saved one of its members  and fullled  its
divine  mission .  This  is  why  it  has  always  accepted  the  death
penalty,  not only as a means  of self-defense,  but  as a powerful  means
27 of salvation .  ... Without trying to make of it a thing of the Church,
the death  penalty  can point proudly  to its almost  divine  ecacy,
like war.”
By virtue  of the same reasoning,  probably,  there could be read on
the sword  of the Fribourg  executioner  the words:  “Lord Jesus,  thou
art  the  judge.”  Hence  the  executioner  is  invested  with  a  sacred
function.  He is the man who destroys  the body in order to deliver
the soul to the divine  sentenc e, which  no one can judge beforehand.
Some  may  think  that  such  words  imply  rather  scandalous
confusions.  And, to be sure, whoever  clings  to the teaching  of Jesus
will look upon that handsome  sword  as one more outrage to the
person  of Christ.  In the  light of this, it is possible  to understand  the
dreadful  remark  of the Russian  condemned  man about to be hanged
by the Tsar’s executioners  in 1905 who said rmly  to the priest who
had come to console  him with the image  of Christ:  “Go away and

commit  no  sacrilege.”  The  unbeliever  cannot  keep  from  thinking
that men who have set at the center  of their faith the staggering
victim  of  a  judicial  error  ought  at  least  to  hesitate  before
committing  legal  murder.  Believers  might  also  be  reminded  that
Emperor  Julian, before  his conversion,  did not want to give ocial
oces  to  Christians  because  they  systematically  refused  to
pronounce  death sentences  or to have anything  to do with them. For
ve  centuries  Christians  therefore  believed  that  the  strict  moral
teaching  of their master  forbade  killing.  But Catholic  faith is not
nourished  solely  by the personal  teaching  of Christ.  It also feeds on
the  Old  Testament,  on  St.  Paul,  and  on  the  Church  Fathers.  In
particular,  the immortality  of the soul and the universal  resurrection
of bodies  are articles  of dogma.  As a result,  capital  punishment  is for
the believer  a temporary  penalty that leaves  the nal  sentence  in
suspense,  an  arrangement  necessary  only  for  terrestrial  order,  an
administrative  measure  which,  far from signifying  the end for the
guilty  man, may instead  favor his redemption.  I am not saying  that
all believers agree with this, and I can readily  imagine  that some
Catholics  may stand closer  to Christ  than to Moses  or St. Paul. I am
simply  saying  that  faith  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  allowed
Catholicism  to  see  the  problem  of  capital  punishmen t  in  very
dierent terms and to justify it.
But what is the value of such a justication  in the society  we live
in, which in its institutions  and its customs  has lost all contact with
the sacred? When  an atheistic  or skeptical  or agnostic  judge inicts
the death  penalty  on an unbelieving  criminal,  he is pronouncing  a
denitive  punishment  that  cannot  be  reconsidered.  He  takes  his
28 place on the throne of God,  without  having  the same powers  and
even  without  believing  in  God.  He  kills,  in  short,  because  his
ancestors  believed  in eternal  life. But the society  that he claims  to
represent  is in reality  pronouncing  a simple  measure  of elimination,
doing  violence  to the human  community  united  against  death,  and
taking  a stand as an absolut e value because  society  is laying  claim
to  absolute  power.  To  be  sure,  it  delegates  a  priest  to  the
condemned  man,  through  tradition.  The  priest  may  legitimately
hope that fear of punishment  will help the guilty  man’s  conversion.

Who can accept,  however,  that such a calculation  should  justify  a
penalty  most often inicted  and received  in a quite die  rent spirit?
It is one thing to believe  before  being  afraid  and another  to nd
faith after fear. Conversion  through  re  or the guillotine  will always
be  suspect,  and  it  may  seem  surprising  that  the  Church  has  not
given up conquering  indels  through  terror.  In any case, society  that
has  lost  all  contact  with  the  sacred  can  nd  no  advantage  in  a
conversion  in which  it professes  to have no interest.  Society  decrees
a sacred punishment  and at the same time divests  it both of excuse
and of usefulness.  Society  proceeds sovereignly  to eliminate  the  evil
ones from her midst as if she were virtue  itself. Like an honorable
man killing  his wayward  son and remarking:  “Really,  I didn’t  know
what to do with him.” She assumes  the right to select as if she were
nature  herself and to add great suerings  to the elimination  as if she
were a redeeming god.
To assert, in any case, that a man must be absolutely  cut o   from
society  because  he is absolutely  evil amounts  to saying  that society
is absolutely good, and no one in his right mind will believe  this
today.  Instead  of believing  this, people  will more readily  think the
reverse.  Our  society  has  become  so  bad  and  so  criminal  only
because  she has respected  nothing  but her own preservation  or a
good reputation  in history.  Society  has indeed  lost all contact  with
the sacred.  But society  began  in the nineteenth  century  to nd  a
substitute  for religion  by proposing herself  as an object  of adoration.
The  doctrines   of  evolution  and  the  notions  of  selection  that
accompany  them have made of the future  of society  a na l end. The
political  utopias that were grafted  onto those doctrines  placed  at the
end of time a golden  age that justied  in advance  any enterprises
whatever.  Society  became  accustomed  to legitimizing  what might
serve her future  and, consequently,  to making  use of the supreme
punishment  in an absolute  way. From then on, society  considered  as
a crime  and a sacrilege  anything  that stood in the way of her plan
and her temporal  dogmas.  In other words,  after being a priest,  the
executioner  became  a  government  ocial.  The  result  is  here  all
around  us. The situation  is such that this mid-century  society  which

has lost the right, in all logic, to decree  capital  punishment  ought
now to suppress it for reasons of realism.
In relation  to crime,  how can our civilization  be dened?  The reply
is  easy:  for  thirty  years  now,  State  crimes  have  been  far  more
numerous  than individual  crimes.  I am not even speaking  of wars,
general  or  localized,  although  bloodshed  too  is  an  alcohol  that
eventually  intoxicates  like the headiest  of wines.  But the number  of
individuals  killed  directly  by  the  State  has  assumed  astronomical
proportions  and innitely  outnumbers  private  murders.  There  are
fewer  and fewer  condemned  by common  law and more and more
condemned  for  political  reasons.  The  proof  is  that  each  of  us,
however  honorable  he may be, can foresee  the possibility  of being
someday  condemned  to death,  whereas  that eventuality  would  have
seemed  ridicul ous at the beginning  of the century.  Alphonse  Karr’s
witty remark:  “Let the noble assassins  begin”  has no meaning  now.
Those  who cause  the most blood  to ow  are the same ones who
believe they have right, logic, and history on their side.
Hence  our society  must now defend  herself  not so much against
the individual  as against  the State.  It may be that the proportions
will be reversed  in another  thirty  years.  But, for the moment,  our
self-defense  must be aimed  at the State rst  and foremost.  Justice
and expediency  command  the law to protect  the individual  against  a
State given over to the follies  of sectarianism  or of pride.  “Let the
State begin and abolish  the death penalty”  ought  to be our rallying
cry today.
Bloodthirsty  laws, it has been said, make bloodthirsty  customs.
But any society  eventually  reaches  a state of ignominy  in which,
despite  every  disorder,  the  customs  never  manage  to  be  as
bloodthirsty  as the laws. Half of Europe  knows  that condition.  We
French  knew it in the past and may again know it. Those executed
during  the  Occupation  led  to  those  executed  at  the  time  of  the
Liberation,  whose  friends  now dream  of revenge.  Elsewhere  States
laden with too many crimes  are getting  ready to drown  their guilt in
even greater massacres.  One kills for a nation  or a class that has

been granted  divine  status.  One kills for a future  society that has
likewise  been  given  divine  status.  Whoever  thinks  he  has
omniscience  imagines  he  has  omnipotence.  Temporal  idols
demanding  an absolute  faith tirelessly  decree  absolute  punishments.
And  religions  devoid  of  transcendence  kill  great  numbers  of
condemned men devoid of hope.
How can European  society  of the mid-century  survive  unless  it
decides  to  defend  individuals  by  every  means  against  the  State’s
oppression?  Forbidding  a  man’s  execution  would  amount  to
proclaiming  publicly  that  society  and  the  State  are  not  absolute
values,  that nothing  authorizes  them to legislate  denitively  or to
bring about the irreparable.  Without  the death penalty,  Gabriel  Péri
and Brasillach  would  perhaps  be among  us. We could  then judge
them according  to our opinion  and proudly  proclaim  our judgment,
whereas  now they judge us and we keep silent.  Without  the death
penalty  Rajk’s  corpse  would  not  poison  Hungary;  Germany,  with
less guilt on her conscience,  would  be more favorably  looked  upon
by  Europe;  the  Russian  Revolution  would  not  be  agonizing  in
shame;  and  Algerian  blood  would  weigh  less  heavily  on  our
consciences.  Without  the  death  penalty,  Europe  would  not  be
infected  by the corpses  accumulated  for the last twenty  years in its
tired soil. On our continent,  all values  are upset by fear and hatred
between  individuals  and between  nations.  In the conict  of ideas
the weapons are the cord and the guillotine.  A natural  and human
society  exercising  her  right  of  repression  has  given  way  to  a
dominant  ideology  that requires  human  sacrices.  “The example  of
29 the gallows,” it has been written,  “is that a man’s life ceases  to be
sacred  when  it  is  thought  useful  to  kill  him.”  Apparently  it  is
becoming  ever  more  useful;  the  example  is  being  copied;  the
contagion  is  spreading  everywhere.  And  together  with  it,  the
disorder  of  nihilism.  Hence  we  must  call  a  spectacula r  halt  and
proclaim,  in our principles  and institutions,  that the individual  is
above  the State.  And any measure  that decreases  the pressure  of
social forces  upon the individ ual will help to relieve  the congestion
of a Europe  suering  from a rush of blood,  allowing  us to think
more  clearly  and  to  start  on  the  way  toward  health.  Europe’s

malady  consists  in  believing  nothing  and  claiming  to  know
everything.  But Europe  is far from knowing  everything,  and, judging
from the revolt  and hope we feel, she believes  in something:  she
believes  that  the  extreme  of  man’s  wretchedness,  on  some
mysterious  limit, borders  on the extreme  of his greatness.  For the
majority  of Europeans,  faith is lost. And with it, the justications
faith provided  in the domain  of punishment.  But the majority  of
Europeans  also reject the State  idolatry  that aimed  to take the place
of  faith.  Henceforth  in  mid-course,  both  certain  and  uncertain,
having  made up our minds  never to submit  and never to oppress,  we
should  admit  at one and the same time our hope and our ignorance,
we should  refuse  absolute  law and the irreparable  judgment.  We
know enough  to say that this or that major  criminal  deserves  hard
labor for life. But we don’t know enough  to decree  that he be shorn
of his future—in  other words,  of the chance  we all have of making
amends.  Because  of what I have just said, in the unied  Europe  of
the future the solemn  abolition of the death penalty  ought to be the
rst article of the European Code we all hope for.
From  the  humanitarian  idylls  of  the  eighteenth  century  to  the
bloodstained  gallows  the way leads directly,  and the executioners  of
today,  as everyone  knows,  are humanists.  Hence  we cannot  be too
wary of the humanitarian  ideology  in dealing  with a problem  such
as  the  death  penalty.  On  the  point  of  concluding,  I  should  like
therefore  to  repeat  that  neither  an  illusion  as  to  the  natural
goodness  of the human  being nor faith in a golden  age to come
motivates  my opposition  to the death  penalty.  On the contrary,  its
abolition  seems to me necessary because  of reasoned  pessimism,  of
logic, and of realism.  Not that the heart has no share in what I have
said.  Anyone  who  has  spent  weeks  with  texts,  recollections,  and
men  having  any  contact,  whether  close  or  not,  with  the  gallows
could not possibly  remain  untouched  by that experience.  But, let me
repeat,  I do not believe,  nonetheless,  that there is no responsibility
in this world  and that we must give way to that modern  tendency  to
absolve  everything,  victim  and  murderer,  in  the  same  confusion.

Such purely sentimental  confusion  is made up of cowardice  rather
than of generosity  and eventually justies  whatever  is worst in this
world.  If you keep on excusing,  you eventually  give your blessing  to
the slave camp,  to cowardly  force, to organized  executioners,  to the
cynicism  of  great  political  monsters;  you  nally  hand  over  your
brothers.  This  can  be  seen  around  us.  But  it  so  happens,  in  the
present  state of the world,  that the man of today  wants  laws and
institutions  suitable  to a convalescent,  which  will curb him without
breaking  him and lead him without  crushing  him. Hurled into the
unchecked  dynamic  movement  of  history,  he  needs  a  natural
philosophy  and  a  few  laws  of  equilibrium.  He  needs,  in  short,  a
society  based on reason  and not the anarchy  into which  he has been
plunged by his own pride and the excessive powers of the State.
I am convinced  that abolition  of the death penalty  would help us
progress  toward that society.  After taking  such an initiative, France
could  oer  to extend  it to the non-abolitionist  countrie s on both
sides  of  the  iron  curtain.  But,  in  any  case,  she  should  set  the
example.  Capital punishment  would  then be replaced  by hard labor
—for life in the case of criminals  considered  irremediable  and for a
xed  period  in the case of the others.  To any who feel that such a
penalty  is harsher  than capital  punishment  we can only express  our
amazement  that they did not suggest,  in this case, reserving it for
such as Landru  and applying  capital  punishment  to minor  criminals.
We might  remind  them,  too, that hard labor leaves  the condemned
man the possibility  of choosing  death,  whereas  the guillotine  oers
no alternative.  To any who feel, on the other hand, that hard labor
is too mild a penalty,  we can answer  rst  that they lack imagination
and  secondly  that  privation   of  freedom  seems  to  them  a  slight
punishment  only insofar  as contemporary  society  has taught  us to
30 despise freedom.
The fact that Cain is not killed but bears a mark of reprobation  in
the eyes of men is the lesson  we must draw from the Old Testament,
to say nothing  of the Gospel s, instead  of looking  back to the cruel
examples  of the Mosaic  law. In any case, nothing  keeps  us from
trying  out  an  experiment,  limited  in  duration  (ten  years,  for
instance),  if our Parliament  is still incapable  of making  up for its

votes in favor of alcohol  by such a great civilizing  step as complete
abolition  of  the  penalty.  And  if,  really,  public  opinion  and  its
representatives  cannot  give  up  the  law  of  laziness  which  simply
eliminates  what it cannot  reform, let us at least—while  hoping  for a
31 new  day  of  truth—not  make  of  it  the  “solemn  slaughterhouse”
that befouls our society.  The death penalty  as it is now applied, and
however  rarely  it  may  be,  is  a  revolting  butchery,  an  outrage
inicted  on the person  and body of man. That truncation,  that living
and yet uprooted  head, those spurts  of blood date from a barbarous
period  that  aimed  to  impress  the  masses  with  degrading  sights.
Today  when such vile death is administered  on the sly, what is the
meaning  of this torture?  The truth is that in the nuclear  age we kill
as we did in the age of the spring  balance.  And there is not a man of
normal  sensitiv ity who, at the mere thought  of such crude surgery,
does  not  feel  nauseated.  If  the  French  State  is  incapable  of
overcoming  habit and giving  Europe  one of the remedies  it needs,
let France begin by reforming  the manner  of administering  capital
punishment.  The science  that serves  to kill so many could at least
serve  to  kill  decently.  An  anesthetic  that  would  allow  the
condemned  man to slip from sleep to death  (which  would be left
within  his reach for at least a day so that he could use it freely and
would  be administered  to him in another  form if he were unwilling
or  weak  of  will)  would  assure  his  elimination,  if  you  insist,  but
would  put a little decency  into what is at present  but a sordid  and
obscene exhibition.
I suggest such compromises  only insofar  as one must occasionally
despair  of  seeing  wisdom  and  true  civilization  inuence  those
responsible  for our future.  For certain  men, more numerous  than we
think,  it is physically  unbearable  to know what the death  penalty
really  is and not to be able to prevent  its application.  In their way,
they suer   that penalty  themselves,  and without  any justice.  If only
the  weight  of  lthy  images  weighing  upon  them  were  reduced,
society  would  lose nothing.  But even that, in the long run, will be
inadequate.  There  will be no lasting  peace  either  in the heart of
individuals or in social customs until death is outlawed.

1  Accordin g to the optimistic  Dr. Guillotin,  the condemned  was not to feel anything.  At
most a “slight sensation of coldness on his neck.”
2   Justice sans bourreau , No. 2 (June 1956).
3   Published  by  Roger  Grenier  in  Les  Monstres   (Gallimard).  These  declarations  are
authentic.
4  Editions Matot-Braine, Reims.
5  In 1905 in the Loiret.
6   Réalités , No. 105 (October 1954).
7  It is possible to read every week in the papers  of criminals  who originall y hesitated
between killing themselves and killing others.
8  Report of the English  Select  Committee  of 1930 and of the English  Royal  Commission
that recently  resumed  the study:  “All the statistics  we have examined  conrm  the fact
that abolition of the death  penalty  has not provoked  an increase  in the number  of
crimes.”
9  Report of the Select Committee, 1930.
10   La Potence et la Croix  (Fasquelle).
11  Roger Grenier:  Les Monstres  (Gallimard).
12  Ibid.
13  A few years ago I asked for the reprieve of six Tunisians  who had been condemned  to
death for the murder, in a riot, of three French  policemen.  The circumstances  in which
the murder  had taken place made dicult  any division  of responsibilities.  A note from
the executive  oce   of the President  of the Republic  informed  me that my appeal  was
being considered  by the appropriate  organization.  Unfortunately,  when that note was
addressed  to me I had already  read two weeks  earlier  that the sentence  had been
carried  out. Three  of the condemned  men had been put to death and the three others
reprieved.  The reasons  for reprieving  some rather  than the others  were not convincing.
But probably  it was essential  to carry out three executions  where  there had been three
victims.
14  Roemen, condemned  to death  at the Liberation  of France,  remained  seven hundred
days in chains  before  being executed,  and this is scandalous.  Those  condemned  under
common  law, as a general  rule, wait from three to six months  for the morning  of their
death.  And it is dicult,  if one wants  to maintain  their chances  of survival,  to shorten
that period.  I can bear witness,  moreover,  to the fact that the examination  of appeals

for mercy is conducted  in France  with a seriousness  that does not exclude  the visible
inclination to pardon, insofar as the law and customs permit.
15  Sunday  not being a day of execution,  Saturday  night is always  better  in the cell blocks
reserved for those condemned to death.
16  Bela Just: op. cit.
17  A great surgeon,  a Catholic  himself,  told me that as a result of his experience  he did
not even inform  believers  when they had an incurable  cancer.  According  to him, the
shock might destroy even their faith.
18  Father  Devoyod:  op. cit. Equally  impossible  to read calmly  the petitions  for reprieve
presented  by a father  or a mother  who obviously  does not understand  such sudden
misfortune.
19  France  ranks rst  among  countries  for its consumption  of alcohol  and f teenth  in
building.
20  The partisans  of the death penalty  made considerable  publicity  at the end of the last
century  about an increase  in criminality  beginning  in 1880, which  seemed  to parallel  a
decrease  in  application  of  the  penalty.  But  in  1880  a  law  was  promulgated  that
permitted  bars to be opened  without  any prior authorization.  After that, just try to
interpret statistics!
21  It must be noted that the custom  in American  prisons  is to move the condemned  man
into another  cell on the eve of his execution  while announcing  to him the ceremony  in
store for him.
22  This is the name of the innocent man guillotined in the case of the  Courrier de Lyon.
23  The condemned  man was accused  of having  killed  his wife. But her body had not
been found.
24  We congratulated  ourselves  on having  reprieved  Sillon,  who recently  killed his four-
year-old  daughter  in order not to give her to her mother,  who wanted  a divorce.  It was
discovered,  in fact, during  his imprisonment  that Sillon  was suering  from a brain
tumor that might explain the madness of his deed.
25   Revue de Criminologie et de Police Technique  (Geneva), special issue, 1952.
26  Jean Bocognano:  Quartier des fauves, prison de Fresnes  (Editions du Fuseau).
27  My italics.
28  As everyo ne knows, the jury’s decision  is preceded  by the words:  “Before  God and my
conscience ...”

29  By Francart.
30   See  the  report  on  the  death  penalty  by  Representative  Dupont  in  the  National
Assembly  on 31 May 1791:  “A sharp and burning  mood  consumes  the assassin;  the
thing he fears most is inactivity;  it leaves  him to himself,  and to get away from it he
continually  braves  death  and  tries  to  cause  death  in  others;  solitude  and  his  own
conscience  are his real torture.  Does this not suggest  to you what kind of punishment
should  be inicted  on him, what is the kind to which  he will be most sensitive?  Is it
not  in the  nature  of the  malady  that  the  remedy  is to be found?”  I have italicized  the last
sentence,  for  it  makes  of  that  little-known  Representative  a  true  precursor  of  our
modern psychology.
31  Tarde.

The Artist and His Time

THE WAGER OF OUR GENERATION
(Interview in  Demain , issue of 24–30 October 1957)
The notion  of art for art’s sake is
obviously  alien  to  your  thinking.
That  of  “commitment”  as  it  has
been  made  fashionable  of  late  is
equally  so.  Taken  in  its  present
meaning,  commitment  consists  in
making  one’s art subservien t to a
policy.  It seems  to me that there is
something  more important,  which
is characteristi c of your work,  that
might  be called  inserting  that work
into its time. Is this correct?  And,
if  it  is,  how  would  you  describe
that insertion?
CAN  accept  your expression:  inserting  a work into its time. But,
I after all, this describes  all literary  art. Every writer  tries to give a
form to the passions  of his time. Yesterday  it was love. Today  the
great passions  of unity and liberty disrupt  the world.  Yesterday  love
led to individual  death.  Today collective  passions  make us  run the
risk of universal  destruction.  Today,  just as yesterday,  art wants  to
save from death a living image of our passions and our suerings.
Perhaps  it is harder today.  It is possible  to fall in love every once
in a while.  Once is enough,  after all. But it is not possible to be a
militant  in  one’s  spare  time.  And  so  the  artist  of  today  becomes
unreal  if he remains  in his ivory tower  or sterilized  if he spends  his
time galloping  around  the political  arena.  Yet between  the two lies
the arduous  way of true art. It seems  to me that the writer  must be

fully aware  of the dramas  of his time and that he must take sides
every time he can or knows  how to do so. But he must also maintain
or resume  from time to time a certain  distance  in relation  to our
history.  Every  work presupp oses a content  of reality  and a creator
who shapes  the container.  Consequently,  the artist,  if he must share
the misfortune  of his time, must also tear himself  away in order to
consider  that misfortune  and give it form. This continual  shuttling,
this tension  that gradually  becomes  increasingly  dangerous,  is the
task of the artist of today.  Perhaps  this means  that in a short time
there will be no more artists.  And perhaps  not. It is a question  of
time, of strength, of mastery, and also of chance.
In any case, this is what ought to be. There remains  what is; there
remains  the truth of our days, which  is less magnicen t. And the
truth, as I see it at least, is that the artist is groping  his way in the
dark, just like the man in the street—incapable  of separati ng himself
from the world’s  misfortune  and passionately  longing  for solitude
and  silence;  dreaming  of  justice,  yet  being  himself  a  source  of
injustice;  dragged—even  though he thinks  he is driving  it—behind  a
chariot  that is bigger  than he. In this exhausting  adventure  the artist
can only draw help from others, and, like anyone  else, he will get
help from pleasure,  from forgetting,  and also from friendship  and
admiration.  And, like anyone  else, he will get help from hope. In my
case, I have always  drawn  my hope from the idea of fecundity.  Like
many  men  today,  I  am  tired  of  criticism,  of  disparagement,  of
spitefulness—of  nihilism,  in short.  It is essential  to condemn what
must be condemned,  but swiftly  and rmly.  On the other hand, one
should  praise  at length  what still deserves  to be praised.  After all,
that is why I am an artist,  because  even the work that negates  still
arms  something  and  does  homage  to  the  wretched  and
magnicent life that is ours.
When  a man speaks  as you do, he
is not speaking  solely  for himself.
He  is  inevitably  speaking  for
others.  And  he  is  speaking  for
something.  In  other  words,   he  is

speaking  in  the  name  of  and  in
favor  of  men  for  whom  those
values  count.  Who are those men
and what are those values?
To  begin  with,  I  feel  a  solidarity  with  the  common  man.
Tomorrow  the  world  may  burst  into  fragments.  In  that  threat
hanging  over our heads there is  a lesson  of truth. As we face such a
future,  hierarchies,  titles,  honors are reduced  to what they are in
reality:  a passing  pu    of smoke.  And the only certainty  left to us is
that of naked  suering,  common to all, intermingling  its roots with
those of a stubborn hope.
In the battles  of our time I have always  been on the side of the
obstinate,  on the side of those who have never despaired  of a certain
honor.  I have shared  and I still share many  of the contemporary
frenzies.  But I have never been able to get myself  to spit, as so many
others  do, on the word “honor.”  Doubtless  because  I was and am
aware  of  my  human  weaknesses  and  of  my  injustices,  because  I
instinctively  knew  and  still  know  that  honor  (like  pity)  is  an
unreasonable  virtue that takes the place of justice  and reason, which
have become  powerless.  The man whose  blood,  and extravagances,
and frail heart lead him to the commonest  weaknesses  must rely on
something  in order  to get to the point of respecting  himself  and
hence  of  respecting  others.  This  is  why  I  loathe  a  certain  self-
satised  virtue,  I  loathe  society’s  dreadful  morality  because  it
results,  exactly  like absolute  cynicism,  in making  men despair  and in
keeping  them from taking  responsibility  for their own life with all
its weight of errors and greatness.
The aim of art, the aim of a life can only be to increase  the sum of
freedom  and  responsibility  to  be  found  in  every  man  and  in  the
world  It cannot,  under  any circumstances,  be to reduce  or suppress
that freedom,  even temporar ily. There  are works  of art that tend to
make man conform  and to convert  him to some external  rule. Others
tend to subject  him to whatever  is worst in  him, to terror or hatred.

Such works  are valueless  to me. No great work has ever been based
on hatred or contempt.  On the contrary,  there is not a single  true
work of art that has not in the end added  to the inner freedom  of
each person  who has known  and loved it. Yes, that is the freedom  I
am extolling, and it is what helps me through  life. An artist may
make a success  or a failure  of his work. He may make a success  or a
failure  of his life. But if he can tell himself  that, nally,  as a result of
his  long  eort,  he  has  eased  or  decreased  the  various  forms  of
bondage  weighing  upon men, then in a sense he is justied  and, to
some extent, he can forgive himself.
At the source  of every work there
is an experience.  It may be a brief
and brutal  experience,  a trauma. It
may  also  be   a   protracted
experience,  generally  the
experience  of  childhood  and
adolescence.  For  you,  to  begin
with, there was the Mediterranean
and  poverty.  But  with  maturity
come  other  experiences  to
inuence  and  color  one’s  early
impressions.  For you they took the
form of war and Resistance.  Have
not  the  last  few  years  likewise
been  the  source  of  a  new
experience?  In  what  way,  and
what have they brought you?
Yes, there was the sun and poverty.  Then sports,  from which  I
learned  all I know about  ethics.  Next the war and the Resistance.
And, as a result,  the tempta tion of hatred.  Seeing  beloved  friends
and relatives  killed is not a schooling  in generosity.  The temptation

of hatred had to be overcome.  And I did so. This is an experience
that counts.
Then the years since the Liberation  were largely  marked , in my
case, by the experience  of a solitary  struggle.  I had friends,  to be
sure, good, generous,  and loyal friends,  the mere thought  of whom
warms  my  heart  today.  But  the  decisions  I  had  to  make,  which
counted  the  most  for  me—the  decision  to  write  The  Rebel ,  for
instance—were  solitary  and  dicult  decisions.  And  also  what
followed.  But  at  the  same  time  history  progressed.  East  Berlin,
Poznan,  Budapest  ...  A  gigantic  myth  collapsed.  A  certain  truth,
which  had long been disguised,  burst upon the world.  And if the
present  is still spattered  with blood and the future  still dark, at least
we  know  that  the  era  of  ideologies  is  over,  and  the  force  of
resistance,  together with the value of freedom,  gives us new reasons
for living.
That’s it. And of course one must add purely personal experiences.
We spoke of inserting  a work into
its  time.  But  it  also  belongs  to  a
current  of  thought  that  is,  in  a
way,  geographical.  It  strikes  me
that your work, like that of several
contemporary  writers —I  am
thinking  particularly  of Silone  and
Ortega  y  Gasset—can  be  said  to
belong  to  Europe.  Are  you  aware
of  this  and  does  that  intellectual
Europe seem to you a reality?
Yes, I am aware of such a Europe  and I believe  it foreshad ows our
political  future. The more French I feel, the more I believe  this. No
one is more closely  attached  to his Algerian  province  than I, and yet
I have no trouble  feeling  a part of French  tradition.  Consequently,  I
learned,  as naturally  as we learn to breathe,  that love of one’s native

land can broaden  without  dying.  And, nally,  it is because  I love my
country  that I feel European.  Just take for example  Ortega  y Gasset,
whom  you  were  right  to  mention.  He  is  perhaps  the  greatest  of
European  writers  after Nietzsche, and yet it would  be hard to be
more Spanish.  Silone  speaks  to all of Europe,  and the reason  I feel so
close to him is that he is also so unbelievably  rooted  in his national
and even provincial tradition.
Unity  and diversity, and never  one without  the other—isn’t  this
the  very  secret  of  our  Europe?  Europe  has  lived  on  its
contradictions,  ourished  on  its  dierences,  and,  constantly
transcending  itself thereby,  has created  a civilization  on which  the
whole  world depends  even when rejecting  it. This is why I do not
believe  in a Europe unied  under  the weight  of an ideology or of a
technocracy  that would  overlook  these dierences.  Any more than I
believe  in a Europe  left to its dierences  alone—in  other words,  left
to an anarchy of enemy nationalisms.
If Europe  is not destroyed  by re,  it will come into being.  And
Russia  will in time be added  to it, with its individual  di erences.  It
will take more than Mr. Khrushchev  to make me forget  what links
us to Tolstoy, to Dostoevsky,  and to their people.  But that future  is
threatened  by war. Let me repeat,  this is our wager.  But it is one of
the few wagers worth accepting.
You are an Algerian  French  writer.
This  is  indeed  what  you  made  a
point  of  emphasizing  when  you
were awarded  the Nobel  Prize. But
when  you  are  aware  of  being  an
Algerian  Frenchman,  certain ly you
are  not  dening  yourself  by
opposition  to  Algerians  not  of
French  origin.  Albert  Camus,  a
Frenchman  from  Algeria—doesn’t
this mean that you feel a solidarity
with  all  Algerians?  How  can  this
be  and  how  does  that  Algeria  t

into the spiritual  Europe  to which
you are also aware of belonging?
My role in Algeria  never has been and never will be to divide,  but
rather  to use whatever  means  I have to unite. I feel a solidarity with
everyone,  French or Arab, who is  suering  today in the misfortune
of my country . But I cannot  all alone rebuild  what so many  men
persist  in destroying.  I have done what I could.  I shall begin again
when there is again a chance  of helping  to rebuild  an Algeria freed
from all hatreds  and all forms  of racism.  But, to limit ourselves  to
the  domain  we  have  chosen ,  I  merely  want  to  remind  you  that,
simply  by virtue  of a generou s interchange  and a real solidarity,  we
have built up a community  of Algerian  writers,  both French  and
Arab writers.  That communit y is cut in two, for the time being.  But
men like Feraoun,  Mammeri,  Chraïbi,  Dib, and so many others  have
taken their place among  European  writers.  Whatever  the future  may
be, and however  dark it looks to me, I am sure that this cannot  be
forgotten.
Frequently  when  speakin g  of
French  culture  you have used the
word  “rebirth. ”  Not  only  do  you
wish for it, but it also seems  that at
times  you  perceive  its  rst
promise.  What may be the form of
that rebirth?  What are the signs of
it?
The change in generations  taking place on all levels is one of the
rst  signs. The quality  of the new generation  is another,  as well as
the increasing  unwillingness  to adopt  slogans  or ideologi es and the
return to less pretentious and more tangible values.

Europe  (and  France)  has  not  yet  emerged  from  fty  years  of
nihilism.  But the moment  people  begin rejecting  the mystications
on which  that nihilism  is based,  then hope is possible.  The whole
question  is to know whether  or not we shall develop  faster than the
rocket  with a nuclear  warhead.  And, unfortunately,  the fruits of the
spirit are slower  to ripen than intercontinental  missiles.  But, after
all, since atomic war would  divest any future  of its meaning, it gives
us  complete  freedom  of  action.  We  have  nothing  to  lose  except
everything.  So let’s go ahead. This is the wager  of our generation.  If
we are to fail, it is better,  in any case, to have stood on the side of
those who choose life than on the side of those who are destroying.
In  all  your  work  there  coexist
philosophical  pessimism  and,
nonetheless,  not  optimism  but  a
sort  of  condence.  Condence  in
the  spirit  rather  than  in  man,  in
nature  rather  than in the universe,
in action  rather  than in its results.
Do you think this attitude—which
is that of the rebel, for the value of
the revolt makes up for the world’s
absurdity—can  be adopted  by the
majority  or  is  it  condemned  to
remain  the privilege  of a few wise
men?
Is that position  really  so special? And do not the men of today,
threatened  and yet resisting,  live in this  manner?  We stie   and yet
survive,  we think we are dying of grief and yet life wins out. The
men of our time, whom  we encounter  in the streets,  show in their
faces that they know.  The only dierence  is that some of them show
more  courage.   Besides,  we  have  no  choice.  It  is  either  that  or
nihilism.  If  our  societies  must  plunge  into  nihilism,  whether

totalitarian  or bourgeois,  then those individuals  who refuse to give
in will stand apart,  and they must accept  this. But in their place and
within  their means,  they must do what is necessary  so that all can
live together again.
Personally,  I have never  wanted  to stand apart.  For the man of
today there is a sort of solitud e, which  is certainly  the harshest thing
our  era  forces  upon  us.  I  feel  its  weight,  believe  me.  But,
nevertheless,  I should  not want to change  eras, for I also know and
respect  the greatness  of this one. Moreover,  I have always  thought
that the maximum danger implied the maximum hope.
One cannot  avoid  tackling  certain
subjects  today.  The  most  serious
one is a problem  for all men: in the
struggles  dividing  the world  today,
must we really be willing  to forget
all that is bad on one side to ght
what is worse on the other?
Before  he died in combat  in the last war, Richard  Hilary  found the
phrase  that sums up this dilemma:  “We were gh ting a lie in the
name  of  a  half-truth.”  He  thought  he  was  expressing  a  very
pessimistic  idea. But one may even have to ght  a lie in the name of
a  quarter-truth .  This  is  our  situation  at  present.  However,  the
quarter-truth  contained  in  Western  society  is  called  liberty.  And
liberty  is  the  way,  and  the  only  way,  of  perfectibility.  Without
liberty  heavy  industry  can be perfected,  but not justice  or truth. Our
most recent history,  from Berlin  to Budapest,  ought  to convince  us
of this. In any case, it is the reason  for my choice.  I have said in this
very place that none of the evils totalitarianism  claims  to remedy  is
worse  than totalitarianism  itself. I have not changed  my mind.  On
the contrary,  after twenty  years of our harsh history,  during which  I
have tried to accept  every experience  it oered,  liberty  ultimately

seems  to  me,  for  societies  and  for  individuals,  for  labor  and  for
culture, the supreme good that governs all others.

CREATE DANGEROUSLY
(Lecture  given at the University  of
Uppsala in December 1957)
N   O RIENTAL   wise  man  always  used  to  ask  the  divinity  in  his
A prayers  to  be  so  kind  as  to  spare  him  from  living  in  an
interesting  era. As we are not wise, the divinity  has not spared  us
and we are living in an interesting  era. In any case, our era forces  us
to take an interest  in it. The writers  of today  know  this. If they
speak  up, they are criticized  and attacked.  If they become  modest
and keep silent, they are vociferously blamed for their silence.
In the midst of such din the writer cannot  hope to remain  aloof in
order  to pursue  the reections  and images  that are dear to him.
Until the present  moment,  remaining  aloof has always  been possible
in history.  When  someone  did not approve,  he could  always keep
silent or talk of something  else. Today  everything  is changed  and
even  silence  has  dangerous  implications.  The  moment  that
abstaining  from  choice  is  itself  looked  upon  as  a  choice  and
punished  or praised  as such, the artist is willy-nilly  impressed  into
service.  “Impressed”  seems  to  me  a  more  accurate  term  in  this
connection  than  “committed.”  Instead  of  signing  up,  indeed,  for
voluntary  service,  the artist does his compulsory  service.  Every artist
today  is  embarked  on  the  contemporary  slave  galley.  He  has  to
resign  himself  to this even if he considers  that the galley  reeks of its
past,  that  the  slave-drivers   are  really  too  numerous,  and,  in
addition,  that the steering  is badly  handled.  We are on the high
seas. The artist,  like everyon e else, must bend to his oar, without
dying if possible—in other words, go on living and creating.
To tell the truth, it is not easy, and I can understand  why artists
regret  their former  comfort.  The change  is somewhat  cruel. Indeed,
history’s  amphitheater  has  always  contained  the  martyr  and  the

lion. The former  relied on eternal  consolations  and the latter on raw
historical  meat.  But until now the artist was on the sidelines.  He
used to sing purposely,  for his own sake, or at best to encourage  the
martyr  and make the lion forget his appetite.  But now the artist is in
the amphitheater.  Of necessi ty, his voice is not quite the same;  it is
not nearly so rm.
It  is  easy  to  see  all  that  art  can  lose  from  such  a  constant
obligation.  Ease, to begin with, and that divine  liberty  so apparent
in the work of Mozart.  It is easier  to understand  why our works  of
art have a drawn,  set look and why they collapse  so suddenly.  It is
obvious  why we have more journalists  than creative  writers,  more
boy-scouts  of painting  than Cézannes,  and why sentimen tal tales or
detective  novels  have  taken  the  place  of  War  and  Peace   or  The
Charterhouse  of Parma.  Of course,  one can always  meet that state of
things  with  a  humanistic  lamentation  and  become  what  Stepan
Tromovich  in  The  Possessed  insists  upon being: a living  reproach.
One can also have, like him, attacks  of patriotic  melancholy.  But
such  melancho ly  in  no  way  changes  reality.  It  is  better,  in  my
opinion,  to give the era its due, since it demands  this so vigorously,
and calmly admit that the period of the revered  master,  of the artist
with a camellia  in his button hole, of the armchair  genius  is over. To
create  today is to create  dangerously.  Any publication  is an act, and
that act exposes  one to the passions  of an age that forgives  nothing.
Hence  the question  is not to nd  out if this is or is not prejudicial  to
art. The question, for all those who cannot  live without  art and what
it signies,  is merely  to nd  out how, among  the police  forces of so
many ideologies  (how many churches,  what solitude!),  the strange
liberty of creation is possible.
It is not enough  to say in this regard  that art is threatene d by the
powers  of the State. If that were true, the problem  would  be simple:
the artist ghts  or capitulates.  The problem  is more complex,  more
serious  too, as soon as it becomes apparent  that the battle is waged
within  the artist himself.  The hatred  for art, of which  our society
provides  such ne  examples,  is so eective  today only because  it is
kept alive by artists  themsel ves. The doubt  felt by the artists  who
preceded  us concerned  their own talent.  The doubt  felt by artists  of

today concerns  the necessity  of their art, hence  their very existence.
Racine  in 1957 would  make excuses  for writing  Bérénice  when he
might have been ghting to defend the Edict of Nantes.
That questioni ng of art by the artist has many reasons,  and only
the loftiest  need be consider ed. Among  the best explanations  is the
feeling  the  contemporary  artist  has  of  lying  or  of  indulging  in
useless  words  if  he  pays  no  attention  to  history’s  woes.  What
characterizes  our  time,  indeed,  is  the  way  the  masses  and  their
wretched  condition  have burst upon contemporary  sensibilities.  We
now know that they exist, whereas  we once had a tendency  to forget
them.  And if we are more aware, it is not because  our aristocracy,
artistic  or  otherwise,  has  become  better—no,  have  no  fear—it  is
because  the  masses  have  become  stronger  and  keep  people  from
forgetting them.
There are still other reasons,  and some of them less noble,  for this
surrender  of the artist.  But, whatever  those reasons  may be, they all
work  toward  the  same  end:  to  discourage  free  creation  by
undermining  its  basic  principle,  the  creator’s  faith  in  himself.  “A
man’s obedience  to his own genius,”  Emerson  said magni cently,  “is
faith  in  its  purest  form.”  And  another  American  writer  of  the
nineteenth  century added:  “So long as a man is faithful  to himself,
everything  is in his favor,  government,  society,  the very sun, moon,
and stars.” Such amazing  optimism  seems  dead today.  In most cases
the artist is ashamed  of himself  and his privileges,  if he has any. He
must rst  of all answer  the question  he has put to himself:  is art a
deceptive luxury?
I
The rst  straightforward  reply that can be made is this: on occasion
art may be a deceptive  luxury.  On the poop  deck of slave galleys  it
is  possible,  at  any  time  and  place,  as  we  know,  to  sing  of  the
constellations  while  the  convicts  bend  over  the  oars  and  exhaust
themselves  in the hold; it is always  possible  to record  the social
conversation  that takes place on the benches  of the amphitheater
while the lion is crunching  the victim.  And it is very hard to make

any objections  to the art that has known  such success  in the past.
But things  have changed  somewhat,  and the number  of convicts  and
martyrs  has increased  amazingly over the surface  of the globe.  In
the face of so much suering , if art insists  on being a luxury,  it will
also be a lie.
Of what could  art speak,  indeed?  If it adapts  itself to what the
majority  of our society  wants,  art will be a meaningless  recreation.
If it blindly  rejects  that society,  if the artist makes  up his mind to
take refuge in his dream,  art will express  nothing  but a negation.  In
this way we shall have the production  of entertainers  or of formal
grammarians,  and in both cases this leads to an art cut o   from
living  reality.  For about  a century we have been living  in a society
that  is  not  even  the  society  of  money  (gold  can  arouse  carnal
passions)  but that of the abstract symbols  of money.  The society  of
merchants  can be dened  as a society  in which  things  disappear  in
favor of signs. When  a ruling  class measures  its fortunes,  not by the
acre  of  land  or  the  ingot  of  gold,  but  by  the  number  of  gures
corresponding  ideally  to a certain  number  of exchange  operations,  it
thereby  condemns  itself to setting  a certain  kind of humbug  at the
center  of its experience  and its universe.  A society  founde d on signs
is, in its essence, an articial  society  in which  man’s  carnal truth is
handled  as  something  articial.  There  is  no  reason  for  being
surprised  that such a society  chose  as its religion  a moral  code of
formal  principles  and  that  it  inscribes  the  words  “liberty”  and
“equality”  on  its  prisons  as  well  as  on  its  temples  of  nance.
However,  words  cannot  be  prostituted  with  impunity.  The  most
misrepresented  value today  is certainly  the value of liberty. Good
minds  (I have always  though t there were two kinds of intelligence—
intelligent  intelligence  and stupid intelligence)  teach that it is but an
obstacle  on the path of true progress.  But such solemn  stupidities
were uttered  because  for a hundred  years a society  of merchants
made an exclusive and unilateral  use of liberty,  looking  upon it as a
right rather  than as a duty, and did not fear to use an ideal liberty,
as often as it could,  to justify  a very real oppression.  As a result,  is
there anything  surprising  in the fact that such a society  asked art to
be, not an instrument  of liberation,  but an inconsequential  exercise

and a mere entertainment?  Consequently,  a fashionable  society  in
which  all  troubles  were  money  troubles  and  all  worries  were
sentimental  worries  was  satised  for  decades  with  its  society
novelists  and with the most futile art in the world,  the one about
which  Oscar Wilde,  thinking  of himself  before  he knew prison,  said
that the greatest of all vices was superciality.
In this way the manufacturers  of art (I did not say the artists)  of
middle-class  Europe,  before  and after 1900, accepted  irresponsibility
because  responsibility  presupposed  a  painful  break  with  their
society  (those  who  really  broke  with  it  are  named  Rimbaud,
Nietzsche,  Strindberg,  and we know the price they paid).  From that
period  we get the theory  of art for art’s sake, which  is merely  a
voicing  of that irresponsibilit y. Art for art’s sake, the entertainment
of a solitary  artist,  is indeed  the articial  art of a factitious  and self-
absorbed  society.  The logical  result  of such a theory  is the art of
little  cliques  or  the  purely  formal  art  fed  on  aecta tions  and
abstractions  and ending  in the destruction  of all reality.  In this way
a few works  charm a few individuals  while many coarse  inventions
corrupt  many others.  Finally  art takes shape  outside  of society  and
cuts itself o   from its living roots. Gradually  the artist,  even if he is
celebrated,  is alone or at least is known  to his nation  only through
the  intermedia ry  of  the  popular  press  or  the  radio,  which  will
provide  a  convenient  and  simplied  idea  of  him.  The  more  art
specializes,  in fact, the more necessary  popularization  becomes.  In
this way millions of people  will have the feeling  of knowing this or
that great artist of our time because  they have learned  from the
newspapers  that he raises  canaries  or that he never  stays married
more than six months.  The greatest  renown  today consists  in being
admired  or hated without  having  been read. Any artist who goes in
for being famous  in our society must know that it is not he who will
become  famous,  but someone  else under  his name,  someone  who
will eventually  escape  him and perhaps  someday  will kill the true
artist in him.
Consequently,  there is nothing  surprising  in the fact that almost
everything  worth  while  created  in  the  mercantile  Europe  of  the
nineteenth  and twentieth  centuries—in  literature,  for instance—was

raised  up against  the  society  of its time. It may be said that until
almost  the time of the French Revolution  current  literature  was, in
the main,  a literature  of consent.  From the moment  when middle-
class  society,  a  result  of  the  revolution,  became  stabilized,  a
literature  of revolt  developed  instead.  Ocial  values  were negated,
in  France,  for  example,  either  by  the  bearers  of  revolutionary
values,  from the Romantics  to Rimbaud,  or by the maintainers  of
aristocratic  values,  of whom  Vigny  and Balzac  are good examples.  In
both cases the masses  and the aristocracy—the  two sources  of all
civilization—took  their stand against  the articial  society  of their
time.
But this negation,  maintained  so long that it is now rigid, has
become  artic   ial  too  and  leads  to  another  sort  of  sterility.  The
theme  of  the  exceptional  poet  born  into  a  mercantile  society
(Vigny’s  Chatterton   is  the  nest   example)  has  hardened  into  a
presumption  that one can be a great artist only against  the society  of
one’s time, whatever  it may be. Legitimate  in the beginning  when
asserting  that a true artist could not compromise  with the world  of
money,  the principle  became  false with the subsidiary  belief that an
artist  could  assert  himself  only  by  being  against  everything  in
general.  Consequently,  many  of our artists  long to be exceptional,
feel guilty  if they are not, and wish for simultaneous  applause  and
hisses.  Naturally,  society,  tired or indierent  at present,  applauds
and hisses only at random.  Consequently,  the intellectual  of today is
always  bracing  himself  stiy    to add to his height.  But as a result of
rejecting  everything,  even the tradition  of his art, the contemporary
artist gets the illusion  that he is creating  his own rule and eventually
takes himself  for God. At the same time he thinks  he can create  his
reality  himself.  But, cut o   from his society,  he will create  nothing
but formal  or abstract  works, thrilling  as experiences  but devoid  of
the fecundity  we associate  with true art, which  is called  upon to
unite.  In  short,  there  will  be  as  much  dierence  between  the
contemporary  subtleties  or abstractions  and the work of a Tolstoy  or
a Molière  as between  an anticipatory  draft on invisible  wheat  and
the rich soil of the furrow itself.

II
In this way art may be a deceptive  luxury.  It is not surprising,  then,
that men or artists wanted  to call a halt and go back to truth.  As
soon as they did, they denied  that the artist had a right to solitude
and oe  red him as a subject,  not his dreams,  but reality  as it is lived
and endured by all. Convinced  that art for art’s sake, through  its
subjects  and through  its style, is not understandable  to the masses  or
else in no way expresses  their truth,  these men wanted  the artist
instead  to speak  intentionall y about  and for the majori ty. He has
only  to  translate  the  suerings  and  happiness  of  all  into  the
language  of all and he will be universally  understood.  As a reward
for  being  absolutely  faithful  to  reality,  he  will  achieve  complete
communication among men.
This ideal of universal  communication  is indeed  the ideal of any
great artist. Contrary  to the current  presumption,  if there is any man
who  has  no  right  to  solitude,  it  is  the  artist.  Art  cannot  be  a
monologue.  When the most  solitary  and least famous  artist appeals
to  posterity,  he  is  merely  rearming  his  fundamental  vocation.
Considering  a dialogue  with deaf or inattentive  contemporaries  to
be impossible,  he appeals  to a more far-reaching  dialogue  with the
generations to come.
But in order to speak  about all and to all, one has to speak  of
what all know and of the reality common  to us all. The sea, rains,
necessity,  desire,  the struggle  against  death—these  are the things
that unite us all. We resemble  one another  in what we see together,
in  what  we  suer   together .  Dreams  change  from  individual  to
individual,  but the reality  of the world  is common  to us all. Striving
toward  realism  is therefore  legitimate,  for it is basically  related  to
the artistic adventure.
So let’s be realistic.  Or, rather,  let’s try to be so, if this is possible.
For it is not certain  that the word has a meaning;  it is not certain
that  realism,  even  if  it  is  desirable,  is  possible.  Let  us  stop  and
inquire  rst  of all if pure realism is possible  in art. If we believe  the
declarations  of  the  nineteenth-century  naturalists,  it  is  the  exact
reproduction  of reality.  Therefore  it is to art what photography  is to

painting:  the former  reproduc es and the latter selects.  But what does
it reproduce  and what is reality?  Even the best of photographs,  after
all, is not a suciently  faithful reproduction,  is not yet suciently
realistic.  What is there more real, for instance,  in our universe  than
a man’s  life, and how can we hope to preserve  it better  than in a
realistic  lm?  But under  what conditions  is such a lm  possible?
Under  purely  imaginary  conditions.  We should  have to presuppose,
in  fact,  an  ideal  camera  focused  on  the  man  day  and  night  and
constantly  registering  his every move.  The very projection  of such a
lm  would  last a lifetime  and could be seen only by an audience  of
people  willing  to waste their lives in watching  someone  else’s life in
great detail.  Even under  such conditions,  such an unimaginable  lm
would  not be realistic  for the simple  reason  that the reality  of a
man’s life is not limited  to the spot in which  he happens  to be. It lies
also in other lives that give shape to his—lives  of people  he loves, to
begin  with, which  would  have to be lmed  too, and also lives of
unknown  people,  inuential  and  insignicant,  fellow  citizens,
policemen,  professors,  invisible  comrades  from  the  mines  and
foundries,  diplomats  and dictators,  religious  reformers,  artists who
create  myths  that  are  decisive  for  our  conduc t—humble
representatives,  in short, of the sovereign  chance  that dominates  the
most  routine  existences.  Consequently,  there  is  but  one  possible
realistic  lm:  the one that is constantly  shown  us by an invisible
camera  on the world’s  screen. The only realistic  artist,  then, is God,
if he exists. All other artists are,  ipso facto , unfaithful to reality.
As a result,  the artists  who reject bourgeois  society  and its formal
art, who insist on speaking  of reality,  and reality  alone,  are caught
in  a  painful  dilemma.  They  must  be  realistic  and  yet  cannot  be.
They  want  to  make  their  art  subservient  to  reality,  and  reality
cannot  be  described  without  eecting  a  choice  that  makes  it
subservient  to  the  originality  of  an  art.  The  beautiful  and  tragic
production  of  the  early  years  of  the  Russian  Revolution  clearly
illustrates  this torment.  What Russia  gave us then with Blok and the
great Pasternak,  Maiakovski  and Essenine,  Eisenstein  and the rst
novelists  of cement  and steel, was a splendid  laboratory  of forms
and themes,  a fecund  unrest,  a wild enthusiasm  for research. Yet it

was necessary  to conclude  and to tell how it was possible to be
realistic  even though  comple te realism  was impossible.  Dictatorship,
in this case as in others,  went straight  to the point:  in its opinion
realism  was  rst  necessary  and  then  possible  so  long  as  it  was
deliberately socialistic. What is the meaning of this decree?
As  a  matter  of  fact,  such  a  decree  frankly  admits  that  reality
cannot  be reproduced  without  exercising  a selection,  and it rejects
the theory  of realism  as it was formulated  in the nineteen th century.
The only thing needed,  then, is to nd  a principle  of choice that will
give shape  to the world.  And such a principle  is found,  not in the
reality  we know, but in the reality  that will be—in  short, the future.
In order to reproduce  properly  what is, one must depict  also what
will  be.  In  other  words,  the  true  object  of  socialistic  realism  is
precisely what has no reality yet.
The  contradic tion  is  rather  beautiful.  But,  after  all,  the  very
expression  of socialistic  realism  was contradictory.  How, indeed,  is a
socialistic  realism  possible  when reality  is not altogether  socialistic?
It is not socialistic,  for example,  either  in the past or altogether  in
the present. The answer  is easy: we shall choose  in the reality  of
today or of yesterday  what announces  and serves  the perfect  city of
the  future.  So  we  shall  devote  ourselves,  on  the  one  hand,  to
negating  and  condemning  whatever  aspects  of  reality  are  not
socialistic  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  glorifying  what  is  or  will
become  so. We shall inevitably  get a propaganda  art with its heroes
and  its  villains—an  edifying  literature,  in  other  words,  just  as
remote  as formalistic  art is from complex  and living reality.  Finally,
that art will be socialistic insofar as it is not realistic.
This aesthetic  that intended  to be realistic  therefore  becomes  a
new idealism,  just as sterile  for the true artist as bourgeois  idealism.
Reality  is ostensibly  granted  a sovereign  position  only to be more
readily  thrown   out.  Art  is  reduced  to  nothing.  It  serves  and,  by
serving,  becomes  a  slave.  Only  those  who  keep  from  describing
reality  will be praised  as realists.  The others  will be censured,  with
the  approval  of  the  former.  Renown,  which  in  bourgeois  society
consisted  in  not  being  read  or  in  being  misunderstood ,  will  in  a
totalitarian  society consist  in keeping  others  from being read. Once

more,  true  art  will  be  distorted  or  gagged  and  universal
communication  will be made  impossible  by the very people  who
most passionately wanted it.
The easiest  thing,  when  faced with such a defeat,  would  be to
admit  that  so-called  socialistic  realism  has  little  connection  with
great art and that the revolutionaries,  in the very interest  of the
revolution,  ought  to look for another  aesthetic.  But it is well known
that  the  defenders  of  the  theory  described  shout  that  no  art  is
possible  outside  it.  They  spend  their  time  shouting  this.  But  my
deep-rooted  conviction  is that they do not believe  it and that they
have  decided ,  in  their  hearts,  that  artistic  values  must  be
subordinated  to  the  values  of  revolutionary  action.  If  this  were
clearly  stated,  the discussion  would  be easier.  One can respect  such
great renunciation  on the part of men who suer   too much from the
contrast  between  the  unhappiness  of  all  and  the  privileges
sometimes  associated  with an artist’s  lot, who reject the unbearable
distance  separating  those  whom  poverty  gags  and  those  whose
vocation  is rather  to express  themselves  constantly.  One might  then
understand  such men, try to carry on a dialogue  with them, attempt
to tell them, for instance,  that suppressing  creative  liberty  is perhaps
not the right way to overcome  slavery  and that until they can speak
for all it is stupid  to give up the ability  to speak for a few at least.
Yes, socialistic  realism  ought to own up to the fact that it is the twin
brother  of political  realism.  It sacrices  art for an end that is alien to
art but that, in the scale of values,  may seem to rank higher.  In
short, it suppresses  art temporarily in order to establish  justice rst.
When  justice  exists,  in  a  still  indeterminate  future,  art  will
resuscitate.  In this way the golden rule of contemporary  intelligence
is applied  to matters  of art—the  rule that insists  on the impossibility
of making an omelet  without  breaking  eggs. But such overwhelming
common  sense must not mislead  us. To make a good omelet  it is not
enough  to break  thousands  of eggs, and the value of a cook is not
judged,  I believe,  by the number  of broken  eggshells.  If the artistic
cooks of our time upset more baskets  of eggs than they intended,  the
omelet  of civilization  may never again come out right, and art may
never  resuscitate.  Barbarism  is  never  temporary.  Sucient

allowance  is  never  made  for  it,  and,  quite  naturally,  from  art
barbarism  extends  to morals . Then the suering  and blood  of men
give  birth  to  insignicant  literatures,  an  ever  indulgent  press,
photographed  portraits,  and sodality  plays in which  hatred  takes the
place of  religion.  Art culminates  thus in forced  optimism,  the worst
of luxuries, it so happens, and the most ridiculous of lies.
How could we be surprised?  The suering  of mankind  is such a
vast subject  that it seems  no one could touch  it unless  he was like
Keats so sensitive,  it is said, that he could have touched  pain itself
with his hands. This is clearly  seen when a controlled  literature  tries
to alleviate that suering  with ocial  consolations.  The lie of art for
art’s  sake  pretended  to  know  nothing  of  evil  and  consequently
assumed  responsibility  for  it.  But  the  realistic  lie,  even  though
managing  to  admit  mankind’s  present  unhappiness,  betrays  that
unhappiness  just as seriously  by making  use of it to glorify a future
state of happiness,  about which  no one knows  anything,  so that the
future authorizes every kind of humbug.
The two aesthetics  that have long stood opposed  to each other,
the one that recommends  a complete  rejection  of real life and the
one  that  claims  to  reject  anything  that  is  not  real  life,  end  up,
however,  by coming  to agreement,  far from reality,  in a single  lie
and in the suppression  of art. The academicism  of the Right does not
even acknowledge  a misery  that the academicism  of the Left utilizes
for  ulterior  reasons.  But  in  both  cases  the  misery  is  only
strengthened at the same time that art is negated.
III
Must we conclude that this lie is the very essence  of art? I shall say
instead  that the attitudes  I have been  describing  are lies only insofar
as they have but little relation  to art. What,  then, is art? Nothing
simple,  that is certain.  And it is even harder  to nd  out amid the
shouts  of so many people  bent on simplifying  everythin g. On the
one hand,  genius  is expected  to be splendid  and solitary; on the
other hand,  it is called  upon to resemble  all. Alas, reality  is more
complex.  And  Balzac  suggested  this  in  a  sentence:  “The  genius

resembles  everyone  and no one resembles  him.”  So it is with art,
which  is  nothing  without  reality  and  without  which  reality  is
insignicant.  How, indeed,  could art get along without  the real and
how could art be subservien t to it? The artist chooses  his object  as
much  as  he  is  chosen  by  it.  Art,  in  a  sense,  is  a  revolt  against
everything  eeting  and unnished  in the world.  Consequently,  its
only aim is to give another  form to a reality  that it is nevertheless
forced  to preserve  as the source  of its emotion.  In this regard,  we
are all realistic  and no one is. Art is neither  complete  rejection  nor
complete  acceptance  of what is. It is simultaneously  rejection  and
acceptance,  and  this  is  why  it  must  be  a  perpetually  renewed
wrenching  apart.  The  artist  constantly  lives  in  such  a  state  of
ambiguity,  incapable  of negating  the real and yet eternally  bound  to
question  it in its eternally  unnished  aspects.  In order to paint a still
life, there must be confrontation  and mutual  adjustment  between  a
painter  and an apple.  And if forms  are nothing  without  the world’s
lighting,  they in turn add to that lighting.  The real universe  which,
by its radiance , calls forth bodies and statues  receives  from them at
the same time a second  light that determines  the light from the sky.
Consequently,  great  style  lies  midway  between  the  artist  and  his
object.
There  is no need of determining  whether  art must ee  reality  or
defer to it, but rather  what precise  dose of reality  the work must
take on as ballast  to keep from oating  up among  the clouds  or from
dragging  along the ground  with weighted  boots.  Each artist solves
this problem  according  to his lights  and abilities.  The greater  an
artist’s  revolt  against  the  world’s  reality,  the  greater  can  be  the
weight  of reality  to balance  that revolt.  But the weight  can never
stie   the artist’s  solitary  exigency. The loftiest  work will always  be,
as in the Greek tragedians,  Melville,  Tolstoy,  or Molière , the work
that maintains  an equilibrium  between  reality  and man’s  rejection
of  that  reality,  each  forcing  the  other  upward  in  a  ceaseless
overowing,  characteristic  of life itself at its most joyous  and heart-
rending  extremes.  Then,  every  once  in  a  while,  a  new  world
appears,  dierent  from  the  everyday  world  and  yet  the  same,
particular  but universal,  full of innocent  insecurity—called  forth for

a few hours by the power  and longing  of genius.  That’s  just it and
yet that’s not it; the world  is nothing  and the world  is everything—
this is the contradictory  and tireless  cry of every true artist,  the cry
that keeps him on his feet with eyes ever open and that, every once
in a while,  awakens  for all in this world  asleep  the eeting  and
insistent  image  of a reality  we recognize  without  ever having  known
it.
Likewise,  the artist can neither turn away from his time nor lose
himself  in it. If he turns away from it, he speaks  in a void. But,
conversely,  insofar  as he takes his  time as his object,  he asserts  his
own existence  as subject  and cannot  give in to it altogether.  In other
words,  at the very moment  when the artist chooses  to share the fate
of all, he asserts  the individu al he is. And he cannot  escape  from this
ambiguity.  The  artist  takes  from  history  what  he  can  see  of  it
himself  or undergo  himself,  directly  or indirectly—the  immediate
event,  in  other  words,  and  men  who  are  alive  today,  not  the
relationship  of that immedia te event to a future  that is invisible  to
the living artist.  Judging  contemporary  man in the name of a man
who does not yet exist is the function  of prophecy.  But the artist can
value  the  myths  that  are  oered  him  only  in  relation  to  their
repercussion  on  living  people.  The  prophet,  whether  religious  or
political,  can  judge  absolute ly  and,  as  is  known,  is  not  chary  of
doing  so. But the artist cannot.  If he judged  absolutely,  he would
arbitrarily  divide  reality  into  good  and  evil  and  thus  indulge  in
melodrama.  The aim of art, on the contrary,  is not to legislate  or to
reign supreme,  but rather  to understand  rst  of all. Sometimes  it
does reign supreme,  as a result  of understanding.  But no work of
genius  has ever been based on hatred  and contempt.  This is why the
artist,  at  the  end  of  his  slow  advance,  absolves  instead  of
condemning.  Instead  of being  a judge,  he is a justier.  He is the
perpetual  advocate  of  the  living  creature,  because  it  is  alive.  He
truly argues  for love of one’s neighbor  and not for that love of the
remote  stranger  which  debases  contemporary  humanis m  until  it
becomes  the  catechism  of  the  law  court.  Instead,  the  great  work
eventually  confounds  all judges.  With it the artist simultaneously
pays  homage  to  the  loftiest  gure  of  mankind  and  bows  down

before  the worst of criminals.  “There  is not,” Wilde  wrote in prison,
“a single  wretched  man in this wretched  place along with me who
does not stand in symbolic  relation  to the very secret  of life.” Yes,
and that secret of life coincides with the secret of art.
For  a  hundred  and  fty   years  the  writers  belonging  to  a
mercantile  society, with but few exceptions,  thought  they could live
in happy irresponsibility.  They lived, indeed,  and then died alone,  as
they had lived. But we writers of the twentieth  century  shall never
again be alone. Rather,  we must know that we can never escape  the
common  misery and that our only justication,  if indeed  there is a
justication,  is to speak up, insofar  as we can, for those who cannot
do so. But we must do so for all those who are suer  ing at this
moment,  whatever may be the glories,  past or future,  of the States
and parties oppressing  them: for the artist there are no privileged
torturers.  This is why beauty,  even today,  especially  today,  cannot
serve any party; it cannot  serve, in the long or short run, anything
but men’s suering  or their liberty.  The only really committed  artist
is  he  who,  without  refusing   to  take  part  in  the  combat,  at  least
refuses  to  join  the  regular  armies  and  remains  a  free-lance.  The
lesson  he then nds  in beauty , if he draws  it fairly,  is a lesson  not of
selshness  but  rather  of  hard  brotherhood.  Looked  upon  thus,
beauty  has  never  enslaved  anyone.  And  for  thousands   of  years,
every day, at every second,  it has instead  assuaged  the servitude  of
millions  of men and, occasionally,  liberated  some of them once and
for all. After all, perhaps  the greatness  of  art lies in the perpetual
tension  betwee n beauty  and pain, the love of men and the madness
of creation,  unbearable  solitude  and the exhausting  crowd,  rejection
and consent.  Art advances  between  two chasms,  which  are frivolity
and propagand a. On the ridge where  the great artist moves forward,
every step is an adventure,  an extreme  risk. In that risk, however,
and only there,  lies the freedom  of art. A dicult  freedom  that is
more like an ascetic  discipline?  What artist would  deny this? What
artist would  dare to claim  that he was equal  to such a ceaseless
task? Such freedom  presupposes  health  of body and mind,  a style
that  reects  strength  of  soul,  and  a  patient  deance.  Like  all
freedom,  it is a perpetual  risk, an exhausting  adventure,  and this is

why  people  avoid  the  risk  today,  as  they  avoid  liberty  with  its
exacting  demands,  in  order  to  accept  any  kind  of  bondage  and
achieve  at least comfort  of soul. But if art is not an adventure, what
is it and where is its justic ation?  No, the free artist is no more a
man of comfort  than is the free man. The free artist is the one who,
with  great  eort,  creates  his  own  order.  The  more  undisciplined
what he must put in order,  the stricter  will be his rule and the more
he will assert  his freedom.  There is a remark  of Gide that I have
always  approved  although  it may be easily misunderstood : “Art lives
on constraint and dies of freedom.”  That is true. But it must not be
interpreted  as meaning  that art can be controlled.  Art lives only on
the constraints  it imposes  on itself; it dies of all others.  Conversely,
if it does not constrain  itself, it indulges  in ravings  and becomes  a
slave to mere shadows.  The freest art and the most rebellious will
therefore  be  the most classical;  it will reward  the greatest  eort.  So
long as a society  and its artists do not accept  this long and free
eort,  so long as they relax in the comfort  of amusements  or the
comfort  of conformism,  in the games  of art for art’s sake or the
preachings  of realistic  art, its artists  are lost in nihilism  and sterility.
Saying  this amounts  to saying that today the rebirth  depends on our
courage and our will to be lucid.
Yes, the rebirth  is in the hands of all of us. It is up to us if the
West  is  to  bring  forth  any  anti-Alexanders  to  tie  together  the
Gordian  Knot of civilization  cut by the sword.  For this purpose,  we
must assume all the risks and labors  of freedom.  There is no need of
knowing  whether, by pursuing  justice,  we shall manage  to preserve
liberty.  It is essential  to know that, without  liberty,  we shall achieve
nothing  and  that  we  shall  lose  both  future  justice  and  ancient
beauty.  Liberty  alone draws  men from their isolation;  but slavery
dominates  a  crowd  of  solitudes.  And  art,  by  virtue  of  that  free
essence  I have tried to dene  , unites  whereas  tyranny  separates.  It is
not surprising,  therefore,  that art should  be the enemy  marked  out
by  every  form  of  oppression.  It  is  not  surprising  that  artists  and
intellectuals  should  have been the rst  victims  of modern  tyrannies,
whether  of the Right or of the Left. Tyrants  know  there is in the
work  of  art  an  emancipatory  force,  which  is  mysterious  only  to

those who do not revere  it. Every great work makes  the human face
more  admirable  and  richer,  and  this  is  its  whole  secret.  And
thousands  of concentration  camps  and barred  cells are not enough
to hide this staggering  testimony  of dignity.  This is why it is not true
that culture  can be, even temporarily,  suspended  in order to make
way for a new culture.  Man’s  unbroken  testimony  as to his suering
and his nobility  cannot  be suspended;  the act of breathing  cannot  be
suspended.  There  is no culture  without  legacy,  and we cannot  and
must not reject anything  of ours, the legacy  of the West. Whatever
the works  of the future  may be, they will bear the same secret, made
up of courage  and freedom,  nourished  by the daring  of thousands  of
artists  of all times and all nations.  Yes, when modern  tyranny shows
us  that,  even  when  conne d  to  his  calling,  the  artist  is  a  public
enemy,  it is right. But in this way tyranny  pays its respects, through
the artist,  to an image  of man that nothing  has ever been able to
crush.
My conclusion  will be simple.  It will consist  of saying,  in the very
midst of the sound and the fury of our history:  “Let us rejoice.”  Let
us  rejoice,  indeed,  at  having  witnessed  the  death  of  a  lying  and
comfort-loving  Europe  and at being faced with cruel truths.  Let us
rejoice  as men because  a prolonged  hoax has collapsed  and we see
clearly  what threatens  us. And let us rejoice  as artists,  torn from our
sleep  and  our  deafness,  forced  to  keep  our  eyes  on  destitution,
prisons,  and bloodshed.  If, faced with such a vision,  we can preserve
the memory of days and of faces, and if, conversely,  faced with the
world’s  beauty,  we  manage   not  to  forget  the  humiliated,  then
Western  art will gradually  recover  its strength  and its sovereignty.
To be sure, there are few examples  in history  of artists  confronted
with such hard problems.  But when  even the simplest  words  and
phrases  cost their  weight  in freedom  and blood,  the artist must learn
to handle  them with restraint.  Danger  makes  men classical,  and all
greatness, after all, is rooted in risk.
The time of irresponsible  artists is over. We shall regret  it for our
little moments  of bliss. But we shall be able to admit that this ordeal

contributes  meanwhile  to our chances  of authenticity,  and we shall
accept  the challenge.  The freedom  of art is not worth  much when its
only purpose is to assure  the artist’s  comfort.  For a value or a virtue
to take root in a society,  there must be no lying about  it; in other
words,  we must pay for it every time we can. If liberty  has become
dangerous,  then it may cease to be prostituted.  And I cannot  agree,
for  example,  with  those  who  complain  today  of  the  decline  of
wisdom.  Apparently they are right. Yet, to tell the truth, wisdom  has
never declined  so much as when it involved  no risks and belonged
exclusively  to a few humanists  buried  in libraries.  But today,  when
at last it has to face real dangers,  there is a chance  that it may again
stand up and be respected.
It is said that Nietzsche  after the break  with Lou Salomé, in a
period  of complete  solitude,  crushed  and uplifted  at the same time
by the perspective  of the huge work he had to carry on without  any
help, used to walk at night on the mountains  overlooking  the gulf of
Genoa  and  light  great  bonres  of  leaves  and  branches  which  he
would  watch as they burned.  I have often dreamed  of those res  and
have occasionally  imagined  certain  men and certain  works  in front
of those res,  as a way of testing men and works.  Well, our era is
one  of  those  res  whose  unbearable  heat  will  doubtless  reduce
many  a work to ashes!  But as for those which  remain,  their metal
will be intact,  and, looking  at them,  we shall be able to indulge
without  restraint  in the supreme  joy of the intelligence  which  we
call “admiration.”
One may long, as I do, for a gentler  ame,  a respite,  a pause  for
musing.  But perhaps  there is no other peace for the artist than what
he nds  in the heat of combat.  “Every  wall is a door,”  Emerson
correctly  said.  Let  us  not  look  for  the  door,  and  the  way  out,
anywhere  but in the wall against  which  we are living.  Instead,  let us
seek the respite where  it is—in  the very thick of the battle.  For in
my opinion,  and this is where  I shall close, it  is  there. Great ideas, it
has been said, come into the world  as gently  as doves.  Perhaps  then,
if we listen attentively,  we shall hear, amid the uproar  of empires
and nations, a faint utter  of wings,  the gentle  stirring  of life and
hope. Some will say that this hope lies in a nation;  others,  in a man.

I believe rather  that it is awakened,  revived,  nourished  by millions
of  solitary  individuals  whose  deeds  and  works  every  day  negate
frontiers  and the crudest  implications  of history.  As a result, there
shines  forth eetingly  the ever threatened  truth that each and every
man, on the foundation of his own suerings and joys, builds for all.

B O O K S   B Y   A L B E R T   C A M U S
Awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1957
The First Man ( Le Premier Homme ) 1995
A Happy Death ( La Mort Heureuse ) 1972
Notebooks 1942–1951 ( Carnets, janvier 1942–mars 1951 ) 1965
Notebooks 1935–1942 ( Carnets, mai 1935–février 1942 ) 1963
Resistance, Rebellion, and Death
( Actuelles —a selection) 1961
The Possessed ( Les Possédés ) 1960
Caligula and Three Other Plays
( Caligula, Le Malentendu, L’Etat de siège, Les Justes ) 1958
Exile and the Kingdom ( L’Exil et le Royaume ) 1958
The Fall ( La Chute ) 1957
The Myth of Sisyphus ( Le Mythe de Sisyphe )
and Other Essays 1955
The Rebel ( L’Homme Róvolté ) 1954
The Plague ( La Peste ) 1948
The Stranger ( L’Etranger ) 1946

ALBERT CAMUS
A LBERT  C AMUS  was born in Algeria in 1913. He spent the early years of
his life in North Africa,  where  he became  a journalist,  and from
1935  to  1938  he  ran  the  Théâtre  de  l’Équipe,  a  company  that
produced  plays by Malraux,  Gide, Synge,  Dostoyevsky,  and others.
During  World  War II he was one of the leading  writers  of the French
Resistance  and  editor  of  Combat ,  an  underground  newspaper  he
helped  found.  His ction,  including  The  Stranger,  The  Plague,  The
Fall , and  Exile  and  the  Kingdom ; his philosophical  essays,  The  Myth  of
Sisyphus  and  The  Rebel ; and his plays have assured  his preeminent
position  in modern  letters.  In 1957,  Camus  was awarded  the Nobel
Prize for Literature.  Upon his untimely  death in a road accident  in
1960,  Jean-Paul  Sartre  wrote,  “Camus  could never cease to be one
of the principal  forces  in our cultural  domain,  nor to represent,  in
his own way, the history of France and this century.”

ALSO BY
Albert Camus
Winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature
THE FIRST MAN
In  The  First  Man  Albert Camus tells the story of Jacque s Cormery,  a boy who lived
a life much like Camus’ own. Camus  summons  up the sights,  sounds,  and textures
of a childhood  circumscribed  by poverty and a father’s  death yet redeemed  by the
austere  beauty  of  Algeria  and  the  boy’s  attachment  to  his  nearly  deaf-mute
mother.  The result is a moving  journey  through  the lost landscape  of youth  that
also  discloses  the  wellsprings  of  Camus’  aesthetic  powers  and  moral  vision.
Published  thirty-v e  years  after  its  discovery  amid  the  wreckage  of  the  car
accident  that killed its author,  The  First  Man  is the brilliant  consummation  of the
life and work of one of the twentieth century’s greatest novelists.
Fiction/Literature EXILE AND THE KINGDOM
From a variety  of masterfully  rendered  perspectives,  these six stories  depict  people
at painful  odds with the world  around  them. A wife can only surrender  to a desert
night by betraying  her husband.  An artist struggles  to honor  his own aspirations
as well as society’s  expectations  of him. A missionary  brutally  converted  to the
worship  of a tribal fetish is left with but an echo of his identity.  Whether  set in
North  Africa, Paris, or Brazil,  the stories  in  Exile  and  the  Kingdom  are probing
portraits  of spiritua l exile and man’s  perpetual  search  for an inner kingdom  in
which to be reborn. They display Camus at the height of his powers.
Fiction/Literature THE FALL
Mordant,  brilliant,  elegantly  styled,  The  Fall  is  a  novel  of  the  conscience  of
modern  man  in  the  face  of  evil.  In  a  seedy  bar  in  Amsterdam,  Clamenc e,  an
expatriate  Frenchman,  indulges  in a calculated  confession.  He recalls  his past life
as  a  respected  Parisian  lawyer,  a  champion  of  noble  causes,  and,  privately,  a
libertine—yet  one  apparently  immun e  to  judgment.  As  his  narrative  unfolds,
ambiguities  amass;  every  triumph  reveals  a  failure,  every  motive  a  hidden
treachery. The irony of his recital anticipates his downfall—and implicates us all.

Fiction/Literature A HAPPY DEATH
In his rst  novel,  A  Happy  Death , written when he was in his early twenties  and
retrieved  from his private  papers  following  his death in 1960,  Albert  Camus laid
the foundation for the  The  Strang er , focusing in both works on an Algerian  clerk
who kills a man in cold blood.  But he also revealed  himself  to an extent  that he
never  did in his later ction.  For if  A  Happy  Death  is the study of a rule-bound
being shattering  the fetters  of his existence,  it is also a remarkably  candid  portrait
of its author as a young man.
Fiction/Literature THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS AND OTHER ESSAYS
One of the most in uential  works  of this century,  The  Myth  of Sisyphus  and  Other
Essays  is a crucial  exposition  of existential  thought.  Inuenced  by works  such as
Don  Juan  and the novels  of Kafka, these essays  begin with a meditation  on suicide:
the question  of living or not living in a universe  devoid  of order or meaning.  With
lyric eloquence,  Albert  Camus  brillian tly posits  a way out of despair,  rearming
the value of personal  existence,  and the possibility  of life lived with dignity  and
authenticity.
Nonction/Literature THE PLAGUE
A gripping  tale of unrelieved  horror,  of survival  and resilience,  and of the ways in
which  humankind  confronts  death,  The  Plagu e  is at once a masterfully  crafted
novel,  eloquently  understated  and epic in scope,  and a parable  of ageless  moral
resonance  profoundly  relevant  to  our  times.  In  Oran,  a  coastal  town  in  North
Africa,  the  plague  begins  as  a  series  of  portents,  unheeded  by  the  people.  It
gradually  becomes  an omnipresent  reality, obliterating  all traces  of the past and
driving  its  victims  to  almost  unearthly  extremes  of  suering,  madness,  and
compassion.
Fiction/Literature THE REBEL
For Albert Camus,  the urge to revolt  is one of the “essential  dimensions”  of human
nature,  manifested  in man’s  timeless  Promethean  struggle  against  the conditions
of  his  existence,  as  well  as  the  popular  uprisings  against  established  orders
throughout  history.  And yet, with an eye toward  the French  Revolution  and its
regicides  and deicides,  he shows  how inevitably  the course  of revolution  leads to
tyranny.  As old regimes  throughout  the world  collapse,  The  Rebel  resonates as an

ardent,  eloquent,  and supremely  rational  voice of conscience  for our tumultuous
times.
Nonction/Literature RESISTANCE, REBELLION, AND DEATH
Resistance,  Rebellion,  and  Death   displays  Camus’  rigorous  moral  intelligence
addressing  issues  that range from colonial  warfare  in Algeria  to the social cancer
of  capital  punishment.  But  this  stirring  book  is  above  all  a  reection  on  the
problem  of freedom , and, as such, belongs  in the same tradition  as the works that
gave Camus his reputation  as the conscience  of our century:  The  Stran ger,  The
Rebel , and  The Myth of Sisyphus .
Fiction/Literature
Available wherever books are sold.
www.randomhouse.com